BRIGHAM CITY, UTAH
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 25-17, passed 8-21-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 24-01
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR BRIGHAM CITY REVISING, AMENDING,
RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES DEALING
WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Brigham City are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Utah empower and authorize
Brigham City to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to
incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the City Council has authorized a general compilation, revision and
codification of the ordinances of Brigham City of a general and permanent
nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
upon adoption.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BRIGHAM CITY COUNCIL:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of Brigham City as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the Code of Ordinances of Brigham City.
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section l shall consist of
the following Titles:
         a.   Title I: General Provisions
         b.   Title III: Administration
         c.   Title V: Public Works
         d.   Title VII Traffic Code
         e.   Title IX: General Regulations
         f.   Title XI: Business Regulations
         g.   Title XIII: General Offenses
         h.   Title XV: Land Usage
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Brigham City Council and the Brigham City Recorder is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Recorder.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any notices thereof as required by
law have been given.
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND ORDERED PUBLISHED this 18th day of January, 2024.
                                       BRIGHAM CITY CORPORATION
                                       Dennis J. Dott (s)
                                       Dennis J. Dott, Mayor
ATTEST:
Christina Boss (s)
Christina Boss, City Recorder
   CERTIFICATE OF PUBLISHING ORDINANCE
            I, the duly appointed Recorder for Brigham City, hereby certify
that a summary of Ordinance No. 24-01 was posted on the Public Notice Website
on 1-19-2024.
            Christina Boss (s)
            Christina Boss, City Recorder
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.001   How code designated and cited
   
10.002   Definitions and rules of construction
   
10.003   Catchlines of sections
   
10.004   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
10.005   Effect of repeal of ordinances
   
10.006   Severability of parts of code
   
10.007   Omission of general law not waiver of same
   
10.008   Sufficiency of intent to defraud
 
   
10.999   Penalty
§ 10.001 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the City of Brigham City, Utah”, and
may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the “Brigham City Code”.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.010)
§ 10.002 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   BRIBE. Any goods, money, right in action, property, thing of value or
advantage, present or prospective, or any promise or undertaking to give any,
asked, given or accepted, with a corrupt intent to influence unlawfully the
person to whom it is given in his or her action, vote or opinion in any public
or official capacity.
   CITY. The words “the city” or “this city” shall be construed as if followed
by the words “of Brigham City, Utah”.
   CODE or THIS CODE. The Code of the City of Brigham City, Utah.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done
is computed by excluding the first day and including the last unless the last
day is a holiday and then it also is excluded.
   CORRUPTLY. A wrongful desire to acquire or cause some pecuniary or other
advantage to the person guilty of the act or omission referred to or to some
other person.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of Brigham City, Utah.
   COUNTY. The County of Box Elder.
   DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
   DAYTIME; NIGHTTIME. DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise and
sunset. NIGHTTIME is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
   GENDER. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   HIGHWAY; ROAD. Includes public bridges, and may be held equivalent to the
words COUNTY HIGHWAY, COUNTY ROAD, COMMON ROAD and STATE ROAD.
   IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY. All territory over which the city now has,
or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers
or other regulatory powers.
   JAIL. The jail or prison in which prisoners of the city are confined.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   KNOWINGLY. A knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission
within the provisions of this code or an ordinance. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such an act or omission.
   MALICE and MALICIOUSLY. A wish to vex, annoy or injure another person, or an
intent to do a wrongful act, established either by proof or by presumption of
law.
   MONTH. A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   MUNICIPALITY. The words “the municipality” or “this municipality” shall be
construed as if followed by the words “of Brigham City, Utah”.
   NEGLIGENCE, NEGLECT and NEGLIGENTLY. A want of such attention to the nature
or probable consequence of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily
bestows in acting in his or her own concerns.
   NUMBER. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular.
   OATH. Includes “affirmation” and the word “swear” includes the word
“affirm”. Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in
the term “testify” and every written one in the term “depose”.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND THE LIKE. Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise. The word OFFICER shall include officers and boards
in charge of departments and members of such boards.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall
mean Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the
city.
   OR; AND. “Or” may be read “and”, and “and” may be read “or”, if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, association, organization, body politic,
partnership, business trust, corporation or company.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real property,
as defined in this section.
   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   PROCESS. Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial
proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
   PROPERTY. Includes both real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY AND THE LIKE. The terms “land”, “real estate” and “real
property” include lands, tenements, hereditaments, water rights, possessory
rights and claims.
   SHALL; MAY. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. Includes a mark when the signer or
subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near
the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s
name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve
as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so
sign their own names thereto.
   STATE. The State of Utah.
   STREET. Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares and sidewalks.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
   TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
   WEEK. A week consists of seven consecutive days.
   WILLFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate the law, or to injure
another, or to acquire any advantage.
   WORDS REQUIRING LICENSE OR PERMIT. Words prohibiting anything being done
except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from a board or
officer, shall be construed as giving such board or officer power to license or
permit or authorize such thing to be done.
   WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided. The word “year” or
the abbreviation “A.D.” is equivalent to the expression “year of our Lord”.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.020)
§ 10.003 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines or titles of the several sections of this code, immediately
preceding each section, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines,
are amended or re-enacted.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.030)
§ 10.004 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those
of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.040)
§ 10.005 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the
ordinances repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.050)
§ 10.006 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.060)
§ 10.007 OMISSION OF GENERAL LAW NOT WAIVER OF SAME.
   The omission to specify or enumerate in this code those provisions of the
general law applicable to all cities shall not be construed as a waiver of the
benefits of any such provisions.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.070)
§ 10.008 SUFFICIENCY OF INTENT TO DEFRAUD.
   Whenever by any of the provisions of this code an intent to defraud is
required in order to constitute any offense, it is sufficient if any intent
appears to defraud any person, association or body politic or corporate
whatever.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.080)
§ 10.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Punishments; general penalty; continuing violations. The punishments,
fines and other sanctions for any violations of this code shall be the same as
those contained and set forth in U.C.A. Title 76, as it exists at the time this
code is adopted and as it may be subsequently amended and or revised.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.090)
   (B)   Imprisonment for nonpayment of general penalty; continuing violations;
imprisonment for non- payment of fine.
      (1)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city or rule,
regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under
authority vested in him or it by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is
declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such
ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $750 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
      (2)   Each day any violation of this code or any such ordinance, rule or
regulation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   A judgment that defendant pay a fine may also direct that he be
imprisoned until the amount thereof is satisfied, specifying the extent of the
imprisonment, which cannot exceed one day for each $2 of such amount. For state
law as to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, see U.C.A. § 10-8-85.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.100)
   (C)   Liability of employers and abettors to penalty for violation. When the
provisions of an ordinance prohibit the commission or omission of an act, not
only the person actually doing the prohibited thing or omitting the direct act,
but also the employer and all other persons concerned or aiding or abetting
therein, shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty
prescribed for the offense.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.110)
   (D)   Imprisonment in county jail. Any person sentenced to imprisonment for
the violation of this code, or other ordinance of the city, may be imprisoned
in the county jail. Use of the county jail shall be subject to such conditions
as are imposed by law and with the consent of the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.120)
   (E)   Prison labor. Any person committed to the county jail or other place
of incarceration as a punishment or in default of the payment of a fine, or
fine and costs, may be required to work for the city at such labor as his or
her strength will permit, not exceeding eight hours in each working day. All
prisoners shall be subject to such work under the direction of the County
Sheriff’s Department.
(Prior Code, § 1.02.130)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.001   Incorporation
   
11.002   Classification
   
11.003   City seal
§ 11.001 INCORPORATION.
   The city was incorporated as a municipal corporation on 1-12-1867. The city
is a political subdivision of the State of Utah and may be referred to as
“Brigham City, a Municipal Corporation”.
(Prior Code, § 1.01.010)
§ 11.002 CLASSIFICATION.
   The city is classified as a Fourth Class City under Utah Code, as amended,
as it has a population of more than 10,000 and less than 30,000. Any change in
classification of the city shall be made pursuant to Utah Code.
(Prior Code, § 1.01.020)
§ 11.003 CITY SEAL.
   The seal provided by and for the city is the impression of which is a
representation of a beehive in the center, with the inscription, “Corporate
Seal, Brigham City, State of Utah”, around the outer edge thereof. Such seal is
hereby established and declared to be the seal of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1.01.030)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   ELECTIONS
      
33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
      
34.   IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND GOVERNING BODY
Section
General Provisions
   
30.001   Municipal form of government
Mayor
   
30.015   Chief executive officer
   
30.016   Duties generally
   
30.017   Appointments and removals of officers by Mayor
   
30.018   General supervision of departments; delivery of books and the like by
outgoing officer to successor
   
30.019   Rewards
   
30.020   Pardoning power; remission of fines
   
30.021   Limiting use of water
   
30.022   Calling out inhabitants to aid in enforcing law
   
30.023   Mayor Pro Tem
   
30.024   Vacancy in office
City Council
   
30.035   Number of Council members; elected at large
   
30.036   Meetings
   
30.037   Quorum
   
30.038   Vacancy in office
   
30.039   Reduction of budget appropriations
   
30.040   Annual tax levy
   
30.041   Claims against city
   
30.042   Disposal of city-owned real property
Rules of Order and Procedure
   
30.055   Adoption
   
30.056   Meeting procedures
   
30.057   Public comment
   
30.058   Public participation in meeting
   
30.059   Council member participation
   
30.060   Chairing the meeting
   
30.061   How vote is taken
   
30.062   Quorum; definition; minimum vote required
   
30.063   Reconsideration
   
30.064   Meeting adjournment
   
30.065   Attendance at Council meetings
   
30.066   Electronic meetings; authorization and requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.001 MUNICIPAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The city is considered a six-member form of government, with the Council
consisting of six members, one of which is a Mayor, in accordance with the Utah
Code.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.010)
MAYOR
§ 30.015 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
   The Mayor is the chief executive officer of the city and shall supervise the
conduct of all city officers and employees.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.010)
§ 30.016 DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Mayor shall perform all duties which are or may be prescribed by law or
ordinance and shall see that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.020)
§ 30.017 APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS OF OFFICERS BY MAYOR.
   (A)    The following enumerated positions constituting directors, personal
staff, Police or Fire Department appointments and/or department heads shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council:
      (1)   City Administrator;
      (2)   City Attorney;
      (3)   City Recorder;
      (4)   City Treasurer;
      (5)   Community Development Director;
      (6)   Economic Development Director;
      (7)   Fire Chief;
      (8)   Finance Director;
      (9)   Human Resource Director;
      (10)   Police Chief;
      (11)   Police Commander(s);
      (12)   Public Power Director;
      (13)   Public Works Director;
      (14)   Assistant Public Works Director;
      (15)   Assistant City Administrator/Public Works Director;
      (16)   Information Technology Director; and
      (17)   Executive Assistant.
   (B)   The above-named positions shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. The Mayor, with the concurrence of the
Council, may appoint deputies to any appointed office. All appointed officers
and deputies shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and may be
removed without cause, by a majority vote of the Council.
   (C)   The above-listed positions shall not limit in any manner any other
classification of employees listed.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.030) (Ord. 24-24, passed 9-19-2024)
§ 30.018 GENERAL SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENTS; DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND THE LIKE BY
OUTGOING OFFICER TO SUCCESSOR.
   The Mayor, as chief executive officer of the city, shall exercise general
supervision over all the departments of the city government. The Mayor shall
see that every officer, at the expiration of their term of office, or
resignation or removal from office, delivers to their successor all the books,
papers, maps, plats, furniture, fixtures or other property appertaining to the
office.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.040)
§ 30.019 REWARDS.
   The Mayor, when necessary, may offer a reward for the apprehension of
offenders against the ordinances of the city, in any sum not exceeding $5,000.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.050)
§ 30.020 PARDONING POWER; REMISSION OF FINES.
   The Mayor is authorized to release a person imprisoned for a violation of a
municipal ordinance or to remit all or any part of a fine or penalty imposed.
The Mayor shall report at the next regular meeting of the Council the number of
fines and the amounts thereof so remitted, and the number of pardons granted,
giving his or her reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.060)
§ 30.021 LIMITING USE OF WATER.
   In the event of scarcity of water, the Mayor may, by proclamation, limit the
use of water for any purpose other than domestic purposes to such extent as may
be required for the public good in the judgment of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.070)
§ 30.022 CALLING OUT INHABITANTS TO AID IN ENFORCING LAW.
   The Mayor shall have the power, when necessary, to call on residents of the
city over the age of 21 years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.080)
§ 30.023 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   In case of the temporary absence of the Mayor from the city, or in case of
his or her temporary inability to perform the duties of his or her office, the
Council may elect a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem to preside at
Council meetings and perform the duties and functions of Mayor. The City
Recorder shall enter in the minutes of the Council meeting the election of a
Council member as Mayor Pro Tem. During such time that such Council member is
acting in the capacity of Mayor Pro Tem, he or she shall have the power to
exercise all the functions and duties of the Mayor. When the Mayor Pro Tem is
presiding, his or her right to vote on all questions is not thereby impaired,
but he or she shall have the same right to vote as a Council member as he or
she would were he or she not presiding.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.090)
§ 30.024 VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the City Council
shall, by a majority vote, appoint a registered voter in the city who meets the
qualifications for office established in the Utah Code to fill the unexpired
term of the office vacated until the next municipal election when a successor
can be elected and qualified.
   (B)   Before acting to fill the vacancy, the City Council shall give public
notice of the vacancy as outlined in the Utah Code.
   (C)   If, for any reason, the Council does not fill the vacancy within 30
days after the vacancy occurs, the two persons having the highest number of
votes of the Council shall come before the Council and if there is not a
majority vote by the Council the vacancy shall be filled by lot in the presence
of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.100)
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.035 NUMBER OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; ELECTED AT LARGE.
   The Council shall be composed of the Mayor and five Council members to be
elected at large as provided by law and ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.010)
§ 30.036 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The City Council shall meet every first and third Thursday in its
chambers at 6:00 p.m. The Council shall hold at least one regular meeting each
month. The Mayor or any two members of the Council may call a special meeting.
   (B)   The order shall be entered in the minutes of the Council, the order
shall provide at least three hours’ notice of the special meeting and notice
thereof shall be served by the City Recorder on each member who did not sign
the order by delivering the notice personally or by leaving it at the member’s
usual place of abode. The personal appearance by a member at any specially
called meeting constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.020) (Ord. 23-04, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 30.037 QUORUM.
   The number of members of the Council necessary to constitute a quorum is
three or more, not including the Mayor. The Mayor and four Council members are
necessary as a quorum if any item to be considered involves the rights or
functions of the Mayor. The Council shall have the power to compel the
attendance of its own members and provide such penalties as it deems necessary
for the failure to comply therewith.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.030)
§ 30.038 VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of City Council, the City
Council shall, by a majority vote, appoint a registered voter in the city who
meets the qualifications for office established in the Utah Code to fill the
unexpired term of the office vacated until the next municipal election when a
successor can be elected and qualified.
   (B)   Before acting to fill the vacancy, the City Council shall give public
notice of the vacancy as outlined in the Utah Code. Any city resident who meets
the qualifications may apply.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.050)
§ 30.039 REDUCTION OF BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS.
   Any budget appropriation may be reduced by action of the Council at any
regular meeting; provided, notice of the proposed action shall have been given
to all members of the Council at least one week in advance of such action. The
requirement for notice shall not apply in cases of emergency where loss of life
or great loss of property is involved.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.060)
§ 30.040 ANNUAL TAX LEVY.
   (A)   Not later than the second Monday in August of each year, the Council,
at a regular meeting, shall, by ordinance or resolution, levy on the real and
personal property within the city made taxable by law.
   (B)   The levy shall not exceed the limitations that are or may hereafter be
prescribed by the laws of the state.
   (C)   The City Recorder shall certify the ordinance or resolution making the
levy to the County Auditor or Clerk, as the case may be, immediately after the
passage of the same.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.070)
§ 30.041 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.
   It shall be the duty of the Council to examine carefully all claims
presented against the city, when properly verified, and such of them as are
found to be valid obligations of the city shall be approved and ordered paid in
accordance with State Code.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.080)
§ 30.042 DISPOSAL OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The City Council may declare any city-owned significant parcel of real
property (as defined below) to be surplus.
   (B)   The City Administrator may declare any city-owned non-significant
parcel of real property (as defined below) to be surplus if he or she finds
that the parcel is no longer needed by the city. After city- owned real
property is declared to be surplus, the city may dispose of the real property
pursuant to the following guidelines.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         NON-SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OR REAL PROPERTY. Any parcel of real properly
that is not included in the definition of “significant parcel of real
property”.
         REASONABLE NOTICE.
            1.   A brief summary of the proposed disposition, including:
               a.   A general description of the parcel (including the
approximate address of the parcel, the approximate size of the parcel, the zone
designation of the parcel and the current use of the parcel); and
               b.   The date, time and location where the public can comment on
the proposed disposition.
            2.   The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, and posted in at least one location at City
Hall.
         SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY. A parcel of real property that is
larger than 5,000 square feet in size or that has a fair market value in excess
of $20,000. The following parcels of real property are excluded from the
definition of “significant parcel of real property”, even if they meet the size
or valuation standards set forth above:
            1.   Parcels disposed of by the city as part of a boundary line
agreement or adjustment;
            2.   Parcels created by a right-of-way vacation or an easement
vacation;
            3.   Parcels that are undevelopable unless combined with an
adjacent parcel. A parcel will be considered to be undevelopable if it cannot
be developed as an independent parcel due to city ordinance requirements or due
to the physical characteristics of the parcel; and
            4.   Parcels acquired by eminent domain or other means if the city
is statutorily or contractually obligated to first offer the parcel to a
specific party; provided that, the parcel is offered, sold or conveyed to the
party holding the right to acquire the parcel.
      (2)   Disposal of significant parcel of real property. Before disposing
of a significant parcel of real property, the city shall:
         (a)   Notice. Provide reasonable notice of the proposed disposition at
least 14 days before the opportunity for public comment; and
         (b)   Public comment. Allow an opportunity for public comment on the
proposed disposition. The opportunity for public comment shall take place at a
City Council meeting.
      (3)   Disposal of non-significant parcels of real property. The City
Administrator may dispose of any non-significant parcel of real property
pursuant to a policy adopted by the City Administrator.
      (4)   Manner of disposal. The city may dispose of real property by sale,
trade, lease, sublease or other means deemed to be in the best interests.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.090) (Ord. 09-11, passed 8-6-2009)
RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
§ 30.055 ADOPTION.
   The city hereby adopts the following rules of order and procedure to govern
the meetings of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.056 MEETING PROCEDURES.
   The city shall comply with all required procedures contained in the Utah
Code and as outlined in §§
30.035 through
30.042 of this chapter. The City Council does not formally adopt Robert’s Rules
of Order. City Council meeting agenda items will be conducted by introducing
the item and having a discussion by the Council members on the item. After
sufficient discussion, a motion and a second will be required for the Council
to vote. If no second to a motion is received, then the motion becomes invalid
and another motion can be considered. Other meeting procedures are outlined
below in this section of the city code. If any rule is in conflict with any
provision of Utah State Code governing meeting procedures for the City Council,
the City Council shall follow the provision of the Utah State Code. Unless
otherwise stated in State Code, three votes are required to approve an item or
any action.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.057 PUBLIC COMMENT.
   Public comment may be listed on the agenda of the City Council and may be
limited to residents of the city. The public comment portion of the meeting
shall be limited to the public speaking to the Council on any item listed or
not listed on the agenda. Members of the public shall be free to express any
idea, question or viewpoint without limitation, except for time and the manner
of the presentation. Individual members of the public shall be limited to three
minutes’ time. The Chair of the meeting shall ensure that the public comment is
civil and orderly. Personal attacks made publicly toward any person or city
employee are not allowed. Speakers are encouraged to bring their complaints
regarding employee performance through the supervisory chain of command in
accordance with the city’s personnel policies. The Chair shall use his or her
best efforts to allow the free expression of the public and keep the meeting in
order. Council members should not interrupt, argue with or otherwise interfere
with any comment by a member of the public. The Mayor and City Council may ask
clarifying questions of the member of the public making a presentation and
other members of the public may ask clarifying questions of the presenter at
the discretion of the Chair.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.058 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN MEETING.
   Other than at a required public hearing and the public comment portion of
the meeting, members of the public shall not be allowed to participate in the
meeting unless they are on the agenda or requested to present to the Council by
the Chair of the meeting or a member of the Council. Any member of the public
interrupting City Council proceedings, approaching the Council without
permission, otherwise creating a disturbance, or failing to abide by the rules
of procedure in addressing City Council, shall be deemed to have disrupted a
public meeting and, at the direction of the Chair, may be removed from Council
Chambers by Police Department personnel or other agent designated by City
Council or City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.059 COUNCIL MEMBER PARTICIPATION.
   Any member of the Council wishing to speak on any item on the agenda shall
be recognized by the Mayor to do so. This recognition can be informal. No
Council member shall interrupt another Council member. Council members shall
conduct themselves at all times with civility and respect. They shall refrain
from making any disparaging remarks concerning any other member of the
government body, employees or the public. If the Chair feels that there has
been sufficient discussion of an item and all Council members have had an
opportunity to speak, the Chair can call for a motion on the item. If no motion
is received the item will be considered continued to allow further thought by
the Council members on the item. Any meeting designated as a work meeting shall
be more informal and Council members may freely participate as long as proper
decorum is maintained.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.060 CHAIRING THE MEETING.
   The Mayor shall chair the meeting in a manner to accomplish the following
goals.
   (A)   The Mayor, as Chair, shall pace the meeting so that all items on the
agenda should be addressed and either concluded or continued.
   (B)   The Mayor shall open and introduce an item on the agenda in order,
unless the Mayor feels like there is a good reason to go out of order.
   (C)   The Mayor, as Chair, shall ensure that the time limits on the public
comment portion of the meeting are complied with.
   (D)   The Mayor, as Chair, shall use his or her best efforts to see that
Council members and the public are treated at all times with respect and
civility and that the meetings are orderly.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.061 HOW VOTE IS TAKEN.
   A roll call vote shall be recorded for all ordinances, resolutions or any
other item that a vote is required. A roll call vote will be considered taken
as long as the actual vote of each individual member is recorded. It is not
necessary to have each individual Council member vote separately to be
considered a roll call vote.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.062 QUORUM; DEFINITION; MINIMUM VOTE REQUIRED.
   The number of Council members necessary to constitute a quorum is three,
excluding the Mayor. The minimum number of yes votes required to pass any
ordinance or resolution, or to take any action by the Council, unless otherwise
prescribed by law, is three. The Mayor is only allowed to vote in accordance
with state law such as a tie vote or on items concerning the Mayor’s rights and
privileges defined in the state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.063 RECONSIDERATION.
   Any action taken by the Council may not be reconsidered or rescinded at any
special meeting unless the number of members of the Council present at the
meeting is equal to or greater than the number of members present at the
meeting when the action was approved or disapproved.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.064 MEETING ADJOURNMENT.
   Meetings of the City Council, as a goal, shall be scheduled to end at or
before 10:00 p.m. and the Mayor and City Council shall use their best efforts
to conclude the meeting in a timely manner. However, no motion to extend the
time of the meeting is necessary to be made. The meetings of the City Council
shall not be adjourned until either all items listed in the agenda have been
acted upon or a motion to adjourn is made and approved by a majority of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.065 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Council may compel the attendance of its own members at its
meetings and provide penalties it considers necessary for the failure to comply
with an exercise of the authority to compel attendance.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 30.066 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS; AUTHORIZATION AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In order to include members of the City Council through an electronic
connection, a request for an electronic meeting must be made by a member of the
City Council up to three days prior to the meeting to allow arrangements for
the electronic meeting to be made. A quorum of Council members must be present
at a single anchor location for the electronic meeting to be held. However, if
a proclamation of local, state or national emergency is in effect, a majority
of a quorum of the Council need not be physically present at the physical
location from which the electronic meeting originates or from which the Council
members are connected to the electronic meeting in order for an electronic
meeting to be held. The city shall provide space and facilities at the anchor
location so interested persons and the public may attend and monitor the open
portions of the meeting. If comments from the public will be accepted during
the electronic meeting, facilities at the anchor location shall be provided so
that interested persons and the public may attend, monitor and participate in
the open portions of the meeting. The Council may restrict the number of
separate connections for members of the Council that are allowed for an
electronic meeting based on available equipment capability or establish other
procedures, limitations or conditions governing electronic meetings not in
conflict with this section.
   (B)   In order to participate in meetings electronically, Council members
shall establish and maintain their electronic connection for the entire Council
meeting including all work sessions or other scheduled items appearing on the
meeting agenda. Small disconnections due to technical problems are allowed in
order to meet the intent of this requirement.
   (C)   If the City Council convenes or conducts an electronic meeting they
shall give public notice of the meeting in accordance with state statute and
post written notice at the anchor location. The City Recorder shall provide
notice of the electronic meeting to the Council members at least 24 hours
before the meeting so they may participate in and be counted as present for all
purposes and a description of how the members will be connected to the
electronic meeting.
   (D)   The City Council may prohibit or limit electronic meetings based on
budget, public policy or logistical considerations.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.040) (Ord. 11-32, passed 12-1-2011; Ord. 20-04, passed 3-
19-2020)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Personnel changes in appointed offices
   
31.002   Official oaths and bonds
   
31.003   Salaries
   
31.004   Audits of officers’ accounts
   
31.005   Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act
Officers
   
31.020   City Recorder
   
31.021   City Treasurer
   
31.022   City Attorney
   
31.023   City Administrator
   
31.024   Human Resources Director
   
31.025   Director of Finance
Board of Appeals
   
31.040   Membership
   
31.041   Qualifications
   
31.042   Rules and procedures
   
31.043   Chairperson
   
31.044   Disqualification of member
   
31.045   Secretary
   
31.046   Legal counsel
   
31.047   Compensation of members
   
31.048   Application
   
31.049   Notice of meeting
   
31.050   Board decision
   
31.051   Board training
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 PERSONNEL CHANGES IN APPOINTED OFFICES.
   Before any formal vote by the City Council upon a personnel change involving
an appointed position, the specific appointed position involved in the change
shall be designated in the City Council agenda which is published prior to the
City Council meeting where a formal vote will be taken.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.020) (Ord. 98-08, passed 3-5-1998)
§ 31.002 OFFICIAL OATHS AND BONDS.
   (A)   All officers, whether elected or appointed, shall, before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, take, subscribe and file the
constitutional oath of office.
   (B)   The City Treasurer’s bonds shall be in compliance with the state’s
Money Management Act, being U.C.A. Title 51, Chapter 7, or its successor
statute.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.030)
§ 31.003 SALARIES.
   The Mayor and Council members, and all officers of the city, shall receive
such compensation as may be fixed by ordinance and all assistants and employees
shall receive such compensation as may from time to time be fixed by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.040)
§ 31.004 AUDITS OF OFFICERS’ ACCOUNTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Council to have made annually an independent
audit of the financial records and financial report prepared in conformity with
generally accepted accounting, as prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual
for Utah Cities. Copies of all audit reports made in conformity with the
provisions of this section and the Utah Code shall be filed with the city and a
copy thereof filed with the State Auditor’s office.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.050)
§ 31.005 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS’ AND EMPLOYEES’ ETHICS ACT.
   The Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act, U.C.A. Title 10, as
amended and subsequent revisions, is hereby adopted as a city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2.10.010)
OFFICERS
§ 31.020 CITY RECORDER.
   (A)   Office; duties generally; copies of records evidence.
      (1)   The office of the City Recorder shall be located at the place of
the Council or at some other place convenient thereto as the Council may
direct. Within the office of the Recorder, a properly qualified employee may be
appointed by the Recorder as the Deputy Recorder. The Deputy Recorder is
authorized to perform, and shall perform, all duties of the Recorder during
such times when the Recorder is unavailable or unable to perform same. Any
official act of the Deputy Recorder taken in the absence of the Recorder shall
be valid and binding to the same extent as if done by the Recorder.
      (2)   The City Recorder or Deputy City Recorder shall attend the meetings
and keep the record of the proceedings of the Council. Copies of all papers
filed in the Recorder’s office and transcripts from all records of the Council,
if certified by the Recorder under the corporate seal, are admissible in all
courts as originals.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.010)
   (B)   Countersigning contracts. The City Recorder shall countersign all
contracts made on behalf of the city and shall maintain a properly indexed
record of all such contracts.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.020)
   (C)   Officio Auditor. The City Recorder shall be ex officio City Auditor
and shall perform the duties of that office.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.030)
   (D)   Record of ordinances. The City Recorder shall record, in a book used
exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the governing body. The
Recorder shall give each ordinance a number. Immediately following each
ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the Recorder shall make or cause to
be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of
publication or posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified
copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and
publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.040)
   (E)   Election Officer. The City Recorder shall be the city’s Elections
Officer and perform the duties of that office as outlined in the Utah Code.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.050)
   (F)   Government Records Access and Management Act. The Government Records
Access and Management Act (GRAMA), as adopted by the state and contained in
U.C.A. §§ 63G-2-101 through 63G-2-901, as amended, with the exception of U.C.A.
§ 63G-2-403, are hereby approved and adopted as part of the code of the city.
      (1)   Appeals to the City Council.
         (a)   Any person aggrieved by a city entity’s access determination,
under U.C.A. Title 63, Chapter 2, may appeal the determination within 30 days
to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal.
         (b)   If the city entity claims extraordinary circumstances and
specifies the date when the records will be available under U.C.A. § 63G-2-204
(3) as amended, and if the requester believes the extraordinary circumstances
to not exist or that the time specified is unreasonable the requester may
appeal the city entity’s claim of circumstances by the governmental entity,
despite the lack of a “determination” or its equivalent under U.C.A. § 63G-2-
204(7), as amended.
         (c)   The notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder and
shall contain the following information:
            1.   The petitioner’s name, mailing address and daytime telephone
number;
            2.   A copy of any denial of the records requests; and
            3.   The relief sought.
         (d)   The petitioner may file a short statement of facts, reasons and
legal authority in support of the appeal.
         (e)   No later than three business days after receiving a notice of
appeal, the City Recorder shall:
            1.   Schedule a hearing for the City Council to discuss the appeal
which shall be held no sooner than 15 days and no later than 30 days from the
date of the filing of the appeal;
            2.   Send a copy of the notice to the petitioner; and
            3.   Send a copy of the notice of appeal, supporting statement and
a notice of hearing to:
               a.   Each member of the City Council;
               b.   The records officer and the chief administrative officer of
the governmental entity from which the appeal originated;
               c.   Any person who made a business confidentiality claim under
U.C.A. § 63G-2-308 for a record that is the subject of the appeal; and
               d.   All persons who participated in the proceedings before the
governmental entity’s chief administrative officer.
         (f)   No later than ten business days after receiving the notice of
appeal, the governmental entity may submit to the City Recorder of the City
Council a written statement of facts, reasons and legal authority in support of
its position. The governmental entity shall send a copy of the written
statement to the petitioner by first class mail, postage prepaid. The City
Recorder shall forward a copy of the written statement to each member of the
City Council.
         (g)   1.   No later than ten business days after the notice of appeal
is sent by the City Recorder a person whose legal interest may be substantially
affected by the proceeding may file a request for intervention before the City
Council.
            2.   Any written statement of facts, reasons and legal authority in
support of the intervener’s position shall be filed with the request for
intervention. The person seeking intervention shall provide copies of the
statement to all parties to the proceedings before the City Council.
         (h)   The City Council shall hold a hearing at least 14 days after the
date of the notice of appeal is filed, but no longer than 52 calendar days
after receiving the notice of appeal.
         (i)   At the hearing, the City Council shall allow the parties to
testify, present evidence and comment on the issues. The City Council may allow
other interested persons to comment on the issues.
            1.   The City Council may review the disputed records. The review
shall be in camera.
            2.   Members of the City Council may not disclose any information
or record reviewed by the City Council in camera unless the disclosure is
otherwise authorized by this section.
         (j)   1.   Discovery is prohibited, but the City Council may issue
subpoenas or other orders to compel production of necessary evidence.
            2.   The City Council’s review shall be de nova.
         (k)   1.   No later than three business days after the hearing, the
City Council shall issue a signed order either granting the petition in whole
or in part or upholding the determination of the governmental entity in whole
or in part.
            2.   The City Council may, upon consideration and weighing of the
various interest and public policies pertinent to the classification and
disclosure or non-disclosure, order the disclosure of information properly
classified as private, controlled or protected if the public interest favoring
access outweighs the interest favoring restriction of access.
            3.   In making a determination under division (F)(1)(k)2. above,
the City Council shall consider and, where appropriate, limit the requester’s
use and further disclosure of the record in order to protect privacy interests
in the case of private or controlled records, business confidentiality interest
in the case of records protected under U.C.A. § 63G2-2-304(1) and (2) or its
successor statute, as amended, and privacy interest of the public interest in
the case of other protected records.
         (l)   The order of the City Council shall include:
            1.   A statement of reasons for the decision, including citations
to this subchapter, court rule or order, and other state statute, federal
statute or federal regulation that governs disclosure of the record, provided
that the citations do not disclose private, controlled or protected
information;
            2.   A description of the record or portions of the record to which
access was ordered or denied; provided that, the description does not disclose
private, controlled or protected information, or information exempt from
disclosure under U.C.A. § 63G-2-201(3)(b), as amended;
            3.   A statement that any party to the proceeding before the City
Council may appeal the City Council’s decision to District Court; and
            4.   A brief summary of the appeals process, the time limits for
filing an appeal, and a notice that in order to protect its rights on appeal,
the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney.
         (m)   If the City Council fails to issue a decision within 35 days of
the filing of the notice of appeal, that failure shall be considered the
equivalent of an order denying the appeal. The petitioner shall notify the City
Council in writing if he considers the appeal denied.
         (n)   Option for appealing a denial. If the City Council denies the
records request in accordance with this section, the petition may:
            1.   Appeal the denial to the records committee as provided in
U.C.A. § 63G-2-403, as amended; and
            2.   Petition for judicial review in district court as provided in
U.C.A. § 63G-2-404, as amended.
      (2)   Fee schedule. The associated fees to obtain records under this
section shall be set by resolution of the City Council. These fees may be
changed from time to time as determined by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.060)
(Ord. 04-06, passed 2-19-2004; Ord. 11-17, passed 6-1-2011; Ord. 23-11, passed
5-4-2023)
§ 31.021 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   Duties generally. The City Treasurer shall:
      (1)   Be custodian of all money, bonds or other securities of the city;
      (2)   Determine the cash requirements of the city and provide for the
investment of all idle cash;
      (3)   Receive all money payable to the city, within three business days
after collection, including all taxes, licenses, fines, and intergovernmental
revenue, and keep an accurate detailed account thereof in the manner provided
in this chapter, and as the governing body of the city may by ordinance or
resolution from time to time direct; and
      (4)   Collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law and
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.010)
   (B)   Payments. The City Treasurer shall pay no money out, save upon lawful
warrant, except bonds and interest coupons, which, when due, may be paid upon
presentation, or in case the same are payable at some other place, then the
money for their redemption shall be sent to the place where they are payable,
in time to meet such payment when due.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.020)
   (C)   Order of payment of warrants. The Treasurer shall pay all warrants in
the order in which presented and as money becomes available for payment thereof
in the appropriate funds of the city. The Treasurer shall note upon the back of
each warrant presented the date of presentation and the date of payment.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.030)
   (D)   Receipts for money paid into treasury. The City Treasurer shall give
or cause to be given to every person paying money to the city treasury, a
receipt or other evidence of payment therefor, specifying, as appropriate, the
date of payment and upon which account paid and shall file the duplicate of the
receipt, a summary report or other evidence of payment in the office of the
Auditor or Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.040)
   (E)   Special assessment funds.
      (1)   All money received by the Treasurer on any special assessment shall
be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made.
      (2)   The money shall be used for the payment of interest and principal
on bonds or other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used
for no other purpose whatever, except as otherwise provided in U.C.A. § 10-6-
131.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.050)
§ 31.022 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney and Deputy City Attorneys shall have the duty to prosecute
violations of city ordinances and shall have the same powers in respect to
violations of city ordinances as may be exercised by a County Attorney in
respect to violations of state law, including, but not limited to, granting
immunity for violations of city ordinances, infractions and misdemeanors and
shall represent the interests of the city in the appeal of any matter
prosecuted in any trial court by the City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 2.06.010) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3-15-2007)
§ 31.023 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Office of City Administrator created. The City Administrator shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. He or
she shall serve as an assistant to the Mayor and be responsible for the day-to-
day operations of the departments as directed by the Mayor. The City
Administrator is the chief administrative officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.010)
   (B)   Duties. The City Administrator shall act as the Mayor’s deputy in the
administration of the city and as a staff assistant to the Mayor. The City
Administrator shall exercise general supervision over all the departments of
the city government in the temporary absence or unavailability of the Mayor or
Mayor Pro Tem, or at the direction of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem. The City
Administrator shall perform various administrative duties as designated by the
Mayor. The City Administrator shall coordinate the functions of the various
city departments under the direction of the Mayor. The City Administrator shall
be subject to appointment on committees or commissions as directed by the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.020)
   (C)   Responsible to Mayor and Council. The City Administrator shall be
directly responsible to the Mayor and shall receive direction for all work to
be done and assignments to be completed through the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.030)
§ 31.024 HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Office of Human Resource Director created. The Human Resource Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.010)
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Human Resource Director shall assume management
responsibilities for the Human Resource Department services and activities,
recommend and implement guidelines and practices to enhance efficiency and
effectiveness of human resource management programs (i.e., recruitment,
selection, compensation, classification, performance management, incentive
systems and employee relations), research laws, codes and statutes, solicit
legal opinions and recommend new procedures as necessary.
      (2)   The Human Resource Director shall also ensure compliance with
personnel policies, federal and state human resources management regulations
and shall review and analyze reports, legislation, court cases and related
personnel matters. The Human Resource Director shall be subject to appointment
on committees or commissions as directed by the Mayor and/or the City
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.020)
   (C)   Employee grievances. The Human Resource Director or his or her
designee shall coordinate the employee grievance hearing process, assure timely
processing of all employee grievances and assist management staff in preparing
and processing responses to employee grievances.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.030)
(Ord. 23-11, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 31.025 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   (A)   Office of Director of Finance created.
      (1)   There is hereby created and established the office of Director of
Finance. The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and shall serve thereafter at the pleasure of
the Mayor and Council.
      (2)   The Director of Finance may be an individual holding some other
administrative position with the city or may be employed solely to this
position.
(Prior Code, § 2.09.010)
   (B)   Duties. The duties of Director of Finance shall include:
      (1)   Supervision of all city financial activities, including the
activities of the City Recorder and the City Treasurer as they relate to the
financial activities of the city;
      (2)   Advise Mayor on fiscal policy;
      (3)   Such other duties as assigned;
      (4)   Handle debt administration; and
      (5)   Specific financial procedures as outlined in city policy.
(Prior Code, § 2.09.020)
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 31.040 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall serve as the chief appointing
authority and shall have oversight over the Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.010)
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall consist of persons appointed by the chief
appointing authority as follows:
      (1)   One for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one
for two years and one for one year;
      (2)   Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or until a
successor has been appointed;
      (3)   The chief appointing authority (the Mayor) shall appoint two
alternate members who shall be called by the Board Chairperson to hear appeals
during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall
possess the qualifications required for Board membership and shall be appointed
for five years, or until a successor has been appointed.
      (4)   No member shall be reappointed to serve more than two consecutive
terms.
      (5)   Members shall only be removed from office prior to the end of their
terms only for cause. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of
the Board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any
such member liable to immediate removal from office.
      (6)   The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of said Board,
but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board.
      (7)   The Fire Code Official shall be an ex officio member of the Board,
but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.020)
(Ord. 23-11, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 31.041 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Board of Appeals shall consist of five individuals, one from each of the
following professions or disciplines or any other qualified individual in a
similar profession or discipline in the case that these individuals are not
available within the jurisdiction:
   (A)   Registered design professional with architectural experience or a
builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten years’
experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work;
   (B)   Registered design professional with structural engineering experience;
   (C)   Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing
engineering experience or a mechanical contractor with at least ten years’
experience, five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work;
   (D)   Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience
or an electrical contractor with at least ten years’ experience, five of which
shall have been in responsible charge of work; and
   (E)   Registered design professional with fire protection engineering
experience or a fire protection contractor with at least ten years’ experience,
five of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.030)
§ 31.042 RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Chief Appointing Authority shall establish policies and procedures
necessary for the Board to carry out its duties.
   (B)   (1)   The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
      (2)   Board members must understand their role is to make a ruling based
upon the application of city code(s).
(Prior Code, § 2.11.040)
§ 31.043 CHAIRPERSON.
   The Board shall select one of its members to serve as Chairperson. The Chair
shall manage the meeting in a manner to accomplish the following goals.
   (A)   The Chair shall pace the meeting so that all items on the agenda may
be addressed and either concluded or continued.
   (B)   The Chair shall open and introduce an item on the agenda in order,
unless the Chair feels there is a good reason to go out of order.
   (C)   The Chair shall use his or her best efforts to see that Board members
and the public are always treated with respect and civility and that the
meetings are orderly.
   (D)   The Chair shall call for a vote from the Board following the hearing
of all parties.
   (E)   The Chair shall conclude the meeting following the vote by asking for
a motion to adjourn from the Board members.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.050)
§ 31.044 DISQUALIFICATION OF MEMBER.
   A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal,
professional or financial interest.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.060)
§ 31.045 SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Community Development Administrative Assistant shall serve as
secretary to the Board.
   (B)   The Secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the
office of the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.070)
§ 31.046 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (A)   The chief appointing authority shall furnish legal counsel to the
Board to provide members with general legal advice concerning matters before
them for consideration.
   (B)   Members shall be represented by legal counsel at the jurisdiction’s
expense in all matters arising from service within the scope of their duties in
accordance with Utah Code.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.080)
§ 31.047 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   Members shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.090)
§ 31.048 APPLICATION.
   The application for appeal shall be filed on a form obtained from the Chief
Building Official within 20 days after the notice was served.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.100)
§ 31.049 NOTICE OF MEETING.
   The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chief Building Official or Fire
Code Official/Fire Marshal, within ten days of the filing on an appeal or at
stated periodic meetings.
   (A)   Open hearing. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the
public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Building Official,
the Fire Code Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be
given an opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   Postponed hearing. When five members are not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the
right to request a postponement of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.110)
§ 31.050 BOARD DECISION.
   A concurring vote of two-thirds shall be required to modify or reverse the
decision of the Building Official and/or the Fire Code Official.
   (A)   The Chief Building Official and/or the Fire Code Official shall take
immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board.
   (B)   Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the
Chief Building Official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified
copy shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be
kept publicly posted in the office of the Chief Building Official for two weeks
after filing.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.120) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3-15-2007)
§ 31.051 BOARD TRAINING.
   Under the direction of the Chief Building Official, the members of the Board
of Appeals and their alternates will gather for training annually. The training
should take place during the first quarter of the year and may be held in
person or electronically.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.130)
CHAPTER 32: ELECTIONS
Section
Nominations and Elections
   
32.001   Municipal elections
   
32.002   Eligibility and qualifications
   
32.003   Time of holding municipal elections; terms of office
   
32.004   Submission of special questions
   
32.005   Poll worker appointment; voting place designated; conduct
   
32.006   Election procedure
   
32.007   Canvass of election results; certificates of election; tie votes
   
32.008   Voter participation areas
   
32.009   Areas defined
   
32.010   Referendum or initiative process
Campaign Financial Disclosures
   
32.025   Definitions
   
32.026   Filing of disclosure reports
   
32.027   Time of filing
   
32.028   Contents of statements
   
32.029   Notification to candidates
   
32.030   Public information
   
32.031   Penalty for non-compliance
   
32.032   Oaths of office
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
§ 32.001 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   All city elections for nomination and election of candidates for city office
shall be made in conformity with Utah Code Annotated.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.010)
§ 32.002 ELIGIBILITY AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All elective officers of the city shall be chosen by the registered
voters of the city.
   (B)   A person may become a candidate for any elected municipal office if:
      (1)   The person is a registered voter in the city; and
      (2)   The person has been a resident for at least 12 consecutive months
immediately before the date of the election; and
      (3)   Meet the other requirements of the Utah Code Annotated.
   (C)   If any elected official shall at any time during his or her term of
office live outside the boundaries of the city for a continuous period of more
than 60 days or establish residence outside the city during his or her term of
office the office shall thereby become automatically vacant.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.020)
§ 32.003 TIME OF HOLDING MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   If the number of those filed is more than twice the number of open
offices, a primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday following the
first Monday in August before the general election.
   (B)   (1)   On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each
odd-numbered year, there shall be held an election to fill all elective offices
to be vacated in the city at 12:00 p.m. on the first Monday of January
following.
      (2)   Such elected officers shall continue in office for the term for
which elected and until their respective successors are elected and qualified,
unless sooner removed for cause or the office is vacated by resignation or
death.
   (C)   The offices of Mayor and two Council members shall be filled in
municipal elections held in 1993. The terms shall be for four years. These
offices shall be filled every four years in municipal elections.
   (D)   The offices of the other three Council members shall be filled in a
municipal election held in 1995. The terms shall be for four years. These
offices shall be filled every four years in municipal elections.
   (E)   The officers shall be elected in an at-large election which are held
at the time and in the manner provided for electing municipal officers.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.030)
§ 32.004 SUBMISSION OF SPECIAL QUESTIONS.
   The Council may submit to the electors, at any election, any proposition or
question required to be submitted by the constitution, general law or by
ordinance of the city; provided that, in case such question or proposition is
required by said constitution, general law or ordinance to be submitted at a
special or other particular kind of election, or within any specified time, it
shall be so submitted.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.040)
§ 32.005 POLL WORKER APPOINTMENT; VOTING PLACE DESIGNATED; CONDUCT.
   (A)   In all municipal elections, the Council shall appoint poll workers and
shall designate the places of voting.
   (B)   All elections must be conducted according to the general laws of the
state and all notices and lists of names required to be posted by registry
agents prior to any primary or general election shall also be posted by the
registry agents prior to any municipal election, the necessary changes being
made as to the time of posting the same.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.050)
§ 32.006 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   All elections shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure prescribed
in the pertinent provisions of the Election Code of the state.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.060)
§ 32.007 CANVASS OF ELECTION RESULTS; CERTIFICATES OF ELECTION; TIE VOTES.
   (A)   (1)   The returns of all elections shall be made to the City Recorder
who shall call for the assistance of the Mayor and Council members of the
municipality to act as the Board of Canvassers.
      (2)   The Board of Municipal Canvassers shall meet to canvass the returns
at the usual place of meeting of the municipal legislative body.
      (3)   This shall be done no sooner than seven days after the election and
no later than 14 days after the election; or, for canvassing of returns from a
primary election, no sooner than three days after the election and no later
than seven days after the election.
   (B)   Certificates of election must be issued to each person elected by a
plurality of votes.
   (C)   If two or more candidates receive an equal and highest number of votes
for the same office, and if there are not enough offices remaining for all such
candidates, and if the result after a recount remains the same, the election
officer shall determine by lot which candidate is selected in a public meeting
in the presence of each person subject to the tie within five days of the
canvass or within five days of the recount if one is requested or held.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.070)
§ 32.008 VOTER PARTICIPATION AREAS.
   In order to comply with the provisions of U.C.A. § 20A-7-401.3, the city
creates four contiguous, compact areas having a similar number of residents
known as “voter participation areas”.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.080) (Ord. 21-05, passed 5-20-2021)
§ 32.009 AREAS DEFINED.
   The following map shows the voter participation areas in the city.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2932.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 9.01.090) (Ord. 21-18, passed 12-16-2021)
§ 32.010 REFERENDUM OR INITIATIVE PROCESS.
   Any individual or group desiring to file a referendum or initiative petition
with the city to repeal, create, or modify a legislative act of the governing
body shall follow the process outlined in the state law, U.C.A.§ 20A, Chapter
7, or its successor statute, using the voter participation areas shown in §
32.009 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.100) (Ord. 21-05, passed 5-20-2021)
CAMPAIGN FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
§ 32.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANDIDATE. Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective
office of the city; or is nominated by a committee or party; or received
contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person receiving
contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such
person’s nomination or election to such office; or causes on his or her behalf,
any written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast,
distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such office.
   CONTRIBUTION. Any monetary and non-monetary contributions such as in-kind
contributions and contributions of tangible things, but shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
   ELECTION. Both primary and final elections.
   EXPENDITURE. A purchase, payment distribution, loan, advance, deposit or
gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the
nomination or election of any candidate.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.010)
§ 32.026 FILING OF DISCLOSURE REPORTS.
   Each candidate for elective offices shall file with the City Recorder,
dated, signed and sworn financial reports which comply with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.020)
§ 32.027 TIME OF FILING.
   The reports required by this subchapter shall be filed according to U.C.A. §
10-3-208, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.030) (Ord. 03-33, passed 8-28-2003)
§ 32.028 CONTENTS OF STATEMENTS.
   Each statement shall:
   (A)   Report all of the candidate’s itemized and total:
      (1)   Campaign contributions, including in-kind and other non-monetary
contributions, as of the reporting date; and
      (2)   Campaign expenditures as of the reporting date.
   (B)   Identify:
      (1)   For each contribution more than $50, the amount of the contribution
and the name of the donor;
      (2)   The aggregate total of all contributions that individually do not
exceed the reporting limit; and
      (3)   For each campaign expenditure, the amount of the expenditure and
the name of the recipient of the expenditure.
   (C)   Report the total amount of all campaign contributions and expenditures
if the candidate receives $500 or less in campaign contributions and spends
$500 or less on the candidate’s campaign.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.040)
§ 32.029 NOTIFICATION TO CANDIDATES.
   The City Recorder shall, at the time the candidate files a declaration of
candidacy and again 14 days before each municipal general election, notify the
candidate in writing of:
   (A)   The provisions of statute or municipal ordinance governing the
disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures;
   (B)   The dates when the candidate’s campaign finance statement is required
to be filed; and
   (C)   The penalties that apply for failure to file a timely campaign finance
state, including the statutory provision that requires removal of the
candidate’s name from the ballot for failure to file the required campaign
finance statement when required.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.045)
§ 32.030 PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   (A)   The statements required by this subchapter shall be public documents
and shall be available for public inspection and copying no later than one
business day after the statement is filed.
   (B)   The City Recorder shall make the campaign finance statement filed
available for public inspection by:
      (1)   Posting an electronic copy or the contents of the statement on the
city’s website no later than seven business days after the statement is filed;
and
      (2)   Verifying that the address of the city’s website has been provided
to the lieutenant governor in order to meet the requirements of Utah Code; or
      (3)   Submit a copy of the statement to the lieutenant governor for
posting on the website established by the lieutenant governor.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.050)
§ 32.031 PENALTY FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   If a candidate fails to file a campaign finance statement before the
municipal general election before the deadline, the City Recorder shall, after
making a reasonable attempt to discover if the report was timely mailed, inform
the appropriate election officials who:
      (1)   Shall, if practicable, remove the name of the candidate by blacking
out the candidate’s name before the ballots are delivered to voters;
      (2)   Shall, if removing the candidate’s name from the ballot is not
practicable, inform the voters by any practical method that the candidate has
been disqualified and that votes cast for the candidate will not be counted;
and
      (3)   May not count any votes for that candidate.
   (B)   A candidate who files a campaign finance statement seven days before a
municipal general election is not disqualified if:
      (1)   The statement details accurately and completely the information
required, except for inadvertent omissions or insignificant errors or
inaccuracies; and
      (2)   The omissions, errors or inaccuracies are corrected in an amended
report or in the next scheduled report.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.060) (Ord. 03-33, passed 8-26-2003)
§ 32.032 OATHS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Candidates elected at the general election shall begin their term of
office at 12:00 p.m. on the first Monday in January following their election.
   (B)   The oaths of office shall be given to the elected officials by any
judge, notary public or by the City Recorder at 12:00 p.m. on the first Monday
in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is practical.
   (C)   All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.070)
CHAPTER 33: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Definitions
Police Department
   
33.015   Chief of Police; powers and duties
   
33.016   Powers and duties of police generally
Fire Department and Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
   
33.030   Supervision over Fire and Ambulance Divisions
   
33.031   Fire Marshal
   
33.032   International Fire Code adopted; modifications
   
33.033   Appeals to Board of Appeal from Fire Chief decision
Office of Emergency Services
   
33.045   Created; Emergency Manager
   
33.046   Mayor’s powers and duties
   
33.047   Emergency Management Plan
   
33.048   Emergency Coordination Center
   
33.049   National Incident Management System
   
33.050   Purchasing goods and services
Public Safety Cost Recovery
   
33.065   Title
   
33.066   Purpose
   
33.067   Rates, charges and discounts
   
33.068   No admission of liability
   
33.069   Actions to recover expense
 
   
33.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTACK. Nuclear, cyber, conventional, biological, act of terrorism or
chemical warfare action against the United States of America or the state or
city.
   CORPORATION COUNSEL. As used in the International Fire Code shall be held to
mean the City Attorney.
   DISASTER. A situation causing or threatening to cause, widespread damage,
social disruption or injury or loss of life or property resulting from attack,
internal disruption, natural phenomenon or technological hazard.
   DISASTER EMERGENCY. Those conditions which may, by investigation, be found
actually or likely to:
      (1)   Affect seriously the safety, health or welfare of a substantial
number of the citizens of the city or preclude the operations or use of
essential public services and facilities;
      (2)   Be of such a magnitude or severity to necessitate seeking county or
state supplementation of local efforts or resources exerted or utilized in
alleviating the danger, damage, suffering or hardship faced; and
      (3)   Have been caused by forces beyond the control of humans, by reason
of civil disorder, riot or disturbance or by factors not foreseen and not known
to exist.
   EMERGENCY.
      (1)   A fire which presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
      (2)   A fire proximately caused by the owner or occupier of property or a
structure, which presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety and
requires immediate action to mitigate the threat, and the fire:
         (a)   Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an
order from any state, county, city or local agency, division or official; or
         (b)   Occurs as a direct result of an act in violation of state law or
the ordinances and/or regulations of the city or other local agency.
      (3)   A fire that constitutes arson or reckless burning as defined by the
Utah Code.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The judicious planning, assignment and coordination of
all available resources in an integrated program of prevention, mitigation,
preparedness response and recovery for emergencies of any kind, whether from
human-made or natural sources.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE EXPENSES. The actual costs incurred by the city and
volunteer personnel, including worker’s compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation,
costs of materials, costs of disposal and cost of any contract labor and
materials, in responding to or providing for a response to a hazardous
materials emergency, and/or false alarm, or a hazardous materials emergency.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of functions,
other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to
prevent, minimize and provide emergency repair of injury and damage resulting
from disaster, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to
the preparation for carrying out of those functions. The functions include,
without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health
services, rescue, engineering, disaster warning services, communications,
radiological, shelter, chemical and other special weapons defense, evaluation
of persons from stricken areas, emergency resources management, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian
protection.
   EXPENSES. Actual costs of government and volunteer personnel; including,
labor, wages, workers compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, cost of equipment, cost of equipment operations, cost of materials
and the cost of any contracted labor and materials.
   FALSE ALARM MEDICAL EMERGENCY. An alarm that results in a fire or ambulance
unit and/or fire and ambulance personnel being dispatched, and the person
transmitting or causing the transmission of the alarm knows or should have
known at the time of said transmission that no medical emergency exists.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY. A sudden or unexpected release of any
substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical
or infectious characteristics, presents a direct or immediate threat to public
safety or the environment and requires action to mitigate the threat.
   HUMAN-MADE DISASTER. Any industrial, nuclear, or transportation accident,
explosion, conflagration, power failure, natural resource shortage, cyber-
attacks or other condition, except enemy action, resulting from human-made
causes, such as oil spills and other injurious environmental contamination,
which threatens or causes substantial damage to property, human suffering,
hardship or loss of life.
   INTERNAL DISTURBANCE. A riot, prison break, disruptive terrorism or labor
strike.
   LOCAL EMERGENCY. The condition declared by the Mayor when, in his or her
judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is or threatens to be
of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government
action to prevent or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering
threatened or caused thereby.
   MEDICAL EMERGENCY. An alarm that results in a fire or ambulance unit and/or
fire and ambulance personnel being dispatched.
   NATURAL DISASTER. Hurricane, windstorm, tornado, storm, flood, high water,
wind-driven water, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire,
explosion or other catastrophe which results in substantial damage to property,
hardship, suffering or possible loss of life.
   TECHNOLOGICAL HAZARD. Any hazardous materials accident, mine accident, train
derailment, air crash, radiation incident, pollution, structural fire or
explosion.
   WAR-CAUSED DISASTER. Any condition following an attack resulting in
substantial damage to property or injury to persons caused by use of bombs,
missiles, shellfire, nuclear, radiological, chemical, biological, other weapons
of mass destruction or overt paramilitary actions, or other conditions such as
sabotage.
(Prior Code, Ch. 11.01) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.015 CHIEF OF POLICE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Council, a Chief of Police. The Chief shall, in the discharge of duties, have
like powers and be subject to like responsibility as sheriffs and constables in
similar cases.
   (B)   The Chief shall suppress riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace
and apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the state
or the ordinances of the city. The Chief shall, at all times, diligently and
faithfully discharge all duties and enforce all ordinances and regulations of
the city for the preservation of peace and good order and the protection of the
rights and property of all persons. The Chief shall be under the direction of
the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 20.01.010)
§ 33.016 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE GENERALLY.
   (A)   The police officers of the city shall have the same powers and
responsibilities as deputy sheriffs. It shall be the duty of the police force
at all times to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove nuisances
existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law relating
to the suppression of offenses, and perform all duties required of them by
ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   This section is not a limitation of a police officer’s statewide
authority as otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 20.01.020)
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS)
§ 33.030 SUPERVISION OVER FIRE AND AMBULANCE DIVISIONS.
   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advise and consent
of the City Council and shall be responsible for effective management of the
Fire and EMS Department.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.010) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.031 FIRE MARSHAL.
   The Fire Marshal shall work under the direction and supervision of the Fire
Chief to administer and enforce the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
adopted by §
33.032 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.020) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.032 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED; MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The International Fire Code, including appendixes printed as a
code in book form by the International Code Council and other referenced NFPA
standards adopted by the state under the state’s Fire Code Adoption Act, being
U.C.A. Title 15A, Chapter 1, Part 4 (establishing rules and regulations for the
design, construction, quality of materials, use, location and maintenance of
building fire provisions), or its successor statute, and as it may be
subsequently amended or revised, one copy of which, including changes, have
been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City
Recorder, is hereby approved and adopted as the International Fire Code of the
city.
      (2)   Any amendments, modifications, supplements or later editions of
said code replacing said code shall constitute the code then in effect under
this subchapter; provided, however, that, before any later editions shall take
effect, the City Council, by resolution, shall certify that the later editions
are available and one copy of all amendments, modifications, supplements or
later editions shall be filed for examination and use by the public in the
office of the City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.030)
   (B)   The Fire Marshal, with the approval of the City Council, shall have
the power to modify any of the provisions of the International Fire Code upon
application in writing by the aggrieved owner or lessee or his or her duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the code; provided that, the spirit of the code shall
be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of
the Fire Chief and Council thereon shall be recorded in the Building Official’s
records and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.040)
(Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.033 APPEALS TO BOARD OF APPEAL FROM FIRE CHIEF DECISION.
   Whenever the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of
the Fire Marshal to the Board of Appeal as outlined within the International
Fire Code and City Code.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.050) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 33.045 CREATED; EMERGENCY MANAGER.
   (A)   The office of Emergency Management has been created under the office
of the Mayor and shall be managed by an Emergency Manager. The Office of
Emergency Manager will coordinate activities pertaining to any disaster
emergency and will be the instrument through which the Mayor may exercise the
authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in him or her.
   (B)   The Emergency Manager shall be an employee of the city who is
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The Emergency Manager
shall report directly to the City Administrator or designee and shall be
responsible for the planning, administration and operation of the local
organization subject to the direction and control of the Mayor. The Emergency
Manager shall also have the following responsibilities:
      (1)   Ultimate responsibility and authority in carrying out the policy
decisions of the Mayor;
      (2)   Coordinates all disaster related emergency response actions of all
city departments;
      (3)   Coordinates activities of the Emergency Coordination Center;
      (4)   Point of contact/liaison with other municipal, county, state or
federal organizations;
      (5)   Coordinate recovery activities following a disaster situation; and
      (6)   Coordinates all mitigation and preparation activities of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.010) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.046 MAYOR’S POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor is authorized to declare a local disaster upon finding
a disaster has occurred or is imminent. A disaster emergency’s existence or
resolution is declared by the Mayor in consultation with readily available City
Council members.
      (2)   In the event of the Mayor’s temporary absence or disability, the
continuity of government in accordance with State Code.
   (B)   A disaster emergency which causes danger of injury or damages to
persons or property can be declared as a result of:
      (1)   Internal disturbance;
      (2)   Natural disasters;
      (3)   Human-made disasters;
      (4)   Technology hazards; and
      (5)   War-caused disaster.
   (C)   The declaration or resolution of a disaster emergency shall become
effective upon completion of a state of emergency declaration by an authorized
city official. The declaration shall be issued and distributed in appropriate
form to the public.
   (D)   Power to create orders deemed necessary to preserve the peace and
order of the city can be made by proclamation or resolution of the Mayor in
consultation with readily available City Council members. In the event of the
Mayor’s temporary absence or disability, the continuity of government in
accordance with State Code.
   (E)   In order to preserve the peace and order of the city, the following
orders can be made:
      (1)   An order to establish a curfew upon all or part of the city
providing:
         (a)   Curfew areas which require the public to remove themselves from
the area; and
         (b)   Exemption from curfew for specific personnel performing
essential services such as medical, utility, fire, police and other essential
services.
      (2)   An order to close any business establishment for the period of the
emergency whose products create a potential for personal harm or property
damage. The types of business may include, but are not limited to, those
selling or dispensing:
         (a)   Intoxicating liquors or beer;
         (b)   Gasoline or other flammable liquids or combustible products,
toxic or hazardous materials; and/or
      (3)   An order to close all private clubs or portion thereof where the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted;
      (4)   An order to discontinue the sale of beer or other alcoholic
beverages for the period of the disaster emergency;
      (5)   An order to designate any public street, thoroughfare, alley, park
or vehicle parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrians for the period
of the disaster emergency;
      (6)   An order to call upon organizations, within or without the city, to
assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the city for a period of the
emergency. This includes Public Safety personnel;
      (7)   Other orders which are imminently necessary for the protection of
life and property; and
      (8)   An order that the City Emergency Management Policy Group shall
convene to make policy decisions during the period of the disaster emergency.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.020) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.047 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Emergency Manager shall prepare an Emergency Management Plan
(plan) that shall be submitted to and approved by the Mayor. The City Council
shall receive copies and training associated with the plan. The plan shall
establish an Emergency Management Committee providing for the use of services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all city government departments and
agencies and other service providers during a threatened or actual local
disaster emergency.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of all Emergency Management Committee
members to perform the functions assigned to them in the plan and to maintain
their portion of the plan in the state of readiness at all times.
      (2)   All substantive amendments to the plan shall be approved by the
Emergency Management Committee and the Mayor; provided, however, that, in the
event an amendment is pending at the time a disaster is proclaimed, the
amendment will be considered approved immediately and will remain effective
unless specifically revoked by the Mayor or the Emergency Management Committee.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.030) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.048 EMERGENCY COORDINATION CENTER.
   The Emergency Manager shall establish and staff an Emergency Coordination
Center (ECC) equipped with a communications system to support government
operations in emergencies and provide other essential support to families and
equipment for agencies and activities assigned emergency functions. An
alternate ECC will also be established in the case the ECC is not able to
operate in an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.040) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.049 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   The Emergency Manager shall ensure compliance with the National Incident
Management System (NIMS) standardized procedures for managing personnel,
communications, facilities and resources. NIMS compliance will improve the
city’s ability to utilize federal funding to enhance local readiness, maintain
responder safety and streamline incident management processes. The Incident
Command System components of NIMS are integral to various incident management
activities, including emergency management training programs.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.050) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
§ 33.050 PURCHASING GOODS AND SERVICES.
   (A)   When a disaster emergency has been declared, the purchasing of goods
and services will not follow the normal purchasing procedures. The department
needing the goods or services will try and obtain a fair market value from the
supplier or contractor, but the need for the goods or services will take
priority.
   (B)   The purchase process that is issued for the goods or services will
contain the following information:
      (1)   Supplier/contractor;
      (2)   Authorized signature/name of city official;
      (3)   Location of the goods or services to be used;
      (4)   Department requesting goods or services;
      (5)   Price for goods and services;
      (6)   “Disaster Emergency” will be written at the top of the purchase
order/or credit card statement;
      (7)   Upon receipt of the invoice for the goods or services will be
attached to the emergency purchase order/or credit card statement; and
      (8)   The completed documentation will be forwarded to the Finance
Director for payment of the invoice.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.060) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
PUBLIC SAFETY COST RECOVERY
§ 33.065 TITLE.
   The provisions of this subchapter may be cited and referred to as the
“Brigham City Public Safety Cost Recovery Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.010) (Ord. 01-21, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 15-15, passed 9-
3-2015)
§ 33.066 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter shall provide procedures for recovering expenses incurred by
the city in connection with any emergency response, as defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.020) (Ord. 01-21, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 15-15, passed 9-
3-2015)
§ 33.067 RATES, CHARGES AND DISCOUNTS.
   The city is hereby empowered to recover emergency response expenses incurred
by virtue of its response to any emergency from any person, corporation,
partnership or other individual or entity who caused such a response, pursuant
to the following procedure.
   (A)   In the event of any emergency response, the city may recover all costs
associated with the response to the call including, but not limited to,
worker’s compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs
of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of
disposal and cost of any contract labor and materials.
   (B)   The city will use the current allowable ambulance rates as adopted by
the state’s Department of Health pursuant to U.C.A. § 26B-4-152 and
Administrative Rule R426-8-200, as it may be subsequently amended or revised.
Any amendments, modifications, supplements or later edition to said code shall
constitute the code then in effect under this subchapter.
   (C)   The city may use a third-party billing provider to assist in the
recovery of costs associated with an emergency response.
   (D)   Clients shall be billed for the actual cost of supplies, plus a 300%
mark-up for restocking, purchasing and inventory expenses.
   (E)   At no time will a Medicare and/or Medicaid recipient be billed for
more than what is allowable by Medicare and/or Medicaid.
   (F)   When requested and a full payment is received from the patient within
30 days, a 10% discount shall be given.
   (G)   Payment plans will be tailored to the individual’s ability to pay as
long as a cooperative attitude and willingness to pay exists. However, the debt
shall be retired in one year or less. If determined that the responsible party
has no intention of satisfying the account, it will be turned over to a
collection agency as “bad debt” and removed from the billing records.
   (H)   Individuals who believe they are eligible for financial hardship can
request an application for charitable consideration. The maximum amount to be
credited to a qualifying patient’s account is 50%, not to exceed $15,000.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.030) (Ord. 01-21, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 09-17, passed 11-
19-2009; Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015; Ord. 17-11, passed 6-15-2017; Ord. 23-18,
passed 8-3-2023)
§ 33.068 NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY.
   The payment of emergency response expenses determined owing under this
subchapter does not constitute:
   (A)   An admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for
damage; or
   (B)   A criminal fine.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.040) (Ord. 01-21, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 15-15, passed 9-
3-2015)
§ 33.069 ACTIONS TO RECOVER EXPENSE.
   In the event the party or parties determined to be responsible for emergency
response expenses fail to make payment to the city within 30 days after a final
administrative determination of any appeal, or 30 days from the deadline for
appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the city may initiate legal action to
recover from the determined responsible party the emergency response expenses
determined to be owing, including the reasonable attorney’s fees, and costs
incurred by the city in such legal action.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.050) (Ord. 01-21, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 15-15, passed 9-
3-2015)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted by §
33.032 of this chapter, or fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or
fails to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation
of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certification or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the Fire Marshal or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed herein, shall severally, for each and every violation and non-
compliance respectively, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
      (2)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.060) (Ord. 15-15, passed 9-3-2015)
CHAPTER 34: IMPACT FEES
Section
   
34.001   Definitions
   
34.002   Statutory authority and restrictions
   
34.003   Service area
   
34.004   Impact Fee Facilities Plan
   
34.005   Impact fee analysis
   
34.006   Calculation of impact fees
   
34.007   Schedule and formula
   
34.008   Adjustments and credits
   
34.009   Notice and hearing
   
34.010   Impact Fee Account and expenditures
   
34.011   Challenges to impact fees
   
34.012   Interpretation
   
34.013   Other impact fees not repealed
§ 34.001 DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases that are defined in the Impact Fees Act, being U.C.A.
Title 11, Chapter 36a, or its successor statute, shall have the same definition
in this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Except as otherwise provided in the Impact Fees Act,
any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use; any change in
use of a building or structure; or any changes in the use of land within the
service area that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. Any written authorization from the city that
authorizes the commencement of development activity.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT. The unit of demand that has an impact on the
park, fire, police, storm water, waste water, water, transportation or power
infrastructure of the city that is equivalent to a single-family residence.
   IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed upon new development activity as a
condition of development approval to mitigate the impact of the new development
on public infrastructure. IMPACT FEE does not include a tax, special
assessment, building permit fee, hookup fee, fee for project improvements or
other reasonable permit or application fee.
   IMPACT FEE ANALYSIS. The written analysis of each impact fee required by
U.C.A. § 11-36a-303 of the Impact Fees Act.
   IMPACT FEE FACILITIES PLAN. The plan required by U.C.A. § 11-36a-301 of the
Impact Fees Act.
   PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS. Site improvements and facilities that are: planned and
designed to provide service for development resulting from a development
activity; necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of
development resulting from a development activity; and not identified or
reimbursed as a system improvement. PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS does not mean system
improvements, as more particularly defined herein.
   PROPORTIONATE SHARE. The cost of public facility improvements that are
roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demands and needs
of any development activity.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Impact fee facilities as defined in the Impact Fees Act
that have a life expectancy of ten or more years and are owned or operated by
or on behalf of a local political subdivision or private entity. For purposes
of this chapter, and as defined in the Impact Fees Act, impact fee facilities
include those capital facilities described in the Impact Fees Facility Plan.
   SERVICE AREA. A geographic area designated by the city on the basis of sound
planning or engineering principles in which a public facility, or a defined set
of public facilities, provides service within the area. The SERVICE AREA, for
purposes of this chapter, is more particularly described in §
34.003 of this chapter.
   SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS. Existing public facilities that are: identified in the
impact fee analysis under U.C.A. § 11-36a-304 of the Impact Fees Act; and
designed to provide services to service areas within the community at large and
future public facilities identified in the impact fee analysis under U.C.A. §
11-36a-304 that are intended to provide service to service areas within the
community at large. SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS do not include project improvements, as
defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.010) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.002 STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Impact Fees Act authority. The city is authorized to impose impact
fees subject to and in accordance with applicable provisions of the Impact Fees
Act. An IMPACT FEE is defined as a payment of money imposed upon new
development activity as a condition of development approval to mitigate the
impact of the new development on public infrastructure. Impact fees may only be
established for  public facilities, as defined in U.C.A. § 11-36a-102, that
have a life expectancy of ten or more years and are owned or operated by or on
behalf of a local political subdivision. Public facilities for which impact
fees may be imposed include public facilities for facilities.
   (B)   Impact Fees Act restrictions. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-202 of the
Impact Fees Act, the city may not impose an impact fee to:
      (1)   Cure deficiencies in public facilities serving existing
development;
      (2)   Raise the established level of service of a public facility serving
existing development;
      (3)   Recoup more than the local political subdivision’s costs actually
incurred for excess capacity in an existing system improvement; or
      (4)   Include an expense for overhead, unless the expense is calculated
pursuant to a methodology that is consistent with generally accepted cost
accounting practices and the methodological standards set forth by the Federal
Office of Management and Budget for federal grant reimbursement.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.020) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.003 SERVICE AREA.
   The Impact Fees Act requires the city to establish one or more service areas
within which the city will calculate and impose a particular impact fee. The
service area within which the proposed impact fees will be imposed includes all
of the area within the corporate limits and jurisdictional boundaries of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.030) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.004 IMPACT FEE FACILITIES PLAN.
   (A)   Impact fee facilities plan required. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-301
of the Impact Fees Act, before imposing or amending an impact fee, the city is
required to prepare an impact fee facilities plan to determine the public
facilities required to serve development resulting from new development
activity. The impact fee facilities plan shall identify the demands placed upon
existing public facilities by new development activity and the proposed means
by which the city will meet those demands.
   (B)   Citywide Impact Fees Facilities Plan. The city has, through its
consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in U.C.A. § 11-36a-
302 of the Impact Fees Act and has caused to be prepared a Citywide Impact Fees
Facilities Plan (“IFFP”). The IFFP has been prepared based on reasonable growth
assumptions for the city and general demand characteristics of current and
future users of facilities. The IFFP identifies the impact on system
improvements created by development activity and estimates the proportionate
share of the costs of impacts on system improvements that are reasonably
related to new development activity. As shown in the IFFP, the city has
considered all revenue sources to finance the impacts on system improvements,
including grants, bonds, interfund loans, impact fees and anticipated or
accepted dedications of system improvements. The IFFP establishes that impact
fees are necessary to maintain proposed level of service that complies with
applicable provisions of U.C.A. § 11-36a-302 of the Impact Fees Act.
   (C)   Plan certification. The IFFP includes a written certification in
accordance with U.C.A. § 11-36a-306 of the Impact Fees Act from the person or
entity that prepared the plan certifying that the IFFP complies in each and
every relevant respect with the Impact Fees Act.
   (D)   Compliance with noticing requirements. All noticing requirements set
forth in the Impact Fees Act, including, but not limited to, provisions of
U.C.A. Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part 5, Notice, including notice of intent to
prepare an impact fee facilities plan, notice to adopt or amend an impact fee
facilities plan, notice of preparation of impact fee analysis and notice of
intent to adopt impact fee enactment, have been provided. Copies of the IFFP
and IFA, together with a summary designed to be understood by a lay person, and
this chapter, have been made available to the public by placing a copy of the
IFFP and IFA, together with the summary, and this chapter, in the City Library
and the City Recorder’s office at City Hall at least ten days before the public
hearing.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.040) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.005 IMPACT FEE ANALYSIS.
   (A)   Impact fee analysis required.
      (1)   Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-303 of the Impact Fees Act, each local
political subdivision intending to impose an impact fee shall prepare a written
analysis of each impact fee to be imposed and a summary of the impact fee
analysis designed to be understood by a lay person.
      (2)   The impact fee analysis identifies the anticipated impact on or
consumption of any existing capacity of a public facility by the anticipated
development activity; identify the anticipated impact on system improvements
required by the anticipated development activity to maintain the established
level of service for each public facility; demonstrates how the anticipated
impacts are reasonably related to the anticipated development activity;
estimates the proportionate share of the costs for existing capacity that will
be recouped and the costs of impacts on system improvements that are reasonably
related to the new development activity and identifies how the impact fee is
calculated.
   (B)   Impact fees analysis.
      (1)   The city has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the
factors set forth in U.C.A. § 11-36a-304 of the Impact Fees Act, including the
proportionate share analysis required therein, and has caused to be prepared an
Impact Fees Analysis (“IFA”).
      (2)   The IFA identifies the impacts upon public facilities required by
the development activity and demonstrates how those impacts on system
improvements are reasonably related to the development activity, estimates the
proportionate share of the costs of impacts on system improvements that are
reasonably related to the development activity and identifies how the impact
fees are calculated.
   (C)   Analysis certification. The IFA includes a written certification in
accordance with U.C.A. § 11-36a-306 of the Impact Fees Act from the person or
entity that prepared the analysis certifying that the IFA complies in each and
every relevant respect with the Impact Fees Act.
   (D)   Compliance with noticing requirements.
      (1)   All noticing requirements set forth in the Impact Fees Act,
including, but not limited to, provisions of U.C.A. Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part
5, Notice, including notice of intent to prepare an impact fee facilities plan,
notice to adopt or amend an impact fee facilities plan, notice of preparation
of impact fee analysis and notice of intent to adopt impact fee enactment, have
been provided.
      (2)   Copies of the IFFP and IFA, together with a summary designed to be
understood by a lay person, and this chapter, have been made available to the
public by placing a copy of the IFFP and IFA, together with the summary, and
this chapter, in the City Library and the City Recorder’s office at City Hall
at least ten days before the public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.050) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.006 CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Impact fee calculations.
      (1)   Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-305, in calculating an impact fee, the
city may include: the construction contract price; the cost of acquiring land,
improvements, materials and fixtures; the cost for planning, surveying and
engineering fees for services provided for and directly related to the
construction of the system improvements; and debt service charges if the city
might use impact fees as a revenue stream to pay principal and interest on
bonds, notes or other obligations issued to finance the costs of the system
improvements.
      (2)   In calculating the proposed impact fees, the city has based such
amounts calculated on realistic estimates and the assumptions underlying such
estimates are more particular disclosed in the IFA.
   (B)   Previously incurred costs.
      (1)   To the extent that new growth and development will be served by
previously constructed improvements, the city’s impact fees may include public
facility costs and outstanding bond costs related to the improvements
previously incurred by the city.
      (2)   As provided in the IFA, a buy-in component is contemplated in the
analysis and therefore the interest costs associated with any outstanding storm
bond obligations have been included in the calculation of the impact fees.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.060) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.007 SCHEDULE AND FORMULA.
   (A)   Impact fee schedule or formula required. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-
402 of the Impact Fees Act, the city is required to provide a schedule of
impact fees for each type of development activity that specifies the amount of
the impact fee to be imposed for each type of system improvement or the formula
that the city will use to calculate each impact fee.
   (B)   Maximum impact fee schedule. Based on the IFA, the maximum impact fees
which the city may impose on development activity within the defined service
area is set forth in the following schedules:
Table 1: Maximum Impact Fee Per Unit
 Single-Family Multi-Family Non-Residential
Table 1: Maximum Impact Fee Per Unit
             Single-Family         Multi-Family          Non-Residential
             Max.                  Max.                  Max. Impact
             Impact Fee Adopted    Impact Fee Adopted    Fee Per     Adopted
             Per Land   Impact Fee Per Land   Impact Fee Land Use    Impact Fee
             Use                   Use
Fire         $171       $171       $171       $171       $350        $350
Parks        $3,115     $2,639     $1,746     $1,746     -           -
Police       $10        -          $10        -          $13         -
Power        See Charts Below
Storm water  $1,026     $1,026     $1,026     $1,026     $1,026      $1,026
(per ERU)
Transportati $354       $354       $249       $249       See Chart Below
on
Waste water  $1,689     $1,689     $1,689     $1,689     $1,689      $1,689
(per ERU)
Water (per   $2,366     $2,366     $2,366     $2,366     $2,366      $2,366
ERU)
 
Table 1.1: Maximum Impact Fee Per Unit
                      Single-Family Multi-Family Non-Residential
                      (Unit/ERU)    (Unit/ERU)   (KSF/ERU)
Fire                  $946          $946         $1,490
Parks and recreation  $4,618        $2,574       -
Police                $1,120        $1,120       $1,243
Power                 See Charts Below
Storm water (per ERU) $1,232        $1,232       $1,232
Transportation        $1,716        $1,227       $4,782
Wastewater (per ERU)  $2,472        $2,472       $2,472
Water (per ERU)       $7,034        $7,034       $7,034
 
Table 2: Transportation Impact Fee By Land Use Type
                                      Pass By
                       Daily Trip End and               Max. Impac Adopt ed
Land Use ITE Code Unit Trips Adjustm  Internal Net Trip t Fee Per  Impa ct Fee
                             ent      Adjustme          Land Use
                                      nt
Table 2: Transportation Impact Fee By Land Use Type
                                            Pass By           Max.
            ITE              Daily Trip End and               Impac t  Adopt ed
Land Use    Code Unit        Trips Adjustm  Internal Net Trip Fee Per  Impa ct
                                   ent      Adjustme          Land Use Fee
                                            nt
Light       110  1,000 SF    6.97  50%      90%      3.1      $232     $232
industrial
Multi-           Residential
family      220  Unit        6.72  50%      100%     3.4      $249     $249
residential
Office      710  1,000 SF    11.01 50%      65%      3.6      $265     $265
Residential 270  Residential 4.5   50%      100%     2.3      $167     $167
PUD              Unit
Shopping    820  1,000 SF    58.93 50%      45%      13.3     $981     $981
center
Single-          Residential
family      210  Unit        9.57  50%      100%     4.8      $345     $345
residential
Warehouse/  130  1,000 SF    6.96  50%      90%      3.1      $232     $232
industr ial
 
Table 1.2: Transportation Impact Fee By Land Use Type
                         ITE             AADT   Pass-By  Enteri  ADJ   Calculat
Development Type         Code   Unit     (Weekd Adjustme ng/Exit Trip  ed Fee
                                         ay)    nt       ing     Rate
Assisted living          254    Beds     2.60   0.00     0.50    1.30  $473
Church                   560    KSF      7.60   0.00     0.50    3.80  $1,383
Clinic                   630    KSF      37.60  0.00     0.50    18.80 $6,843
Daycare center           565    KSF      47.62  0.44     0.50    13.33 $4,853
Department store         875    KSF      22.88  0.00     0.50    11.44 $4,164
Discount club            857    KSF      42.26  0.34     0.50    13.95 $5,076
Drive-in bank            912    KSF      100.35 0.35     0.50    32.61 $11,871
Elementary school        520    Students 2.27   0.00     0.50    1.14  $413
Free-standing discount   813    KSF      50.52  0.29     0.50    17.93 $6,528
store
General office           710    KSF      10.84  0.00     0.50    5.42  $1,973
Hardware/paint store     816    KSF      8.07   0.26     0.50    2.99  $1,087
High school              525    Students 1.94   0.00     0.50    0.97  $353
High turnover/sit down   932    KSF      107.20 0.43     0.50    30.55 $11,121
restaurant
Home improvement         862    KSF      30.74  0.42     0.50    8.91  $3,245
superstore
Hotel                    310    Rooms    7.99   0.00     0.50    4.00  $1,454
Industrial park          130    KSF      3.37   0.00     0.50    1.69  $613
Light industrial         110    KSF      4.87   0.00     0.50    2.44  $886
Medical dental office    720    KSF      36.00  0.00     0.50    18.00 $6,552
Middle/Jr. high school   522    Students 2.10   0.00     0.50    1.05  $382
Mini warehouse           151    KSF      1.45   0.00     0.50    0.73  $264
Multi-family high rise   222    Unit     4.54   0.00     0.50    2.27  $826
Multi-family low rise    220    Unit     6.74   0.00     0.50    3.37  $1,227
New car sales            841    KSF      27.06  0.00     0.50    13.53 $4,925
Nursing home             620    Beds     3.06   0.00     0.50    1.53  $557
Pharmacy/drugstore with  881    KSF      108.40 0.49     0.50    27.64 $10,062
drive-through
Quality restaurant       931    KSF      83.84  0.44     0.50    23.48 $8,545
Senior adult housing – 252    Occ.     3.24   0.00     0.50    1.62  $590
attached                        Unit
Senior adult housing – 251    Unit     4.31   0.00     0.50    2.16  $784
detached
Shopping center/general  820    KSF      37.01  0.29     0.50    13.14 $4,782
commercial
Single-family            210  Unit     9.43   0.00     0.50    4.72  $1,716
residential
Supermarket              850    KSF      93.84  0.24     0.50    35.66 $12,980
Tire store               848    KSF      27.69  0.25     0.50    10.38 $3,780
Source: Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 11th Edition.
 
 
Table 3: Power Impact Fee – Residential Single Phase Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
Table 3: Power Impact Fee – Residential Single Phase Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
100  24  3                $1,026          $1,026
125  30  4                $1,368          $1,368
150  36  5                $1,710          $1,710
200  48  6                $2,052          $2,052
225  54  8                $2,736          $2,736
400  96  24               $4,104          $4,104
 
 
Table 4: Power Impact Fee – Commercial Single Phase Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
100  24  3                $1,026          $1,026
125  30  5                $1,710          $1,710
150  36  7                $2,394          $2,394
200  48  12               $4,104          $4,104
400  96  19               $6,498          $6,498
 
Table 5: Power Impact Fee – Commercial 3 Phase (120/208V) or (120/240V)
Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
Table 5: Power Impact Fee – Commercial 3 Phase (120/208V) or (120/240V)
Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
125  45  9                $3,078          $3,078
150  54  14               $4,788          $4,788
200  72  18               $6,156          $6,156
400  144 36               $12,312         $12,312
600  216 54               $24,624         $24,624
800  288 72               $24,624         $24,624
1000 360 90               $30,780         $30,780
1200 432 108              $36,936         $36,936
1600 576 144              $49,248         $49,248
2000 720 180              $61,560         $61,560
 
 
Table 6: Power Impact Fee – Commercial Phase 3 (120/240V) Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
125  52  9                $3,078          $3,078
150  62  14               $4,788          $4,788
 
 
Table 6: Power Impact Fee – Commercial Phase 3 (120/240V) Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
Table 6: Power Impact Fee – Commercial Phase 3 (120/240V) Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
200  83  18               $6,156          $6,156
400  166 36               $12,312         $12,312
600  249 54               $18,468         $18,468
800  332 72               $24,624         $24,624
1000 415 90               $30,780         $30,780
1200 498 108              $36,936         $36,936
1600 664 144              $49,248         $49,248
2000 830 180              $61,560         $61,560
 
Table 7: Power Impact Fee – Commercial Phase 3 (227/480V) Service Sizes
AMPS KVA Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
Table 7: Power Impact Fee – Commercial Phase 3 (227/480V) Service Sizes
AMPS KVA  Peak Demand (kW) Max. Impact Fee Adopted Impact Fee
125  104  20               $6,840          $6,840
150  125  30               $10,260         $10,260
200  166  42               $14,364         $14,364
400  332  83               $28,386         $28,386
600  498  125              $42,750         $42,750
800  664  166              $56,772         $56,772
1000 830  208              $71,136         $71,136
1200 996  249              $85,158         $85,158
1600 1329 333              $113,886        $113,886
2000 1661 416              $142,272        $142,272
 
(Prior Code, § 6.01.070) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.008 ADJUSTMENTS AND CREDITS.
   (A)   Adjustments.
      (1)   In accordance with U.C.A. § 11-36a-402 of the Impact Fees Act, the
city may adjust the impact fees at the time the fee is charged to respond to:
         (a)   Unusual circumstances in specific cases;
         (b)   A request for a prompt and individualized impact fee review for
the development activity of the state, a school district or a charter school
and an offset or credit for a public facility for which an impact fee has been
or will be collected; and
         (c)   To ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly.
      (2)   The impact fees assessed to a particular development may also be
adjusted should the developer supply sufficient written information, studies
and/or data to the city showing a discrepancy between the fee being assessed
and the actual impact on the system.
   (B)   Developer credits.
      (1)   In accordance with U.C.A. § 11-36a-402 of the Impact Fees Act, a
developer, including a school district or a charter school, may be allowed a
credit against impact fees or proportionate reimbursement of impact fees if the
developer:
         (a)   Dedicates land for a system improvement;
         (b)   Builds and dedicates some or all of a system improvement; or
         (c)   Dedicates a public facility that the city and the developer
agree will reduce the need for a system improvement; provided that, the system
improvement is:
            1.   Identified in the city’s IFFP; and
            2.   Required by the city as a condition of approving the
development activity.
      (2)   To the extent required in U.C.A. § 11-36a-402, the city shall
provide a credit against impact fees for any dedication of land for,
improvements to or new construction of any system improvements provided by the
developer if the facilities are:
         (a)   System improvement; or
         (b)   Dedicated to the public and offset the need for an identified
system improvement.
   (C)   Exemption for “public purpose”.
      (1)   The City Council may, on a project by project basis, authorize
exceptions or adjustments to the impact fees for development activity
attributable to:
         (a)   Low income housing;
         (b)   The state;
         (c)   A school district;
         (d)   A charter school; or
         (e)   Other development activity which the City Council determines to
have a broad public purpose.
      (2)   Exemptions provided under this division (C) shall be by resolution
of the City Council.
      (3)   For development activities requesting an exemption as serving a
broad public purpose, the City Council shall find that such activities will
provide benefits to the citizens of the city as a whole and will accomplish a
defined purpose of the city’s General Plan that may otherwise require the
expenditure of city funds to accomplish. If the City Council is unable to make
such a finding, no exemption shall be provided.
      (4)   The City Council shall consider requests for exemption of
development activities due to the provision of low income housing only under
the following circumstances:
         (a)   The developer is a bona fide non-profit organization which has
the provision of low income housing as a principal objective;
         (b)   The developer has established procedures that will ensure that
the dwelling or dwellings for which the exemption is requested will remain
affordable to low income households for a period of not less than 30 years;
         (c)   The developer has established procedures that will guarantee the
long-term maintenance and upkeep of the low income housing development,
including all structures, landscaping and other site features; and
         (d)   The Planning Commission and City Council find that the project
demonstrates quality in site planning and architecture.
   (D)   Impact Fee Adjustment Committee. Requests for adjustment or exemption
of impact fees, or for developer credits, shall be reviewed by the Impact Fee
Adjustment Committee (the “Committee”), which shall be comprised of three
members, which shall be the Community and Economic Development Director, the
Chief Building Official and the City Engineer. The Director of Public Works and
the Director of Public Power shall advise the Committee, and may act as
alternate members in the event that one of the Committee members is unable to
attend. Committee members may also designate a member of their respective
departments to act as their alternate in the event they are unable to attend.
      (1)   All requests for adjustment or exemption of impact fees or
developer credits shall be submitted to the Community and Economic Development
Department, which shall forward the request to the Committee. The Committee
shall convene as needed to review all requests.
      (2)   Requests for adjustment or exemption of impact fees or developer
credits must be requested in writing by the developer, and must include
evidence supporting the request, and compiled, as applicable, in a standard
form as it relates to equivalent residential units, as defined herein.
      (3)   If the request for adjustment or exemption or developer credit is
the result of land dedication, or improvement of new public services or
buildings, then a fair market appraisal shall be made of the proposal and shall
be submitted, with any other evidence, to the Committee for review. The
appraisal shall be at the expense of the developer. Land dedication must first
be approved by the City Council.
         (a)   All submitted requests shall be reviewed by the Committee within
14 days from the date a complete application is submitted, and all decisions of
the Committee shall be submitted in writing to the developer within 30 days
following the Committee meeting.
         (b)   The Committee is authorized or deny requests for adjustment of
impact fees. In such cases, the Committee’s decision may be appealed to the
City Council.
         (c)   The Committee shall make recommendations to the City Council
regarding requests for exemption of impact fees.
         (d)   Minutes of Committee meetings shall be submitted to the City
Council.
         (e)   The Committee shall be subject to the requirements of the
state’s Open and Public Meetings Act (U.C.A. Title 52, Chapter 4).
      (4)   Except for the exemption of low income housing, in the event that
the City Council exempts a project from the payment of all or a portion of
impact fees, it shall establish one or more sources of funds other than impact
fees to offset funds that would otherwise be paid in the form of impact fees.
Applications for exceptions are to be filed with the city at the time the
applicant first requests the extension of service to the applicant’s
development or property.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.080) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.009 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Notice.
      (1)   All noticing requirements set forth in the Impact Fees Act,
including, but not limited to, provisions of U.C.A. Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part
5, Notice, including notice of intent to prepare an impact fee facilities plan,
notice to adopt or amend an impact fee facilities plan, notice of preparation
of impact fee analysis and notice of intent to adopt impact fee enactment, have
been provided.
      (2)   Copies of the IFFP and IFA, together with a summary designed to be
understood by a lay person, and this chapter, have been made available to the
public by placing a copy of the IFFP and IFA, together with the summary, and
this chapter, in the City Library and the Recorder’s office at City Hall at
least ten days before the public hearing. Notice has also been provided in
accordance with applicable provisions of U.C.A. § 10-9a-205.
   (B)   Hearing. The City Council held a public hearing regarding the IFFP,
the IFA and this chapter, on 5-17-2018, and a copy of the ordinance was
available in its substantially final form at the City Library and the City
Recorder’s office in the City Hall at least ten days before the date of the
hearing, all in conformity with the requirements of U.C.A. § 10-9a-205 and
applicable noticing provisions of the Impact Fees Act.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.090) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.010 IMPACT FEE ACCOUNT AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Impact fees accounting. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-601 of the Impact
Fees Act, the city will establish a separate interest bearing ledger account
for each type of public facility for which an impact fee is collected, deposit
a receipt for an impact fee in the appropriate ledger account established
herein and retain the interest earned on each fund or ledger account in the
fund or ledger account.
   (B)   Reporting. At the end of each fiscal year, the city shall prepare a
report on each fund or ledger account showing the source and expenditures as
required by law. Annually, the city shall produce and transmit to the State
Auditor a certified report in accordance with U.C.A. § 11-36a-601 in a format
developed by the State Auditor.
   (C)   Impact fee expenditures.
      (1)   Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-602 of the Impact Fees Act, the city
may expend impact fees only for a system improvement:
         (a)   Identified in the IFFP; and
         (b)   For the specific public facility type for which the fee was
collected.
      (2)   Impact fees will be expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
   (D)   Time of expenditure. Except as otherwise provided by law, the city
shall expend or encumber impact fees for a permissible use within six years of
their receipt. For purposes of this calculation, the first funds received shall
be deemed to be the first funds expended.
   (E)   Extension of time. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-602 of the Impact Fees
Act, the city may hold the impact fees for longer than six years if it
identifies in writing:
      (1)   An extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held
longer than six years; and
      (2)   An absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
   (F)   Refunds.
      (1)   Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-603 of the Impact Fees Act, the city
shall refund any impact fees paid by a developer, plus interest earned, when:
         (a)   The developer does not proceed with the development activity and
has a written request for a refund;
         (b)   The fees have not been spent or encumbered; and
         (c)   No impact has resulted.
      (2)   An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the
city may include any impact reasonably identified by the city, including, but
not limited to, the city having sized facilities and/or paid for, installed
and/or caused the installation of facilities based in whole or in part upon the
developer’s planned development activity even though that capacity may, at some
future time, be utilized by another development.
   (G)   Other impact fees. To the extent allowed by law, the City Council may
negotiate or otherwise impose impact fees and other fees different from those
currently charged. Those charges may, at the discretion of the City Council,
include, but not be limited to, reductions or increases in impact fees, all or
part of which may be reimbursed to the developer who installed improvements
that service the land to be connected with the city’s system.
   (H)   Additional fees and costs. The impact fees authorized herein are
separate from, and in addition to, user fees and other charges lawfully imposed
by the city and other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized
component parts of the impact fee schedule. In charging any such fees as a
condition of development approval, the city recognizes that the fees must be a
reasonable charge for the service provided.
   (I)   Fees effective at time of payment. Unless otherwise provided in the
city code, the city will collect the impact fees prior to final plat recording
or prior to building permit issuance, as applicable. The fees will be
calculated by the city. Unless the city is otherwise bound by a contractual
requirement, the impact fees shall be determined from the fee schedule in
effect at the time of payment.
   (J)   Imposition of additional fee or refund after development. Should any
developer undertake development activities such that the ultimate acreage or
other impact of the development activity is not revealed to the city, either
through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans or any other cause whatsoever,
and/or the impact fee is not initially charged against all acreage within the
development, the city shall be entitled to charge an additional impact fee to
the developer or other appropriate person covering the acreage for which an
impact fee was not previously paid.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.100) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.011 CHALLENGES TO IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Request for information. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-701, a person or
entity required to pay an impact fee who believes the impact fee does not meet
the requirements of law may file a written request for information with the
City Administrator. As required by law, the City Administrator shall, within
two weeks after the receipt of the request for information provide the person
or entity with the IFFP, the IFA and any other relevant information relating to
the impact fee.
   (B)   Advisory opinion. A potentially aggrieved person may request an
advisory opinion from a neutral third party regarding compliance of the impact
fees with the Impact Fees Act by filing such request with the office of the
Property Rights Ombudsman in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
U.C.A. Title 13, Chapter 43, known as the Property Rights Ombudsman Act. The
aggrieved party requesting an advisory opinion is not required to exhaust the
administrative appeals procedures set forth in division (C) below before
requesting an advisory opinion.
   (C)   Appeal. A person or entity that has paid impact fees under the
provisions of this chapter may challenge such impact fees pursuant to the
provisions set forth in U.C.A. Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part 7, of the Impact
Fees Act regarding challenges.
      (1)   Grounds for challenge. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-701, a person or
entity that has paid impact fees under the provisions of this chapter may
challenge:
         (a)   The impact fees;
         (b)   Whether the city complied with the notice requirements of the
Impact Fees Act with respect to the imposition of the impact fees; and/or
         (c)   Whether the city complied with other procedural requirements of
the Impact Fees Act for imposing the impact fee.
      (2)   Sole remedy. The sole remedy for challenging the notice
requirements is the equitable remedy of requiring the city to correct the
defective notice and repeat the process. The sole remedy for challenging the
impact fee is a refund of the difference between what the person or entity paid
as an impact fee and the amount the impact fee should have been if it had been
correctly calculated. Reasonable attorney’s fees may be awarded to the
substantially prevailing party to the extent provided in the Impact Fees Act.
      (3)   Imitation. A challenge to an impact fee is initiated by filing:
         (a)   An appeal to the City Council pursuant to the administrative
appeal procedures set forth herein;
         (b)   A request for arbitration as provided in U.C.A. § 11-36a-705 of
the Impact Fees Act; or
         (c)   An action in district court.
   (D)   Time restrictions. The time for filing a challenge to the impact fees
shall be filed in accordance with the time limitations set forth in U.C.A. §
11-36a-702, depending upon the type of challenge. The deadline to file an
action in district court is tolled from the date that a challenge is filed
using the administrative procedures set forth in division (C) above until 30
days after which a final decision is rendered in the administrative appeals
procedure.
      (1)   Administrative appeal procedure. The city hereby adopts an
administrative appeal procedure to consider and decide challenges to the impact
fees. Any person or entity that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this chapter
may challenge or appeal the impact fee by filing written notice of
administrative appeal with the city within 30 days after the day on which the
person or entity paid the impact fee. The notice of appeal shall set forth the
grounds for the appeal and shall include any applicable filing fees as set
forth in the city’s Consolidated Fee Schedule. Upon receiving the written
notice of appeal, the City Council shall set a hearing date to consider the
merits of the challenge or appeal. The person or entity challenging or
appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and present any written or oral
evidence deemed relevant to the challenge or appeal. Representatives of the
city may also appear and present evidence to support the imposition of the fee.
The City Council shall hold a hearing and make a decision within 30 days after
the date the challenge or appeal is filed.
      (2)   Mediation. In addition to the methods of challenging an impact fee
as provided herein, a specified public agency may require the city to
participate in mediation of any applicable impact fee in accordance with the
provisions of U.C.A. § 11-36a-704 of the Impact Fees Act. A written request for
mediation must be filed in accordance with U.C.A. § 11-36a-704 no later than 30
days after the day on which the impact fee is paid.
      (3)   Declaratory judgment action. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 11-36a-701, a
person or entity residing in or owning property within the service area, or an
organization, association or a corporation representing the interests of
persons or entities owning property within the service area are deemed to have
standing to file a declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of an
impact fee.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.110) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.012 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter has been divided into sections, divisions and clauses for
convenience only and the interpretation of this chapter shall not be affected
by such division or by any heading contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.120) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
§ 34.013 OTHER IMPACT FEES NOT REPEALED.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this chapter shall not
repeal, modify or affect any impact fee of the city in existence as of the
effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.120) (Ord. 18-05, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 24-33, passed 12-
5-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES
   Chapter
      
50.   ELECTRICITY
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   WASTE TREATMENT
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 24-06, passed March 7, 2024, changed the name of Title V from
Public Works to Public Utility Services.
CHAPTER 50: ELECTRICITY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Director of Public Power
   
50.002   Name of electrical system; property of city; extensions
   
50.003   Injuring, interfering with system; unauthorized connections
   
50.004   Director to have access to premises
   
50.005   Application for service
   
50.006   Meter deposit
   
50.007   Consumer to protect meter; keep meter unobstructed, accessible
   
50.008   Rates, charges and discounts
   
50.009   Restitution of payment
   
50.010   Delinquent utility bills, termination procedures
   
50.011   Application of delinquent consumer for service
   
50.012   Using electric power from connection ahead of meter
   
50.013   Payment of cost of electrical connection
   
50.014   City not liable for damages
   
50.015   Adoption of electrical requirements and standards
Master Metering and Sub-Metering
   
50.025   Definitions
   
50.026   Unlawful act
   
50.027   Electrical energy services
Electrical Code
   
50.040   Application
   
50.041   Community Development Department; powers and duties; permits;
inspections; records
   
50.042   Adoption of Electrical Code
   
50.043   Standards for electrical equipment installed in city
   
50.044   Supervision of work by licensed electrical contractor; permit
required; exceptions
   
50.045   Permit required; permit fees; calls for inspection
   
50.046   Authority of Community Development Department as to wiring
   
50.047   Special permission for variance from requirements of subchapter
   
50.048   Connection to installation without certificate
   
50.049   Liability for damages
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
   
50.060   Purpose
Interconnection
   
50.075   Applicability
   
50.076   Definitions
   
50.077   Application
   
50.078   Requirements prior to interconnection
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC POWER.
   The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council, shall appoint a Director
of Public Power, whose duties shall be to manage and direct all business
connected with or pertaining to the Electrical Department.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.010)
§ 50.002 NAME OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; PROPERTY OF CITY; EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The electric light and power system constructed by the city to supply
electric light and power shall be designated and known as the “Brigham City
Public Power” system.
   (B)   It shall be the property of the city, including individual meters and
other related apparatus, and the Mayor and Council may from time to time
authorize the construction, improvements or maintenance of such system as may
be required.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.020)
§ 50.003 INJURING OR INTERFERING WITH ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; UNAUTHORIZED
CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall break any seal, pull any meter, close any by-pass
switch, connect, disconnect or tamper with any of Brigham City Public Power’s
metering equipment other than authorized Brigham City Public Power personnel.
   (B)   Any person determined to have violated division (A) above shall also
be liable for the costs of all energy supplied which has not been billed due to
unauthorized use, alteration or tampering with metering equipment. The person
(s) shall also be liable for all of the city employee labor hours required for
the investigation and resolution to the said violation.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall willfully injure or destroy any part or
portion of the electrical system or the extensions thereof or, without
authority, connect with the system to use electric energy from the system or
who shall, in any manner, unlawfully interfere with the free workings of the
system shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
      (2)   No person shall install any kind of lock device or mechanism, or in
any way impede accessibility to any city-owned equipment.
      (3)   Any equipment owned by the city that is found to be rendered
inaccessible will be corrected immediately by the consumer or by Department
personnel depending on the need for access.
      (4)   A cost to the consumer may apply if costs are incurred by the city
in correcting inaccessible equipment.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.030) (Ord. 18-17, passed 10-4-2018) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.004 DIRECTOR TO HAVE ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The Director of Public Power, or authorized persons under his or her
direction, shall have free access at all usual hours to all places supplied
with electric power, to examine the apparatus, the amount used and the manner
of using the same or for the purpose of disconnecting the electric power.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.040)
§ 50.005 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   The consumer shall make application to the city for electric service.
   (B)   The consumer shall agree that the electric meter placed on the
premises will not be removed or altered and shall be housed by the consumer at
a point designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.050)
§ 50.006 METER DEPOSIT.
   (A)   A meter deposit shall be required on all electric meters owned by
Brigham City Public Power.
   (B)   The amount of the deposit shall be determined by resolution adopted by
the City Council and/or in accordance with state law.
   (C)   Said meter deposit may be changed by resolution from time to time as
the requirements of the city demand.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.060) (Ord. 03-37, passed 9-18-2003)
§ 50.007 CONSUMER TO PROTECT METER; KEEP METER UNOBSTRUCTED, ACCESSIBLE.
   (A)   Each consumer shall provide a place for the housing of the electric
meter on the exterior of the structure to protect it from damage, and shall use
all reasonable care to protect the meter from destruction from any source
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.070)
   (B)   (1)   Each consumer is responsible to keep landscaping (shrubs, trees
and the like) from obstructing access to the meter, which includes trimming or
removal as deemed necessary by the Public Power Department.
      (2)   If a consumer makes a meter inaccessible, in the opinion of the
Public Power Department, by installing a fence, deck, enclosure or animal run
or other obstructions, the consumer shall, at his, her or their expense, either
modify the area to provide safe, unobstructed access to the meter, or move the
meter to a location acceptable to the Public Power Department.
      (3)   For existing meters located behind an existing fence, the consumer
shall keep said fence unlocked for access to premises as referenced in §
50.004 of this chapter. Animals shall not be kept in an area that would
prohibit the Public Power Department from accessing the meter or any apparatus
associated with the meter.
      (4)   Meters shall not be installed over window wells, steps in stairways
or in other unsafe or inconvenient locations.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.075)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.008 RATES, CHARGES AND DISCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution from time to time, change, alter,
amend, fix or classify any and all rates, charges and discounts for the use of
electrical energy from the electrical power system to consumers of different
classifications.
   (B)   Such rates, charges and discounts so fixed and determined shall be
filed with the City Recorder and, when so filed, shall be the existing rates,
charges and discounts for all electrical service until further amended. The
resolution fixing the same shall be made available to the public by the City
Recorder at all times.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.080)
§ 50.009 RESTITUTION OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   In the event that electrical services at a structure are found to have
been incorrectly billed, restitution of payment to the customer or to the city,
shall only be made on the most current 24-month billing period.
   (B)   No claim shall be filed or suits shall be instituted for improper
billing outside this time limit.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.085)
§ 50.010 DELINQUENT UTILITY BILLS, TERMINATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution from time to time, adopt such
written policies and procedures for collection of delinquent utility accounts
and for termination of service due to delinquencies, as the Council shall deem
necessary and proper.
   (B)   The policies and procedures adopted by the City Council, pursuant to a
resolution, shall constitute the official policies and procedures of the city
in this regard until such time as the City Council, by resolution, amends or
revises said policies and procedures.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.090)
§ 50.011 APPLICATION OF DELINQUENT CONSUMER FOR SERVICE.
   No new connection or reconnection shall be made for any applicant in the
city who is, at the time, delinquent and indebted to the city for the use of
electrical energy.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.100)
§ 50.012 USING ELECTRIC POWER FROM CONNECTION AHEAD OF METER.
   When a customer is found to be using electric power ahead of the meter,
except by authority of special action by the Council, the service shall be shut
off and not reconnected until the service from the point of intake to the meter
has been inspected by the city at the expense of the consumer.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.110)
§ 50.013 PAYMENT OF COST OF ELECTRICAL CONNECTION.
   A fee schedule shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council for any
person desiring an electrical connection supplied by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.120)
§ 50.014 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES.
   The city shall not be held liable for damage to any electric power user, or
to any person or property, by reason of any supply or interruption of
electrical supply caused by accidents or incidents to the system or by system
alterations, additions, repairs or from unavoidable cause.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.130)
§ 50.015 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City Council Brigham City Electrical
Requirements and Standards Manual, containing certain standards for new
construction, trenching and conduit requirements, temporary and permanent
residential and commercial service connections, metering and meter
installations, transformers, secondary junction boxes, street lighting,
sectionalizer and switch placement, clearance guidelines, primary and secondary
system requirements, developer and customer responsibilities, inspection
requirements and related matters. A copy of the manual will be kept on file
with the City Recorder and placed on the Power Department page of the city’s
website at https://www.bcutah.org/public-power.htm. Any amendments,
modifications, supplements or later portions of said manual shall constitute
the manual then in effect under this section.
   (B)   All illustrations contained in the manual will be assembled into one
or more documents and shall be known as the Brigham City Electrical Quick
Reference Guide. A copy of the Quick Reference Guide shall be kept on file with
the City Recorder and placed on the Power Department page of the city’s
website at https://www.bcutah.org/public-power.htm.
(Prior Code, § 10.01.140) (Ord. 19-13, passed 8-1-2019)
MASTER METERING AND SUB-METERING
§ 50.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASTER METERING. Measurement of electricity consumption of several tenants
or housing units using a single meter. That is, one meter measures the energy
usage for several households, tenants, recreation vehicles or mobile home parks
collectively.
   SUB-METERING. The use of a meter(s) connected after the main revenue meter
and are typically used for monitoring energy usage or other information.
   TRANSIENT BUILDING. Transient multiple occupancy buildings and transient
mobile home parks normally used as temporary domiciles and in such buildings as
hotels, motels, dormitories, rooming houses, hospitals, nursing homes and
mobile home parks designated for recreational vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 10.02.010) (Ord. 11-01, passed 4-7-2011)
§ 50.026 UNLAWFUL ACT.
   (A)   At any point on the city’s electrical grid system where adequate
capacity is available to service transient buildings or temporary domiciles, no
transient buildings or the expansion thereof as defined in the city code will
be allowed to sub-meter the city’s electrical energy.
   (B)   (1)   Any attempt by owner(s) or proprietor(s) to sub-meter the city’s
electrical energy will result in the disconnection of their electrical service.
      (2)   Any violation of this subchapter will be considered an infraction
of the law.
(Prior Code, § 10.02.020) (Ord. 11-01, passed 4-7-2011)
§ 50.027 ELECTRICAL ENERGY SERVICES.
   (A)   The city’s electrical energy service will be supplied to each
transient building defined in city code directly by the city. Service to each
tenant will be separately metered and billed under the city’s approval rate
schedule in the name of the individual tenant whenever possible or in the name
of the facility owner(s) or proprietor(s) where circumstances make it
impractical to bill the tenants directly. Notwithstanding, the city will supply
electric energy through a single point of delivery to approved locations under
the rates set forth in the city’s approved rate schedules.
   (B)   (1)   Should the owner(s) or proprietor(s) of transient buildings
currently receive single point of delivery service under the city’s approved
rate schedule, the owner or proprietor will sub-meter each tenant for
electrical service rendered under the applicable residential rate schedule of
the city. Copies of the city’s residential rate schedules will be furnished to
the owner(s) or proprietor(s) of each facility who has a single point of
delivery service. The owner(s) or proprietor(s) shall post in several
conspicuous places around the facilities copies of the city’s residential rate
schedule with a statement that the charge for electric service for each unit or
space will be billed in accordance with the appropriate residential service
rate.
      (2)   The owner(s) or proprietor(s) shall not meter or sell electric
energy to any tenant under any other rate or system of charges. Evidence of any
sale or attempt to sell electric energy by owners or proprietor(s) on any other
rate or system of charge except as provided herein shall give the city the
right to discontinue service upon five days’ written notice. Miscellaneous
loads such as general lighting of the area, laundry facilities, washroom,
recreational facilities and the like, available only to facility tenants will
be considered residential usage and served under the applicable schedule. Loads
for commercial purposes such as stores, restaurants, service stations and other
distinct and separate commercial establishments will be separately metered and
served under applicable schedules.
   (C)   Developers of transient building projects desiring single point of
delivery service shall furnish and install all required material(s) from the
property line to the meter base and be responsible for the care and maintenance
of them, except the city will install and own all meters and sub-meters and
will be responsible for their care and maintenance and periodic testing.
(Prior Code, § 10.02.030) (Ord. 11-01, passed 4-7-2011)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 50.040 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all installations of
electrical conductors, fittings, devices, appliances and fixtures, hereinafter
called “electrical equipment”, within or on public or private buildings and
premises with exceptions as provided herein and with the following general
exceptions.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to installations of
electrical equipment in railway cars or to automotive equipment or to equipment
in mines.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to installations
used by electricity supply or communication agencies in the generation,
transmission or distribution of electricity or for the operation of signals or
the transmission of intelligence and located within or on buildings or premises
used exclusively by such an agency or on public thoroughfares used for such
purposes by these agencies.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to electrical equipment
used for radio transmission in amateur transmitting stations and shall apply to
all electrical equipment used for power supply to radio transmitting equipment,
but shall not apply to other electrical equipment used for radio transmission.
   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the installations
or equipment employed by a railway utility in the exercise of its functions as
a utility and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that
purpose.
   (E)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to industrial
concerns nor their employees for electrical work performed on the premises of
such industrial concerns where such industrial concerns either employ an
electrical engineer licensed as such by the state or obtain an electrical
contractor’s license under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.010)
§ 50.041 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES; PERMITS;
INSPECTIONS; RECORDS.
   (A)   (1)   The Community Development Department is hereby declared to be
the Electrical Inspector.
      (2)   The Community Development Department is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this subchapter and is authorized
and directed to employ such assistants as may, in its opinion, be necessary to
carry out such enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.020)
   (B)   (1)   The Electrical Inspector or duly appointed assistants, upon
presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right during reasonable
hours to enter any building premises in the discharge of official duties, or
for the purpose of making any inspection, re-inspection or test of electrical
equipment contained therein or its installation in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Where any electrical equipment is found by the Electrical Inspector
to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or is
defectively installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment
shall be notified in writing and shall be required to place such equipment in
safe condition.
      (3)   If such work is not completed within 15 days or any longer period
that may be specified by the Electrical Inspector in such notice, the
Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the
disconnection of electrical service to such electrical equipment.
      (4)   In cases of emergency, where, in the judgment of the Inspector or
Public Power Department, it is necessary for the safety of persons and
property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the Fire
Department, the Electrical Inspector or Public Power Director shall have the
authority to immediately disconnect or cause disconnection of any electrical
equipment.
      (5)   The Electrical Inspector or Public Power Director may delegate
authority to qualified and authorized employees.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.030)
   (C)   (1)   The Electrical Inspector shall, upon application, issue permits
for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment and shall make
inspections of electrical installations and equipment as provided in this
subchapter.
      (2)   Complete records shall be maintained of all permits issued, all
inspections made and of all other official work or actions in connection with
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.040)
§ 50.042 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   (1)   The National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, as adopted by the
National Fire Protection Association and the American Standards Association and
printed as a code in book form and as it may be subsequently amended or
revised, one copy of which is filed for use and examination by the public in
the office of the City Recorder, is hereby approved and adopted as the
Electrical Code of the municipality.
      (2)   Any amendments, modifications, supplements or later editions of
said code replacing said code shall constitute the code then in effect under
this subchapter; provided, however, that, before any later editions shall take
effect, the City Council, by resolution, shall certify that the later editions
are available and one copy of all amendments, modifications, supplements or
later editions shall be filed for examination and use by the public in the
office of the City Recorder.
   (B)   Provided further that, the following additional requirements shall be
considered a part of the city’s Electrical Code.
      (1)   All overhead service entrances shall have a minimum two-inch rigid
metal conduit mast terminating above the roof with an approved weather cap. The
mast height shall be designed to accommodate minimum NEC service drop
clearances.
      (2)   (a)   Underground service entrances shall have a minimum two-inch
rigid metal raceway from the meter base to a minimum depth of 18 inches below
grade.
         (b)   The lower end of the raceway shall have a 90-degree rigid metal
sweep to accommodate horizontal attachment.
      (3)   The neutral or ground conductor shall be continuous from the
weather cap to the main disconnect.
      (4)   Service entrance conductors shall protrude a minimum of 18 inches
beyond the weather cap.
      (5)   All service entrance conduit shall have lock nuts and bushings on
the fittings.
      (6)   Water grounding and ground rod connection shall terminate at the
main disconnect.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.050)
§ 50.043 STANDARDS FOR ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLED IN CITY.
   (A)   All electrical equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to
persons and property and in conformity with the applicable statutes of the
state and with ordinances, rules and regulations issued by the city.
   (B)   Conformity of electrical equipment with applicable standards of
Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., or other recognized standardization testing
laboratories acceptable to the Electrical Inspector, shall be prima facie
evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to equipment owned and used by an
electricity supply or communication agency in the generation, transmission or
distribution of electricity or for the operation of signals or the transmission
of intelligence.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.060)
§ 50.044 SUPERVISION OF WORK BY LICENSED ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR; PERMIT
REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   In accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, no electrical wiring
or electrical equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure
or premises publicly or privately owned nor shall any alteration or addition be
made to any existing wiring system unless such work is done under the
supervision of the holder of an electrical contractor’s license issued by the
state and unless a permit to perform such work is first applied for and
obtained from the city, except as specifically exempted in other parts of this
subchapter; and, except that, no license or permit shall be required to execute
any of the classes of electrical work specified in the following divisions (A)
to (D), inclusive:
   (A)   Minor repair work, the replacement of lamps or fuses or the connection
of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles
or to electrical systems or equipment operating at 50 volt amperes at 50 volts;
   (B)   The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment for the
operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence;
   (C)   The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment
intended by or for an electricity supply or communication agency for the use of
such agency in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of
electricity; and
   (D)   Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, altering
or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus; except that, this exemption
shall not include any permanent wiring other than that required for testing
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.070) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.045 PERMIT REQUIRED; PERMIT FEES; CALLS FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any construction work
upon any building without first having obtained a permit so to do from the
Community Development Department or authorized agents.
      (2)   Such permit shall be issued upon application and upon the payment
of fees per the Uniform Administrative Code provision.
   (B)   After a permit is issued, the permittee shall call for an inspection
by Community Development Department after the electrical work is roughed in and
shall call for other inspections when the work is completed.
   (C)   Any person failing to call for an inspection as herein provided for
shall have his, her or their license revoked upon notice and hearing.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.080) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.046 AUTHORITY OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT AS TO WIRING.
   (A)   In order to safeguard life and property, the Electrical Inspector
shall have the authority to require that certain wiring methods, such as
enclosed wiring system, shall be installed and that certain wiring methods,
such as open wiring or other methods of wiring shall not be permitted in that
location.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Electrical Inspector or authorized agent,
such special rules and regulations are necessary notice will be given to each
holder of a valid license covering electrical work of such rules and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.090)
§ 50.047 SPECIAL PERMISSION FOR VARIANCE FROM REQUIREMENTS OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   The Electrical Inspector or an authorized agent shall have the
authority to authorize the use of any wiring method or the installation of any
electrical equipment or material by special permission when corrosive or
moisture conditions or structural details make the use of wiring methods,
equipment or materials specified in this subchapter impractical.
   (B)   Such special permission shall be for the specific case only and shall
not establish any precedent for future installations.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.100)
§ 50.048 CONNECTION TO INSTALLATION WITHOUT CERTIFICATE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of
electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment or wiring for
which an installation permit is required, or which has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the Electrical Inspector or an authorized agent
until a certificate of approval has been issued by the Electrical Inspector or
an authorized agent authorizing the connection and use of such equipment or
wiring.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.110) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.049 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electrical wiring or equipment for damage to persons or property
caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the inspection or the examination authorized herein or
the certificate of approval or the license and certificate therefor issued as
herein provided or by reason of the approval of any equipment or wiring
authorized herein.
(Prior Code, § 10.03.120)
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
§ 50.060 PURPOSE.
   The city hereby adopts the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act and, in
conformance with U.C.A. §§ 10-1-301 et seq., the Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax Act. Any amendments, modifications, supplements or later editions of said
act shall constitute then in effect under the ordinance, or as amended.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.010)
INTERCONNECTION
§ 50.075 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth requirements for the interconnection of any
type of customer electric generating facilities to the city’s electric
distribution systems.
   (B)   Interconnection is available on a first-come first-served basis at the
sole discretion of the city and only under the following conditions:
      (1)   Any proposed customer generating facility shall comply with all
federal, state and city regulations.
      (2)   Interconnected generation is limited annually (December 31 -
January 1) to no more than 15% of the city’s maximum annual peaking load
calculated as of September 1 of the prior year. The 15% maximum shall be
allocated by allowing 12% for commercial or industrial uses and 3% for
residential uses. Once these limits are met, no additional interconnection
shall be considered until the following year.
      (3)   Residential applications shall only be considered for possible
interconnection for 10kW or 100% of the kWh usage in the last 12 months as
measured by actual usage or stamped engineer estimate for usage for new
residential. Multi-family applications shall only be considered for possible
interconnection for 10kW per unit so long as the generation is connected to a
house meter and not individual units.
      (4)   Commercial and industrial applications shall only be considered for
1000 kW or a net alternating current (AC) output equal to 100% of a customer’s
annual peak demand in kilowatts, whichever is less.
   (C)   At the sole discretion of the city, Renewable Energy Credits (RECs)
may be considered but any RECs approved by the city shall be placed in the
ownership of Brigham City Corporation for their sole use.
   (D)   Any required modifications or improvements to the city’s distribution
system to accommodate the customer’s generating facility interconnection shall
be the sole responsibility of the customer.
(Prior Code, § 10.05.010) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-17-2011; Ord. 22-20, passed 9-
1-2022; Ord. 23-02, passed 1-19-2023; Ord. 25-16, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 50.076 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIDIRECTIONAL METERING. A system of measuring the difference between the
electricity supplied by Brigham City Public Power and the electricity generated
by an eligible distributed energy resource system and delivered onto the
electric grid over the applicable billing period.
   CITY. Brigham City Corporation, Utah.
   CUSTOMER. A city residential or business electrical customer that generates
distributed energy resources, on the customer’s side of the meter and receives
an electric utility bill from the city.
   CUSTOMER-GENERATING FACILITY. The generating equipment used by an electrical
customer to generate, manage and monitor electricity which includes but is not
limited to a solar power generation facility.
   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The portion of the city’s electric system which
delivers electricity from transformation points on the transmission system to
points of connection at a customer’s premises.
   IEEE STANDARD. The standards published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers.
   INVERTER. A device that converts direct current power into alternation
current power that is compatible with power generated or supplied by Brigham
City Public Power.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. Two or more connected residential units.
   NEC. The most current version of the National Electrical Code, respectively.
   NESC. The most current version of the National Electrical Safety Code,
respectively.
   UL STANDARD. The standards published by the Underwriters Laboratory.
(Prior Code, § 10.05.020) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-17-2011; Ord. 22-20, passed 9-
1-2022; Ord. 25-16, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 50.077 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any customer seeking interconnection must make application and receive
approval from the city through Brigham City Public Power.
   (B)   The customer must complete the prescribed application and provide any
requested information regarding the request.
   (C)   All applications shall demonstrate compliance with all laws, rules and
regulations including the city’s governing land use regulations at the time of
application.
   (D)   Once the city has received the application it shall make a
determination of completeness or shall reject the application as incomplete.
   (E)   The city may deny any application for any reason at its sole
discretion to protect the public power grid it maintains and operates.
(Prior Code, § 10.05.030) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-17-2011; Ord. 22-20, passed 9-
1-2022; Ord. 25-16, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 50.078 REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO INTERCONNECTION.
   (A)   Certification. If approved by the city, a customer-generating facility
must comply with the following standards, as applicable, prior to connecting to
the city’s distribution system:
      (1)   IEEE Standard 1547, Standard for Interconnecting Distributed
Resources with Electric Power systems, as amended and supplemented;
      (2)   UL Standard 1741, Inverters, Converters and Controllers for Use in
Independent Power Systems, as amended and supplemented;
      (3)   An equipment package shall be considered certified for
interconnected operation if all components have been submitted by a
manufacturer to a nationally-recognized testing and certification laboratory
and has been tested and listed by the laboratory for continuous interactive
operation with an electric distribution system in compliance with the
applicable codes and standards listed above. The city has the right to approve
or deny other distributed energy resource components on a case-by-case basis;
and
      (4)   A Utah-licensed electrical contractor (S200, S201 or S202) must
either install or oversee the installation of the photovoltaic systems.
   (B)   Approval and inspection.
      (1)   Prior to interconnection.
         (a)   After installation of the customer-generating facility and prior
to interconnection with the city’s distribution system, the facility shall be
inspected and approved by the city’s Inspection and Public Power Departments
and/or their designees. The customer must also obtain any local, state or
federal permits and pay all applicable fees.
         (b)   If approved, the city will allow interconnection and enable the
bi-directional capability of the city standard meter, that is capable of
measuring power flow in and out of the customers metering equipment. The city
requires one production meter, at the customer’s cost and shall be required to
upgrade the meter base to bring it to the current code standard.
      (2)   After interconnection. The city shall have the right to inspect a
customer-generating facility after interconnection approval is granted, at
reasonable hours and with reasonable prior notice to the customer. If the city
discovers that the customer-generating facility is not in compliance with the
requirements of this policy, and the non-compliance adversely affects the
safety or reliability of the electric distribution system in the sole
discretion of the city, the city shall require the customer to disconnect the
customer-generating facility immediately and may refuse reconnection or may
limit reconnection.
   (C)   Testing and maintenance. Once an interconnection has been approved
under this policy, the city will require a customer to test or perform
maintenance on its facility as follows:
      (1)   An annual test in which the customer-generating facility is
disconnected from the city’s distribution system to ensure that the inverter
stops delivering power to the grid; and
      (2)   Any manufacturer-recommended testing or maintenance and any post-
installation testing necessary to ensure compliance with IEEE 1547 or to ensure
safety.
   (D)   Disconnection and metering.
      (1)   In addition to the rights listed above, the city shall have the
right to disconnect the customer-generating facility at any time, in the event
it causes problems to the distribution system. The customer, at the sole
discretion of the city may have the option of correcting the problem, at which
time the system will be re-inspected prior to reconnecting.
      (2)   The customer shall be required to install a manual disconnect,
which is of the visible break type in a metal enclosure which can be secured by
a padlock and is located within ten feet of the meter. The disconnect shall be
readily accessible by city authorized personnel at all times. Roof-mounted
systems must have a roof-mounted manual disconnect as per NEC and local codes.
      (3)   The customer shall be required to meet all current applicable
electrical codes (NEC, NESC) and the city’s metering and disconnection
requirements, including, but not limited to, installation of new meter base and
panel.
   (E)   Liability. The customer shall be responsible for any damage caused by
the customer-generating facility to the city’s distribution system and/or
neighboring services. The customer shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of applicable protection equipment, and for any damage caused
by improper application, maintenance or faulty equipment. The city shall not be
liable directly or indirectly for permitting or continuing to allow an
attachment of an interconnected facility, or for the acts or omissions of the
customer-generator that caused loss or injury, including death, to any third
party.
   (F)   Brigham City has the right to deny any application.
   (G)   Net metering billing and energy crediting post interconnection.
      (1)   The city shall determine the net electricity produced or consumed
by the customer and the amounts to be billed to the customer during each
billing period in accordance with the city rates and metering practices, which
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   If the electricity supplied by city exceeds the electricity
generated by the customer, then customer shall be billed for the net
electricity supplied by the city, at the rate and with the base charge(s) paid
by other customers of city in the same rate class as customer.
      (3)   If the electricity generated by customer exceeds consumption and is
distributed back to city during the billing period, then customer shall be
billed for the base charge(s) paid by other customers of city in the same rate
class as customer, and shall be credited for the net excess kilowatt- hours
generated during the billing period, with this kilowatt-hour credit appearing
on customer’s bill for the following billing period.
      (4)   On the read date each calendar year, as set by the City Council,
any remaining unused kilowatt-hour credit accumulated during the previous year
shall be granted to city, without any compensation to customer-generator.
(Prior Code, § 10.05.040) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-17-2011; Ord. 22-20, passed 9-
1-2022; Ord. 25-16, passed 8-21-2025)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Water supervisor
   
51.002   Names of city waterworks; construction of reservoirs; installation of
mains and the like
   
51.003   Damage to city waterworks property
   
51.004   Fire hydrants
   
51.005   Opening or closing fire hydrant
   
51.006   Diverting water; injuring property used in distributing water
   
51.007   Service connections
   
51.008   When cost of installing service pipe to be paid by applicant; credit
upon water account
   
51.009   Connection service and meter deposits
   
51.010   Access to places supplied with water
   
51.011   City not liable for damages for shutting off water
   
51.012   Single connection for more than one party
   
51.013   Schedule of water rates
   
51.014   Restitution of payment
   
51.015   Due date of water bills; delinquency
   
51.016   Analysis of city water
   
51.017   Cross-connection control and backflow prevention
Drinking Water Source Protection
   
51.030   Short title and purpose
   
51.031   Definitions
   
51.032   Establishment of drinking water source protection zones
   
51.033   Permitted uses
   
51.034   Prohibited uses
   
51.035   Administration
Cross-reference:
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 155
   Swimming Pools, see
Chapter 151
   Waste Treatment, see
Chapter 52
   Zoning, see
Chapter 156
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 WATER SUPERVISOR.
   The Water Division shall be under the direction of the Water Supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.010)
§ 51.002 NAMES OF CITY WATERWORKS; CONSTRUCTION OF RESERVOIRS; INSTALLATION OF
MAINS AND THE LIKE.
   The waterworks constructed by the city to supply the city with culinary
water shall be designated and known as the “Brigham City Waterworks”. The Mayor
and Council may authorize the construction of storage reservoirs and the
installation of water mains, services and fire hydrants, as the necessities of
the inhabitants of the city may require, and make such rules and regulations as
may from time to time become necessary to properly service and supply the
inhabitants of the city with water.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.020)
§ 51.003 DAMAGE TO CITY WATERWORKS PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall willfully and without authority from the Water
Supervisor remove or damage any dam, bulkhead, gate, gatehouse, conduit, air
vent, air box, cover, main pipe, culvert or surface box, or raise or open any
gate or break down or force open any doors of the city waterworks system
executed, constructed or maintained for the purpose of supplying water to the
inhabitants of the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.030) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.004 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new
dwelling structure unless said structure or some portion thereof shall lie
within a distance of 300 lineal feet as measured from the structure to the
right-of-way and along the right-of-way to the nearest fire hydrant. This
requirement shall not apply to lots which are identified and platted at the Box
Elder County Recorder’s office prior to 11-1-1986.
      (2)   The sections shall apply in the event that any lot as shown on the
official plats as of that date is subdivided or altered in its shape or size.
   (B)   The Water Supervisor shall be responsible for making the determination
of the location of all fire hydrants installed within the corporate limits of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.040)
§ 51.005 OPENING OR CLOSING FIRE HYDRANT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open or close any fire hydrant within
the corporate limits of the city or to attempt to open or close, by the use of
any wrench or other device any such hydrant without first having obtained from
the Water Supervisor permission so to do; provided that, this section shall not
apply to any the City Fire Division.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.050) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.006 DIVERTING WATER; INJURING PROPERTY USED IN DISTRIBUTING WATER.
   Every person who, in violation of any right of any other person, willfully
turns or uses the water, or any part thereof, of any canal, ditch, pipeline, or
reservoir, except at a time when the use of the water has been duly distributed
to the person, or willfully uses any greater quantity of the water than has
been duly distributed to him or her, or in any way changes the flow of water
when lawfully distributed for irrigation or other useful purposes, except when
duly authorized to make the change, or willfully and maliciously breaks or
injures any dam, canal, pipeline, watergate, ditch or other means of diverting
or conveying water for irrigation or other useful purposes, is guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.060) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.007 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon written application and by authority of the Council, the
Water Supervisor shall supervise and cause to be installed and maintained
services to the water customers from the water main to a point adjacent to the
property line. At that point a stop clock, curb box, meter and necessary
fittings shall be installed.
      (2)   A separate service shall be installed to each customer. Standard
poly or copper pipe shall be used for all services and one-inch diameter shall
be the minimum. Refer to current city public works standards.
   (B)   For the installation and connection of service lines, materials shall
be furnished and charges made sufficient to cover actual costs thereof as
determined by resolution by the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council shall periodically determine the actual costs to the
city of all such installations and shall hereafter by resolution duly passed,
fix the charges for water service installations.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.070)
§ 51.008 WHEN COST OF INSTALLING SERVICE PIPE TO BE PAID BY APPLICANT; CREDIT
UPON WATER ACCOUNT.
   (A)   Where any property is not served by a service water pipe in front of
or adjacent to such property and the owner desires a water service connection,
such water service connection shall be furnished only on the condition that the
owner pay all costs of installing the pipeline, the backfilling and repairing
of streets through such property and in addition thereto pay for the meter
installation as set out in the above section; provided that, the applicant
shall be required to lay the size of pipe which in the opinion of the Water
Supervisor, may be necessary or needful to serve other potential water users in
the future along such street, in which event the city shall pay the difference
in cost between the size of pipe needed by the applicant and that specified by
the Water Supervisor; provided further that, all costs of installing the pipe
to the place of the applicant, which has been paid by the applicant, shall be
entered as a credit upon the account of the applicant and all water bills
thereafter charged for the use of water shall be charged against such account
until the cost of the installation has been paid in full, at which time the
service line shall be considered the property of the city.
   (B)   The credit allowed a property owner on water charges, as provided in
this section, shall be limited to a term of five years from the date of the
installation of the original connection to the property. Thereafter, the
property owner, or his or her successor in interest, shall pay the regular
charges for all water consumed upon the premises, with no credit being
thereafter allowed.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.080)
§ 51.009 CONNECTION SERVICE AND METER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   A meter deposit shall be required and shall be determined by
resolution adopted by the City Council. Said meter deposit may be changed by
resolution from time to time as the requirements of the city demand.
   (B)   Upon receipt of on-time payments for 12 consecutive months, the city
shall apply the full deposit to the consumer’s utility bill. If payments are
not received on time for 12 consecutive months, the deposit shall be held and
applied to its bill upon termination and any remaining amount returned to the
consumer.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.090)
§ 51.010 ACCESS TO PLACES SUPPLIED WITH WATER.
   Unrestricted access shall, at all ordinary hours, be allowed to the Water
Supervisor, or other authorized persons, to all places supplied with water to
examine the apparatus, the amount used and the manner of using the water or to
cut off the same.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.100)
§ 51.011 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES FOR SHUTTING OFF WATER.
   The city reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the
water from its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for
other purposes and no claim shall be made against the city by reason of any
breakage whatsoever or for any damage that may result from the shutting off of
water for repairing, laying or relaying mains, hydrants or other connections or
for any other reason whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.110)
§ 51.012 SINGLE CONNECTION FOR MORE THAN ONE PARTY.
   Whenever water shall be supplied to more than one party through a single
connection or tap, the bill for the whole supply furnished through such
connection or tap shall be made to the owner of the property. In case of non-
payment, the water may be shut off notwithstanding one or more parties have
paid their portion to any such owner or to any other party.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.120)
§ 51.013 SCHEDULE OF WATER RATES.
   All water supplied to the inhabitants of the city shall be through water
meters, unless otherwise directed by the Water Supervisor and the rates to
apply for all water so metered shall be fixed by the City Council by resolution
as the Council shall from time to time deem appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.130)
§ 51.014 RESTITUTION OF PAYMENT.
   In the event that water services at a structure are found to have been
incorrectly billed, restitution of payment to the customer or to the Brigham
City Water Works, shall only be made on the most current 36-month billing
period. No claim shall be filed or suits shall be instituted for improper
billing outside this time limit.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.140)
§ 51.015 DUE DATE OF WATER BILLS; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   All charges for water furnished by the city shall be billed to the
user on any day of the month following a one-month period of service to the
user and payment therefor shall be due and payable 20 days after such date of
billing. Any accounts which are not paid by the due date shall accrue interest
at a rate to be determined by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   If not paid within ten days after due date, the water service may be
disconnected after proper and legal notice has been given. Re-establishment of
service may be withheld until all delinquent charges due from such party have
been paid in full, together with a service charge for reconnection. The service
charge for reconnection shall be determined by resolution of the City Council,
and may be amended from time to time by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.150)
§ 51.016 ANALYSIS OF CITY WATER.
   It shall be the duty of the Water Supervisor to make or cause to be made at
least once every month an analysis of the water furnished by the city through
its water system. The analysis shall be made in accordance with the
requirements of the state’s Division of Drinking Water and local Health
Department.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.160)
§ 51.017 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful at any place supplied with water from the Brigham
City Water Distribution System to do any of the following:
      (1)   To install after written notification from Brigham City Water
Supervisor or use any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
which may allow any fluid or substance not suitable for human consumption to
come in contact with potable water in the Brigham City Water Distribution
System;
      (2)   To install any connection, arrangement or fixtures without using a
backflow prevention device or assembly designed to prevent a violation of
division (A) above. Any such device or assembly must be approved for
installation by the Brigham City Water Supervisor with respect to each
application; and/or
      (3)   To install any backflow prevention device or assembly described in
division (B) below which is not installed as required in the Utah Plumbing
Code.
   (B)   Officers and employees of the city shall have the right to enter any
place which is supplied with water from the Brigham City Water Distribution
System and conduct a hazard survey or any other examination or test reasonably
necessary to the enforcement of this section.
   (C)   Any user of water from the Brigham City Water Distribution System, and
not the city, shall pay all costs of installation and testing of backflow
prevention devices or assemblies.
   (D)   Backflow prevention devices or assemblies required by this section
shall be tested not less than once each year by a technician certified by the
Safe Drinking Water Committee of the state. Test results shall be furnished to
the city’s Water Supervisor.
   (E)   Water service may be discontinued to any user who is found to be in
violation of this section and who fails to take corrective action within ten
days after violation notification; except that, water service may be
discontinued immediately if an immediate threat to the water supply exists.
   (F)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
civilly liable to the city, and to third persons other than the city, for all
damages proximately caused by said violation.
(Prior Code, § 28.01.170) Penalty, see §
10.999
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
§ 51.030 SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known as the “Drinking Water Source
Protection Ordinance”.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure the provision of a safe
and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of
drinking water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads and springs
for all wells and spring s which are the supply sources for the Brigham City
Water System and by the designation and regulation of property uses and
conditions which may be maintained within such zones.
(Prior Code, § 28.02.010) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-9-1997)
§ 51.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. A control which is implemented by a potential
contamination source to prevent discharges to the ground water. Spill
protection is an example of DESIGN STANDARD.
   LAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES. Zoning and non-zoning controls which include,
but are not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site
plan reviews, design and operating standards, development rights, public
education programs, ground water monitoring, household hazardous waste
collection programs, water conservation programs, memoranda of understanding,
written contracts and agreements and so forth.
   POLLUTION SOURCE.
      (1)   Point source discharges of contaminants to ground water or
potential discharges of the liquid forms of “extremely hazardous substances”
which are stored in containers in excess of “applicable threshold planning
quantities” as specified in SARA Title III.
      (2)   Examples of possible POLLUTION SOURCES include, but are not limited
to, the following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely
hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, Class V underground injection
wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles,
salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding operations with more than ten
animal units.
      (3)   The following clarify the definition of POLLUTION SOURCES.
         (a)   ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION. A lot or facility where the following
conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period, and crops,
vegetation forage growth or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the
normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Two or more
ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS under common ownership are considered to be single
feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if
they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
         (b)   ANIMAL UNIT. A unit of measurement for any animal feeding
operation calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter
and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle
multiplied by 1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over 55 pounds multiplied
by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses
multiplied by 2.0.
         (c)   EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. Those substances which are
identified in the Section 302(EHS) column of the Title III List of Lists -
Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to Reporting Under SARA Title III, (EPA
560/4-91-011).
         (d)   POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE. Any facility or site which
employs an activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate ground
water. A POLLUTION SOURCE is also a POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE.
   REGULATORY AGENCY. Any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous
waste, as defined herein.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
thereon.
   SEPTIC TANK/DRAIN-FIELD SYSTEMS.
      (1)   A system which is comprised of a septic tank and a drain field
which accepts domestic wastewater from buildings of facilities for subsurface
treatment and disposal.
      (2)   By their design, SEPTIC TANK/DRAIN FIELD SYSTEM discharges cannot
be controlled with design standards.
   SPRING. The ground surface outlet of a natural underground spring including
spring collection and control boxes, valves, piping and other attachments.
   WELLHEAD. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals,
valves and other attachments.
(Prior Code, § 28.02.020) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-9-1997)
§ 51.032 ESTABLISHMENT OF DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONES.
   There is hereby established use districts to be known as Zones One, Two,
Three and Four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and
described as follows.
   (A)   “Zone One” is the area within a 100-foot radius from the wellhead or
spring.
   (B)   “Zone Two” is the area within a 250-day ground water time of travel to
the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to
the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
   (C)   “Zone Three” (waiver criteria zone) is the area within a three-year
ground water time of travel to the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the
aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground water source, or the ground water
divide, whichever is closer.
   (D)   “Zone Four” is the area within a 15-year ground water time of travel
to the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water
to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
(Prior Code, § 28.02.030) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-9-1997)
§ 51.033 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be allowed within the ground water protection
zones.
   (A)   All zones.
      (1)   Uses established before the effective date of this subchapter and
used continuously and in the same manner thereafter, which uses may continue,
subject to §
51.034 of this chapter; provided, any such use is not judged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be a nuisance under the provisions of federal, state
or local laws or regulations;
      (2)   Uses of single or multiple-family residential dwellings, commercial
or institutional uses established on or after the effective date of this
chapter connected to a sanitary sewer system; and
      (3)   Uses incidental and accessory to the uses set forth in divisions
(A)(1) and (A)(2) above.
   (B)   Zone 4.
      (1)   The tilling of the soil and the raising of crops; provided,
fertilizing and the use of pesticides is accomplished within federal, state and
local guidelines;
      (2)   The pasturing of livestock; provided, all forage is raised on the
pastured area; and
      (3)   Uses incidental and accessory to the uses set forth in divisions
(B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 28.02.040) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-9-1997)
§ 51.034 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   Except uses established before the effective date of this chapter and
used continuously and in the same manner thereafter, which uses may continue,
on or after the effective date of this chapter, the following uses or
conditions shall be and hereby are prohibited within ground water protection
zones, regardless of whether such uses or conditions may otherwise be included
as part of a use allowed under §
51.033 of this chapter.
      (1)   Zones 1 and 2.
         (a)   Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead or spring
collection area;
         (b)   Underground storage tanks;
         (c)   Storm water infiltration structures; and
         (d)   Any pollution source as defined herein or in R-309-605 of the
state’s Administrative Code.
      (2)   Zones 1, 2 and 3. Agriculture industries including, but not
limited, intensive feeding operations such as feed lots, dairies, fur breeding
operations, poultry farms and the like.
      (3)   All zones.
         (a)   Surface use, storage or dumping of hazardous waste or material,
expressly including industrial or commercial uses of agricultural pesticides
(except when such pesticides are used in farming applications within strict
compliance of the manufacturer’s recommendations of use, subject to inspection
by local officials);
         (b)   Sanitary landfills;
         (c)   Hazardous waste or material disposal sites; and
         (d)   Septic tanks/drain field systems.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the city’s Public Works Department, a literal
interpretation of the prohibitions provided in this section would work a
hardship and the use would comply with the rules and provisions of the state’s
administrative rules for public drinking water systems, then the city may allow
such use upon request of any interested party, developer or land user; provided
that, the proposed use does not violate the provisions established by the
state’s rules for public drinking water systems.
(Prior Code, § 28.02.050) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-9-1997; Ord. 98-56, passed 12-
10-1998)
§ 51.035 ADMINISTRATION.
   The policies and procedures or administration of any source protection zone
established under this subchapter, including without limitation those
applicable to non-conforming uses, exception, enforcement and penalties, shall
be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the
same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended.
(Prior Code, § 28.02.060) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-9-1997)
CHAPTER 52: WASTE TREATMENT
Section
Waste Treatment
   
52.001   Manager
   
52.002   Injuring sewer appliance or appurtenance
   
52.003   Opening manhole
   
52.004   Permit for sewer connection required; to be kept on premises;
exhibition
   
52.005   Application for permit for sewer connection; grant of permit
   
52.006   Designation of grade of sewer connection; plat of connection
   
52.007   Inspection of connections
   
52.008   Connection to intercepting sewer when fixtures lower than sewer
elevation
   
52.009   To whom permit for sewer connection issued
   
52.010   Revocation of permit for sewer connection
   
52.011   Plumbing in house or building for which sewer connection permit sought
   
52.012   Discharging rain water and the like into sanitary sewer; overflow from
blow-off boilers
   
52.013   Settling tanks
   
52.014   Grease and the like; interceptors may be required
   
52.015   Maintenance of grease interceptors and the like
   
52.016   Variation from provisions of chapter
   
52.017   Sewer service lines
   
52.018   Joint sewer connections
   
52.019   Construction of drain under Council regulations
   
52.020   Work done without inspection
   
52.021   Failure to remedy defective work
   
52.022   Use of licensed plumber’s name
   
52.023   Requirements for sanitary sewer connection
   
52.024   Rates
   
52.025   Sewer treatment plant charges for hauled wastewater
   
52.026   Connection fee; discontinuance of water service to non-connected
property
   
52.027   Sewer bills
   
52.028   Property outside city limits
   
52.029   Right of entry
Industrial Pretreatment
   
52.040   Purpose and policy
   
52.041   Administration
   
52.042   Abbreviations
   
52.043   Definitions
   
52.044   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.045   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.046   State pretreatment standards
   
52.047   Local limits
   
52.048   City’s right of revision
   
52.049   Special agreement
   
52.050   Dilution
Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
52.065   Pretreatment facilities
   
52.066   Additional pretreatment measures
   
52.067   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans
   
52.068   Hauled wastewater
Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
   
52.080   Wastewater analysis
   
52.081   Permit requirement
   
52.082   Existing connections
   
52.083   New connections
   
52.084   Application contents
   
52.085   Application signatories and certifications
Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
   
52.100   Permit duration
   
52.101   Permit contents
   
52.102   Permit modification
   
52.103   Transfer shall not be allowed
   
52.104   Permit revocation
   
52.105   Permit reissuance
   
52.106   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions
Reporting Requirements
   
52.120   Baseline monitoring reports (BMR)
   
52.121   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
52.122   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
52.123   Periodic compliance reports
   
52.124   Reports of changed conditions
   
52.125   Reports of potential problems
   
52.126   Reports from unpermitted users
   
52.127   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
52.128   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
52.129   Analytical requirements constant
   
52.130   Sample collection
   
52.131   Date of receipt of reports
   
52.132   Recordkeeping
   
52.133   Certification statements
Compliance Monitoring
   
52.145   Right of entry; inspection and sampling
   
52.146   Treatment responsibility
   
52.147   Search warrants
Administration and Enforcement Generally
   
52.160   Confidential information
   
52.161   Publication of users in significant non-compliance
   
52.162   Performance bonds
   
52.163   Liability insurance
   
52.164   Payment of outstanding fees and penalties
   
52.165   Water supply severance
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
52.180   Upset
   
52.181   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.182   Bypass
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
52.195   Notification of violation
   
52.196   Consent orders
   
52.197   Show cause hearing
   
52.198   Compliance orders
   
52.199   Cease and desist orders
   
52.200   Administrative fines
   
52.201   Emergency suspensions
   
52.202   Termination of discharge
   
52.203   Effective date
   
52.999   Penalty
WASTE TREATMENT
§ 52.001 MANAGER.
   The entire waste treatment system shall be under the immediate care,
supervision and control of the Publicly-Owned Treatment Works (POTW) manager.
The POTW manager is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the ordinance
contained in this chapter (hereinafter, “this ordinance”).
(Prior Code, § 22.01.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.002 INJURING SEWER APPLIANCE OR APPURTENANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently
injure, break or remove (any part or portion of) damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance, appliance
or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this
requirement shall be subject to the provisions in §
52.999(B) of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.003 OPENING MANHOLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open any sewer manhole without the
permission of the POTW manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.004 PERMIT FOR SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED; TO BE KEPT ON PREMISES;
EXHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or carry on the work of
laying, repairing, altering or connecting any sewer pipe with the public sewer
without first having a permit to do so from the POTW manager. Such permit must
be on the premises during the whole time the work is in progress and must be
exhibited, upon a request, to the manager or his or her authorized agent. It
shall be unlawful for any person to connect or attach any private drain or
house connection directly or indirectly with the public sewer without having
first received the regular permit from the POTW manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.005 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT FOR SEWER CONNECTION; GRANT OF PERMIT.
   The application for a permit for a sewer connection must be made in writing
by the owner of the premises or his or her authorized agent and must be
accompanied by plans showing the cause of the connection, its size and the size
and location of all branches to be connected. The application and plans
together with the connection fee as hereinafter provided for, shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer and, when approved by the POTW manager, shall
be granted, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.050) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.006 DESIGNATION OF GRADE OF SEWER CONNECTION; PLAT OF CONNECTION.
   All sewer connections shall be put into line on grades designated by the
POTW manager, who shall prepare a plat of each connection and file such plat in
the office of the POTW manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.060) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.007 INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS.
   All inspections of connections shall be in accordance with the current
Brigham City Public Works Standards.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.070) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.008 CONNECTION TO INTERCEPTING SEWER WHEN FIXTURES LOWER THAN SEWER
ELEVATION.
   No permit shall be issued for, nor shall any connection be made with, what
is known as the intercepting sewer where the fixtures in the house or the
property so to be connected to such sewer are lower than the present elevation
of the sewer in which the connection is to be made not including pumping
systems approved by the POTW manager and approved in accordance with Brigham
City’s Public Works Standards for Sanitary Sewerage Pumps.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.080) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.009 TO WHOM PERMIT FOR SEWER CONNECTION ISSUED.
   All permits for sewer connections shall be issued to the state-licensed
contractor who is qualified under state license law to do the work. All sewers
and apparatuses shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
Design Requirements for Wastewater Collection, Treatment and Disposal Systems
section of the state’s Rules of Administration, Rule 317.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.090) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.010 REVOCATION OF PERMIT FOR SEWER CONNECTION.
   The POTW manager may at any time revoke a permit for a sewer connection on
account of defective work or material.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.100) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.011 PLUMBING IN HOUSE OR BUILDING FOR WHICH SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT
SOUGHT.
   Permits to connect with the public sewer shall not be issued unless the
plumbing in the house or building to be connected is in accordance with the
provisions of all ordinances of the city relating thereto.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.110) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.012 DISCHARGING RAIN WATER AND THE LIKE INTO SANITARY SEWER; OVERFLOW FROM
BLOW-OFF BOILERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect with a public sanitary
sewer any drain or pipe which discharges rain water, ground water, cellar or
surface water or the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch or
other watercourse.
   (B)   The overflow from blow-off boilers or heating plants shall not be
permitted to enter a sewer at a temperature above 120°F. The overflow from
blow-off boilers or heating plants shall not be permitted to enter a force main
at a temperature above 104°F.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.120) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.013 SETTLING TANKS.
   The discharge of contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines,
air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages, stores or warehouses
containing inflammable oils, car barns, carriage houses, laundries, buildings
for the stabling and keeping of horses, cows or other animals, and all similar
establishments shall not be made into or connected with a public sanitary
sewer, unless such contents are discharged into a settling tank properly
trapped and vented. Such tanks shall be of construction approved by the POTW
manager and to be at all times subject to his inspection and condemnation.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.130) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.014 GREASE AND THE LIKE; INTERCEPTORS MAY BE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Specifications for grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the POTW manager, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sands and other harmful ingredients; except that, such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW
manager and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection and shall be constructed in accordance with the city’s
public works standards.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.140) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.015 MAINTENANCE OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND THE LIKE.
   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained
by the owner, at the owner’s expense, in continuously efficient operation at
all times.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.150) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.016 VARIATION FROM PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER.
   Any variation from the provisions of this ordinance shall be made only upon
the written order of the POTW manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.160) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.017 SEWER SERVICE LINES.
   The city shall maintain and repair all collection mains; however, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to maintain sewer service lines from
building to city main.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.170) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.018 JOINT SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Each separate building or premises shall have a separate connection to
the main line sewer, except only in cases where it is impracticable, and then
only on special permission granted by the Council upon the recommendation of
the POTW manager.
   (B)   No special permission shall be granted by the Council unless and until
the owner of each building or premises to be thus connected shall grant to and
receive from every other owner perpetual easements and rights-of-way which
shall be properly recorded across and upon each of the premises involved for
the purpose of constructing and maintaining each separate connection, and shall
covenant and agree as a part of such right-of-way or easement, so that the same
shall be a covenant appurtenant to and running with the land, that each owner
will bear and pay his or her proportionate share for the maintenance and repair
of the connection whether the expenditure, maintenance or repair becomes
necessary upon his or her own premises or the premises with which he or she is
connected.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.180) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.019 CONSTRUCTION OF DRAIN UNDER COUNCIL REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any private drain
connection with the public sewer of any length, except under such regulations
and restrictions, as may be prescribed by the Council in each instance.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.190) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.020 WORK DONE WITHOUT INSPECTION.
   Work done without notice to inspect or without inspection shall be treated
as defective work and shall be condemned, uncovered and re-laid, if necessary,
to the grade given by the POTW Manager and inspected by the proper officer upon
the proper permits being taken out by a duly licensed plumber or contractor,
the expense for the same to be borne by the property owner. The permit(s) of
the plumber or contractor of such defective work shall be revoked.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.200) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.021 FAILURE TO REMEDY DEFECTIVE WORK.
   No permit shall be issued to any licensed plumber or contractor during the
time that he or she shall fail to remedy any defective work, after he or she
has been notified that he or she has been held responsible therefor under this
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.210) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.022 USE OF LICENSED PLUMBER’S NAME.
   No licensed plumber shall allow his or her name to be used by any person or
party, directly or indirectly, either for the purpose of obtaining a permit or
to do any work under his or her license.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.220) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.023 REQUIREMENTS FOR SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   In order to defray the cost of constructing, reconstructing,
maintaining or operating a sanitary sewer collection system or waste water
treatment plant, the city may require a property owner with a building used for
human occupancy located on a parcel of property within city limits to connect
to the sanitary sewer system if the sewer is available and within 300 feet of
the property line or building.
   (B)   The property owner shall pay all current impact, connection and user
rate fees. If a property owner fails to connect to the sanitary sewer system
within a 90-day period commencing from the date of written notification or
fails to pay for the sewer service required by the city ordinances, the city
may cause the culinary water service to the property or building to be shut off
until the person has connected up to the sewer at the person’s own expense and
paid in full for all sewer service. However, a property owner may be allowed to
continue the use of an existing septic tank or cesspool until the system fails
to handle the waste or becomes a public health threat; in such case, the
property owner shall connect to the sanitary sewer system and pay all required
fees.
   (C)   Any user rate fees collected by the city prior to a sewer being
connected shall be credited back against the connection(s) and impact fees.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.230) (Ord. 09-13, passed 10-29-2009; Ord. 22-17, passed 8-
18-2022)
§ 52.024 RATES.
   Rates for sewer shall be fixed by the City Council by resolution as the
Council shall from time to time deem appropriate. All structures that can be
served by the sewer when the same is completed and ready for use shall be
charged per month whether or not such structures are connected to the sewer and
water service shall be discontinued for non-payment as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.240) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.025 SEWER TREATMENT PLANT CHARGES FOR HAULED WASTEWATER.
   Hauled wastewater shall not be permitted in the city’s sewage system without
written authorization first obtained from the POTW manager. Charges for hauled
wastewater shall be set by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
The POTW manager may refuse service to waste haulers at the POTW manager’s
discretion. See also §
52.068 of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.250) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.026 CONNECTION FEE; DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE TO NON- CONNECTED
PROPERTY.
   (A)   The charges for the connection of any property to the municipal sewer
system shall be set by resolution as approved by the City Council.
   (B)   In addition to the service connection fee, the contractor or property
owner shall pay all the actual expenses of installing the service line from the
property to the main sewer line, connecting to the city sewer line subject to
the city’s inspection and approval, and all other costs including the repairing
and restoring of the street in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (C)   Where property on existing city streets is not served by a sewer line
in front of or adjacent to such property and the owner desires a sewer service
connection, the abutting property owner, in addition to paying the service
connection fee, will be required to run the line at his or her own expense to
the main sewer line, to make the connection at his or her own expense, subject
to the city’s inspection and approval, and to restore and repair the street in
a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (D)   (1)   If any abutting improved property on which is located a
residence or business, is not connected to the city sewer lines after the
effective date of this ordinance; provided, the sewage facilities are available
in sewage lines passing in front of or adjacent to such property, the city is
to discontinue service of water to such property, and shall not serve such
property with water until the connection is made and the connection charge
paid, or arranged for, and further in the event any owner of improved property
fails or refuses to make such connection prior to such date, such failure or
refusal is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and each day that such failure
or refusal continues is hereby declared to be a separate offense and punishable
as such.
      (2)   All provisions contained in prior ordinances, in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance, are to the extent of such conflicts hereby
repealed.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.260) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.027 SEWER BILLS.
   (A)   (1)   All bills for sewer service shall be rendered monthly at
established rates on the same bill with the electrical and water bill. Each
bill shall show separately the amount of the sewer service charges, but the
total thereof shall be considered one charge for the combined use of water,
electricity and the services of the sewer system. The portion of the bill
rendered for water service cannot be paid separately from the other portions.
      (2)   All charges for sewer service furnished by the city shall be billed
to the user on any day of the month following a one-month period of service to
the user and payment shall be due and payable 20 days after such date of
billing.
   (B)   For purposes of determining the occupancy of residences and/or
apartment, it shall be prima facie proof that a residence or apartment is
occupied whenever electricity is furnished to the unit of occupancy.
   (C)   The charges for sewer service shall be billed to the person or entity
to whom the electrical bill for the unit of occupancy is chargeable.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.270) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.028 PROPERTY OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   The proper officers of the city are hereby authorized to make and enter into
such contracts as may be necessary, convenient or proper with respect to the
carriage and treatment of sewage for improved property outside the territorial
limits of the city and with respect to the payment of property charges for such
service, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
connection charges justly related to but not less than the charges herein above
fixed; provided that, no such contract shall impair the ability of the city to
carry and treat properly the sanitary sewage furnished within the territorial
limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.280) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.029 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of
the ordinance contained in this subchapter (hereinafter, “this ordinance”) or
whenever the POTW manager or his or her authorized representative has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any
premises any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe as defined
in the International Plumbing Code or these ordinances, the POTW manager or his
or her authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
POTW manager by the Plumbing Code; provided that, if such building or premises
be occupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner
or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and
demand entry. If such entry is refused the POTW manager or his or her
authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law
to secure entry. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care
or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper
demand is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the POTW
manager or his or her authorized representative for the purpose of inspection
and examination pursuant to this ordinance. See also §
52.145 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.290) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT
§ 52.040 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   The ordinance contained in this subchapter (hereinafter, “this
ordinance”) sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the publicly-owned
treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403) and the
state’s Administrative Code R317.
   (B)   The objectives of this ordinance are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly-owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly-owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly-owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or the atmosphere, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly-owned treatment works;
      (3)   To protect both publicly-owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the
publicly-owned treatment works;
      (5)   To allow for the establishment of fees for the equitable
distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW;
and
      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its Utah Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the publicly-owned treatment works is
subject.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.041 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   This ordinance shall apply to all Users of the publicly-owned
treatment works. This ordinance authorizes the issuance of individual
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires
User reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW manager shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers
granted to, or duties imposed upon the POTW manager may be delegated by the
POTW manager to a duly authorized city employee.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.042 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the
designated meanings.
   BMP. Best management practice.
   BMR. Baseline monitoring report.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   CIU. Categorical industrial User.
   COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
   CWA. Clean Water Act.
   EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   FOG. Fats, oils and grease.
   FOGS. Fats, oils, grease and sand.
   gpd. Gallons per day.
   IU. Industrial User.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   POTW. Publicly-owned treatment works.
   RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
   SIU. Significant industrial User.
   SNC. Significant non-compliance.
   TDS. Total dissolved solids.
   TSS. Total suspended solids.
   UPDES. Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   U.S.C. United States Code.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.043 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality,
Division of Water Quality (DWQ), or its successor agency.
   AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the User is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively;
      (3)   If the User is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or their designee;
and
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3) above may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to POTW manager.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in §
52.044 of this chapter. BMPs may also include, but are not limited to,
treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial User subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category
of Users and that appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405
through 471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   CITY. Brigham City or the Brigham City Council.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time. The method should be in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403,
Appendix E, Subpart I, Composite Method.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. Brigham City.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day.
      (1)   Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in units of mass, the
daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day.
      (2)   Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
the Regional Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge that is not a “new source”.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   HAULED WASTE. Any material arriving at the POTW from sources not connected
to the POTW including, but not limited to, the following: food wastes; fats,
oils and grease (FOG); other liquids or solids; construction activity
wastewater; remediation wastewater; leachate; and septic waste.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. As defined in 40 C.F.R. § 261.3 and this reference is
incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW
from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
An INDIRECT DISCHARGE is the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
non-domestic source.
   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum or minimum concentration (or load) of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of
any discrete, grab or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s UPDES permit or
of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or
any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the Act; the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.; any
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.; the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15
U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries
Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1341 and 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.
   LOCAL LIMIT. Specific discharge limits developed to protect the POTW in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.5 and enforced by the city upon industrial or
commercial facilities to implement the general and specific prohibitions listed
in §
52.044 of this chapter. The development documents are kept on file at city’s
industrial pretreatment office and can be reviewed if requested.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar
month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of daily discharges
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured
during that month.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section; provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE, as defined under this definition, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling that does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the city’s UPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   POTW MANAGER. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation
of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this ordinance. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the
POTW MANAGER.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a User, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Act, which applies to industrial Users, which includes but is not limited
to prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
52.044 of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the city.
      (1)   This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant. It also includes sewers, pipes and other
conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.
      (2)   The term also means the municipality, as defined in § 502(4) of the
Act, being C.F.R. § 40-502(4), which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, cesspools and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations and the like).
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. Except as provided in division (3)
below, a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER is:
      (1)   An industrial User subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
      (2)   An industrial User that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in division (2)
above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may, at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an
industrial User, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such User should not be considered a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
USER.
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
52.044 of this chapter. A SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other
liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW which
is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and compatible industrial
waste.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WATER OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or
border upon this state or any portion thereof; except that, bodies of water
confined to and retained within the limits of private property, and which do
not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a
menace to fish and wildlife, shall not be considered to be WATERS OF THE STATE
under this definition.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.044 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions and specific prohibitions listed in
division (B) below apply to all Users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. part
261.21;
      (2)   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0, unless the works is
specifically designed to accommodate such discharges;
      (3)   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH of more than 12.5;
      (4)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
      (5)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the POTW;
      (6)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity or otherwise
cause harm to the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such
quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40°C
(104°F) unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves
alternate temperature limits;
      (7)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (8)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (9)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW. See also §
52.068 of this chapter; and
      (10)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail toxicity test.
   (C)   Process, storage. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by
this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.050) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.045 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards specifying quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to
a POTW by existing or new industrial Users in specific industrial subcategories
have been established by EPA in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405
through 471 and are hereby incorporated.
   (B)   Users subject to categorical standards must comply with the
categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N,
parts 405 through 471.
   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW manager
shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).
(Prior Code, § 22.02.060) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.046 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   State pretreatment standards contained in the Utah Administrative Code R317
are hereby incorporated.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.070) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.047 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   The POTW manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to
40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c).
   (B)   (1)   Local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
total metal unless indicated otherwise. The POTW manager may impose mass
limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations as stated in the
local limits with the approval of the state’s Division of Water Quality.
      (2)   The development documents for local limits are kept at the city’s
Industrial Pretreatment Program Office and can be reviewed if requested.
   (C)   The POTW manager may develop best management practices (BMPs) by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits to implement local
limits and the requirements of §
52.044 of this chapter.
   (D)   No User shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants in excess of
the specific local limits as established by the city from time to time. The
local limits are developed and implement per the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part
403. The development documents can be found at the city’s wastewater treatment
plant, Industrial Pretreatment Office.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.080) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.048 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this
ordinance. In addition, the POTW manager is authorized to temporarily or
permanently revoke or suspend issuance of any type of permit at any time in
order to protect the POTW from pass through or interference in order to
maintain compliance with any UPDES permit requirement or pretreatment program
requirement.
   (B)   The POTW manager shall also have the right to deny new or increased
contributions or to set additional conditions on such contributions to protect
the POTW, including limits that may be more stringent than the approved local
limits, with the approval of the state’s Division of Water Quality. Public
notice may be required.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.090) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.049 SPECIAL AGREEMENT.
   The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial
Users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW upon
the recommendation of the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive
compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, with the approval of
the state’s Division of Water Quality. Public notice may be required.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.100) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.050 DILUTION.
   No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The POTW
manager may impose mass limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.110) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 52.065 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §
52.044 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state
or the city, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the User’s expense.
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to POTW manager for review and shall be acceptable to POTW manager
before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
city under the provisions of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.066 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW manager may require Users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the User’s compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   (B)   The POTW manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be required when, in the
opinion of the POTW manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except
that, such interceptors shall not be required for residential Users. All
interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW
manager, shall comply with the city’s most current public works standards, and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, maintained and repaired by the User
at their expense in accordance with the city’s most current sanitary sewer
management plan.
   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (E)   Sampling manholes shall be located in an area to allow for ease of
cleaning, sampling and inspection by the User and by city personnel. If located
in a parking area, parking shall not be allowed on the sampling manhole.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.067 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The POTW manager shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug
discharges. The POTW manager will evaluate an SIU for a slug discharge control
plan within the first year of determining that an IU is an SIU. If POTW manager
determines that the SIU does not require a slug control plan, then the SIU will
be evaluated every two years thereafter, for the need to develop a slug
discharge control plan. The POTW manager may require any User to develop,
submit for approval and implement such a plan or take such other action that
may be necessary to control slug discharges.
   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW manager of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
52.125 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Inspection and maintenance of storage areas;
         (b)   Handling and transfer of materials;
         (c)   Loading and unloading operations;
         (d)   Control of plant site runoff;
         (e)   Worker training;
         (f)   Building of containment structures or equipment;
         (g)   Measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents; and/or
         (h)   Measures and equipment for emergency response.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.068 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   The contents of a waste hauler’s truck shall not, under any
circumstance, be emptied into a car wash, recreational vehicle (RV) dump
station, manhole or any other unauthorized location. The only authorized
location for the waste hauler to dump waste into the sewer system is at the
city’s wastewater treatment plant.
   (B)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the POTW manager, and at such times as are established by the
POTW. Such waste shall not violate §
52.044 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the city. The
POTW manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits.
   (C)   The POTW manager may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits. The POTW manager may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge
permits. The POTW manager also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial
waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
requirements of this ordinance.
   (D)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by POTW manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of
the POTW manager. The POTW manager may collect samples of each hauled load to
ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW manager may require the
industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to
discharge.
   (E)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste manifest form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste and volume and characteristics of waste. The form
shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
   (F)   (1)   Any person operating a waste hauler business shall pay for all
costs and damages incurred by the city’s POTW resulting from any load or
materials which violate any of this ordinance or any other applicable
regulations.
      (2)   Costs and damages include, but are not limited to, sampling,
analysis, investigations, inspections, POTW pass through or interference
including, but not limited to, any violation of the provisions in §§
52.040 through
52.050 of this chapter and any fines assessed resulting from the improper
discharge, including those stated in §§
52.162 through
52.165,
52.195 through
52.202 and
52.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
§ 52.080 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the POTW manager, a User must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The
POTW manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require Users to update this information. If the User changes or
adds a process the User is required to update the information provided to the
POTW manager 30 days prior to the process being changed or added.
(Prior Code, § 22.04.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.081 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No significant industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first completing a BMR and, if required, obtaining an individual
wastewater discharge permit from the POTW manager, except that a significant
industrial User that has filed a timely application pursuant to §
52.082 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.
   (B)   The POTW manager may require other Users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
52.162 through
52.165,
52.195 through
52.202 and
52.999 of this chapter.
      (2)   Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state and local law.
(Prior Code, § 22.04.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.082 EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any User required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit that
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
ordinance and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within 90 days after said date, apply to the POTW manager for an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
52.084 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after 180 days of the effective date of this ordinance, except in
accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the POTW
manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.04.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.083 NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any User required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with §
52.084 of this chapter, must be filed at least 180 days prior to the date upon
which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(Prior Code, § 22.04.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.084 APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   All Users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application. All permittees that will be continuing to
discharge are required to complete an application 90 days prior to the permit
expiring. The POTW manager may require Users to submit all or some of the
following information as part of a permit application:
      (1)   Identifying information:
         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner;
         (b)   Contact information for the authorized representative and the
duly authorized representative for the facility; and
         (c)   The description of activities, facilities and plant production
processes on the premises.
      (2)   Environmental permits: a list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations:
         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such User. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day); and
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation, and all points of discharge.
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (6)   Flow measurement: information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in §
52.045 of this chapter (alternate limits for mixed wastewater with different
standards);
      (7)   Measurement of pollutants:
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process;
         (c)   Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
52.129 of this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit documentation as
required by the POTW manager or the applicable standards to determine
compliance with the standard; and
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
52.130 of this chapter.
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the POTW
manager to evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the User for revision.
   (C)   Based on information provided by the permittee, in §
52.084 of this chapter, the city will within 30 days determine if additional
information is needed, a permit is not necessary or if a permit will be
required to be issued before the IU discharge is allowed to the POTW.
   (D)   Should any of the information requested or supplied be considered by
the User to be of a confidential nature, the User should request confidential
status in accordance with §
52.160 of this chapter. Information regarding sampling and analysis of the
discharge is not considered confidential information.
(Prior Code, § 22.04.050) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.085 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, User reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative, see §
52.043 of this chapter, of the User and contain the certification statement in
§
52.133 of this chapter.
   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the POTW manager prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Prior Code, § 22.04.060) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
§ 52.100 PERMIT DURATION.
   (A)   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the
permit.
   (B)   An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period
less than five years, at the discretion of the POTW manager.
   (C)   Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific
date upon which it will expire.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.101 PERMIT CONTENTS.
   (A)   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the POTW manager to prevent
pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving
the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW
   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-
transferable;
      (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law;
      (5)   A statement of applicable administrative, civil and criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law;
      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the POTW
manager to be necessary;
      (7)   Requirements to report immediately to the POTW manager any slug
discharge or any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug
discharge; and
      (8)   Requirements to notify the POTW manager of changes to the
industrial Users discharge 30 days prior to the change. The POTW manager may
deny, or conditionally approve, the change prior to the User making the change
at the facility that may impact the discharge at the facility to the POTW.
   (C)   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW manager to
ensure compliance with this ordinance and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.102 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The POTW manager may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the User’s
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the city’s POTW, the city’s personnel, the treatment and beneficial use of
sludge or the receiving waters;
   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13; and
   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.103 TRANSFER SHALL NOT BE ALLOWED.
   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall not be transferred to a new
owner or operator.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.104 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The POTW manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the POTW manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the POTW manager of
changed conditions pursuant to §
52.124 of this chapter;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      (5)   Falsifying certification statements;
      (6)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (7)   Refusing to allow the POTW manager timely access to the facility
premises and/or records;
      (8)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (9)   Failure to pay fines;
      (10)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (11)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (12)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application or reapplication;
      (13)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (14)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a User are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that User.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.050) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.105 PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A User with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply
for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with §
52.084 of this chapter, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the
User’s existing individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.060) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.106 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   If another municipality, or User located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city shall enter into an inter-
municipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A) above,
the POTW manager shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all Users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the POTW manager may deem necessary.
   (C)   An inter-municipal agreement, as required by division (A) above, shall
contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this ordinance and local
limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at
least as stringent as those set out in §
52.047 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s
ordinance or local limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
User inventory on at least an annual basis;
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the POTW manager
and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and POTW manager;
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide POTW
manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s
discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the POTW manager access to the facilities of
Users located within the contributing municipality’s jurisdictional boundaries
for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary
by the POTW manager; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the inter-municipal agreement.
(Prior Code, § 22.05.070) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.120 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS (BMR).
   (A)   BMR requirements.
      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial Users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the POTW manager a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below.
      (2)   At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources and sources that become categorical industrial Users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the POTW
manager a report which contains the information listed in division (B) below. A
new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Information. Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below:
      (1)   General. All information required in §
52.084(A)(1)(a), (A)(2), (A)(3) and (A)(6) of this chapter;
      (2)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The User shall provide the information required in §
52.084(A)(7)(a) through (d) below.
         (b)   The User shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this division
(A)(2).
         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the User should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted to the control authority.
         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with §§
52.129 and
52.130 of this chapter.
         (e)   The POTW manager may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
      (3)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the User’s
authorized representative, as defined in §
52.043 of this chapter, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (4)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required for the User to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule
by which the User will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be
provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out
in §
52.121 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with §
52.133 of this chapter and signed by an authorized representative, as defined
in §
52.043 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.121 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
52.120(B)(4) of this chapter.
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the User to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation).
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
   (C)   The User shall submit a progress report to the POTW manager no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the User to return to the established schedule.
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the POTW manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.122 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any User subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
manager a report containing the information described in §§
52.084(A)(7) and
52.120(B)(2) of this chapter. For all Users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
User’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.133 of this chapter. All sampling will be done in conformance with §
52.130 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.123 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   All significant industrial Users must, at a frequency determined by
the POTW manager submit no less than twice per year, by June 30 and December
31, reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP)
or pollution prevention alternative, the User must submit documentation
required by the POTW manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the User.
   (B)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
52.133 of this chapter.
   (C)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the User’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (D)   If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the POTW manager, using the procedures prescribed
in §
52.130 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.124 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each User must notify the POTW manager of any significant changes to
the User’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume
of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change, including changes that
may affect slug discharges to the POTW.
      (1)   The POTW manager may require the User to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
52.084 of this chapter.
      (2)   The POTW manager may issue an individual wastewater discharge
permit under §
52.105 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
§
52.102 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
   (B)   The POTW manager may approve, deny or conditionally approve the change
based on the affects the change may have on the POTW and/or the pretreatment
program.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.050) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.125 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the User shall immediately notify either in
person or via a phone conversation with the POTW manager of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the User.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the User shall, unless
waived by the POTW manager, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the User to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which might be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the User of any fines, penalties
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   Significant industrial Users are required to notify the POTW manager
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.060) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.126 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All Users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the POTW manager may require.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.070) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.127 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation, the User must notify
the POTW manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The User
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the POTW manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. Resampling by the industrial User is not required if the city
performs sampling at the User’s facility at least once a month, or if the city
performs sampling at the User between the time when the initial sampling was
conducted and the time when the User or the city receives the results of this
sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
industrial User. If the city performs the sampling and analysis and a violation
occurs, in lieu of the User performing the sampling and analysis, then the city
will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the User of
the violation and requires the User to perform the repeat sampling and
analysis.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.080) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.128 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   Any User who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the User discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the User:
      (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
      (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
      (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
   (B)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this division (B) need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed conditions must be submitted under §
52.124 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by Users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
52.120,
52.122 and
52.123 of this chapter.
   (C)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A) above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires
a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the User discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (D)   In the case of any new regulations under RCRA Subtitle C, § 3001,
being 42 U.S.C. § 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous
waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the User must
notify the POTW manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
   (E)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the User
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (F)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.090) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.129 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS CONSTANT.
   (A)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application, report, permit or other
requirement by this ordinance shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW manager or other parties approved by EPA.
   (B)   All laboratory samples collected for this ordinance shall be analyzed
by a laboratory that is either certified by the state’s Department of Health
Environmental Laboratory Certification program or another laboratory approved
by the POTW manager. The following must be met for field methods or analysis
completed by the permittee: the analysis must adhere to the requirements of 40
C.F.R. part 136 and/or have been approved by the POTW manager for analysis by
the User.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.100) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.130 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   (A)   (1)   Except as indicated in divisions (B) and (C) below, the User
must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the POTW manager.
      (2)   Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the POTW manager, the samples must be representative of the
discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40
C.F.R. part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the POTW manager as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
limits.
   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (C)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §§
52.120 and
52.122 of this chapter, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds
for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities
for which historical sampling data are available, the POTW manager may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs in §
52.123 of this chapter, the industrial User is required to collect the number
of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.110) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.131 DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.120) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.132 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying:
      (1)   All records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities required by this ordinance;
      (2)   Any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the User independent of such requirements;
and
      (3)   Documentation associated with best management practices established
under §
52.047(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses.
   (C)   These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the User or the city, or where the User has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW manager.
(Prior Code, § 22.06.130) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.133 CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The following certification statement is required to be signed and
submitted by Users submitting permit applications in accordance with §
52.085 of this chapter; Users submitting baseline monitoring reports under §
52.120(B)(5) of this chapter; Users submitting reports on compliance with the
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under §
52.122 of this chapter; and Users submitting periodic compliance reports
required by §
52.123(A) through (D) of this chapter.
   (B)   The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative, as defined in §
52.043 of this chapter:
 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and/or
imprisonment for knowing violations.
 
(Prior Code, § 22.06.140) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 52.145 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The POTW manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any User to
determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this ordinance
and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the POTW manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and/or the
performance of any additional duties. Monitoring and inspections shall be
conducted at a frequency as determined by the city and may be announced or
unannounced.
   (A)   Where a User has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the POTW manager shall be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (B)   The POTW manager shall have the right to set up on the User’s
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the User’s operations.
   (C)   The POTW manager may require the User to install monitoring equipment
as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at
its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall
be calibrated as per manufacturers recommendations and as necessary to ensure
their accuracy, but at least once per calendar year.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User
at the written or verbal request of the POTW manager and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the User.
   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the POTW manager access to the User’s
premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.
   (F)   The city may use a camera to photograph areas of the facility as
necessary for carrying out the duties of the industrial pretreatment program
including, but not limited to, documentation of the User’s compliance status
and for reinforcement of written reports. The User shall be allowed to review
copies of the photographs for confidentiality claims.
   (G)   The location of the monitoring facility shall provide ample room in or
near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples and analysis and whether constructed on public or private property, the
monitoring facilities should be provided in accordance with the POTW manager’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
that enables the POTW manager to perform independent monitoring activities.
(Prior Code, § 22.07.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.146 TREATMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant
under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an
industrial, and/or commercial User as determined by the POTW manager, either or
both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance. It shall be the duty of every property owner, and/or person as a
tenant under any rental or lease agreement whom contracts, and/or performs work
for the installation or repair of building, structure mechanical or plumbing
systems, for which this ordinance is applicable, to comply with this ordinance
and to ensure all subcontracts under them also comply with this ordinance to
include obtaining the required permits and ensuring the required inspections
are completed.
(Prior Code, § 22.07.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.147 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the POTW manager has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and ordinance
sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this ordinance
or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the POTW manager may seek issuance
of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 22.07.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY
§ 52.160 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from the POTW manager’s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
User specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the POTW manager, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the
time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated
by the User furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for
uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 C.F.R. § 2.302,
shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to
the public without restriction.
(Prior Code, § 22.08.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.161 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The POTW manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the Users which, at any time during the previous
12 months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
   (B)   The term SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE shall be applicable to all
significant industrial Users (or any other industrial User that violates
divisions (B)(3), (B)(4) or (B)(8) below) and shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, as defined in §§
52.040 through
52.050 of this chapter, this includes instantaneous limits;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, as defined by §§
52.040 through
52.050 of this chapter, this includes instantaneous limits, multiplied by the
applicable TRC criteria (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and
TRC=1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as
defined by §§
52.040 through
52.050 of this chapter, daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit
or narrative standard) that the POTW manager determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW manager’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the POTW manager determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local Pretreatment program.
(Prior Code, § 22.08.090) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.162 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The POTW manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of
this ordinance, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless
such User first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the POTW manager to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
(Prior Code, § 22.12.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.163 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The POTW manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of
this ordinance, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the
User first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient
to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
(Prior Code, § 22.12.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.164 PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.
   The POTW manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any User who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines
or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this ordinance, a
previous individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 22.12.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.165 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
   (A)   Whenever a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to
the User may be severed.
   (B)   Service will recommence, at the User’s expense, only after the User
has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(Prior Code, § 22.12.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 52.180 UPSET.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
User. An upset does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper
operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of division (C) below are met.
   (C)   A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred, and the User can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The User has submitted the following information to the POTW
manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of non-
compliance;
         (b)   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for non-compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Prior Code, § 22.13.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.181 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   A User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for non- compliance with the general prohibitions in §
52.044(A) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in §
52.044(B)(4), (B)(5), (B)(6), (B)(7) and (B)(8) of this chapter if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or
interference and that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the User was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the User’s prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its UPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Prior Code, § 22.13.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.182 BYPASS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
User’s treatment facility.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   Violations. A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of divisions (C) and (D) below.
   (C)   Bypass notifications.
      (1)   If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the POTW manager, at least ten days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A User shall submit oral notice to the POTW manager of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the User becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW manager may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (D)   Bypass.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW manager may take an enforcement
action against a User for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The User submitted notices as required under division (C) above.
      (2)   The POTW manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW manager determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 22.13.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 52.195 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   When the POTW manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the POTW manager may serve upon that User a written notice of
violation.
   (B)   Within 30 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the User to the POTW
manager.
   (C)   Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the User of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the POTW manager
to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.010) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.196 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The POTW manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible for
non-compliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
User to correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
52.198 and
52.199 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.020) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.197 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (A)   The POTW manager may order a User which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the POTW manager and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.
   (B)   Notice shall be served on the User specifying the time and place for
the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and
a request that the User show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days prior
to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of
the User as defined in §
52.043 of this chapter and required by §
52.085 of this chapter. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.030) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.198 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the POTW manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the POTW manager may issue an order to the User responsible for
the discharge directing that the User come into compliance within a specified
time. If the User does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the non-compliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the User of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the User.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.040) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.199 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   (A)   When the POTW manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the User’s past violations are likely to recur, the POTW
manager may issue an order to the User directing it to cease and desist all
such violations and directing the User to:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   (B)   Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.050) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.200 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   (A)   (1)   When the POTW manager finds that a User has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the POTW manager may fine such User in an amount not to exceed
$10,000.
      (2)   Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis.
      (3)   In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty according to the city’s Purchasing and Accounts
Receivable (P.A.R.S.) Policy.
   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the POTW manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit,
the POTW manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the User’s
appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto,
shall be returned to the User. The POTW manager may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.060) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.201 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   The POTW manager may immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after
informal notice to the User, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
The POTW manager may also immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after notice
and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of
the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the
environment.
      (1)   Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a User’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW
manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance
of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW manager may
allow the User to recommence its discharge when the User has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the POTW manager that the period of endangerment has passed
unless the termination proceedings in §
52.202 of this chapter are initiated against the User.
      (2)   A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the POTW manager prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under §§
52.197 or
52.202 of this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension of a permit and/or discharge to the POTW.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.070) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.202 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   In addition to the provisions in §
52.104 of this chapter, any User who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      (1)   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of access to the User’s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
52.040 through
52.050 of this chapter.
   (B)   Such User will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
52.197 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of
this option by the POTW manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the User.
(Prior Code, § 22.10.080) (Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 52.203 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance was in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.
Prior Code, § 22.16.010)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person violating any provision of this ordinance for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions
of §§
52.001 through
52.029 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. The
city shall maintain the right to prosecute or sue any person, firm or
corporation who shall violate any provisions of §§
52.001 through
52.029 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.300)
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of
§§
52.001 through
52.029 of this chapter shall be civilly liable to the city by reason of such
violation. Civil liability may include, but shall not be limited to, fines,
fees and penalties imposed by the state and/or the federal government on the
city that is directly attributable to the person, firm or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.310)
   (C)   Violation of §
52.003 of this chapter shall be a Class C misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.030)
   (D)   (1)   Injunctive relief. When the POTW manager finds that a User has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the POTW manager may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction through the city’s Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, order
or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the User. The
POTW manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, including a requirement for the User to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
(Prior Code, § 22.11.010)
      (2)   Civil penalties.
         (a)   A User who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to
the city for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000 per violation, per day. In the
case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall
accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
         (b)   The POTW manager may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
         (c)   In the event an industrial User discharges pollutants which
cause the city to violate any conditions of its UPDES permit and the city is
fined by EPA or the state for such violations, then such industrial Users shall
be fully liable for the total amount of the fines and civil penalties assessed
against the city by the EPA and/or the state and administrative costs incurred.
         (d)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the User’s violation, corrective
actions by the User, the compliance history of the User and any other factor as
justice requires.
         (e)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
(Prior Code, § 22.11.020)
      (3)   Criminal prosecution.
         (a)   A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law.
         (b)   A User who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law.
         (c)   A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance,
individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor, and shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 22.11.030)
      (4)   Remedies non-exclusive. The remedies provided for in this ordinance
are not exclusive. The POTW manager may take any, all or any combination of
these actions against a non-compliant User. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response
plan. However, the POTW manager may take other action against any User when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW manager is empowered to take more than
one enforcement action against any non-compliant User.
(Prior Code, § 22.11.040)
(Ord. 22-17, passed 8-18-2022)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
70.001   Duty of the Police Department
   
70.002   Records of traffic violations
   
70.003   Investigate accidents
   
70.004   Traffic accident studies and reports
   
70.005   Driver’s files
   
70.006   Authority to install traffic-control signs, markings and devices
 
   
70.999   Penalty
§ 70.001 DUTY OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the traffic
regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to traffic
in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents,
to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and
to carry out those duties specifically imposed upon the said division by the
ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.010)
§ 70.002 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   The Police Department shall keep a record of all local violations of the
traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person
has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such
alleged offenses. Such records shall be maintained as to show all types of
violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least
a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five-year period.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.020)
§ 70.003 INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   The Police Department shall investigate traffic accidents, arrest and assist
in the prosecution of those persons charged with the violation of law causing
or contributing to such accidents.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.030)
§ 70.004 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Whenever the accidents in any particular location become numerous, the
Chief of Police shall cooperate with the Public Works Department in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.040)
   (B)   The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing
accident reports.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.050)
§ 70.005 DRIVER’S FILES.
   The Police Department shall maintain a suitable record of all local traffic
accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each
driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver
concerned.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.060)
§ 70.006 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, MARKINGS AND DEVICES.
   (A)   The Police Department and the Public Works Department shall work in
concert in establishing, maintaining, altering or removing all traffic-control
devices, signs and markings located on or adjacent to public streets within the
city.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted as the official guidelines to be used by said
departments in making said decisions the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices, published by the United States Department of Transportation, three
copies of which shall be maintained on file with the City Recorder.
   (C)   All such signs, markings and devices so placed shall be and become the
official location of such signs, markings or devices for the city.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.070)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any violations of this traffic code
shall be a Class C misdemeanor. A violation of §§
73.015 through
73.019 shall be an infraction.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.080) (Ord. 24-07, passed 4-4-2024)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.001   Traffic Code
   
71.002   Uniform Driver’s License Act
   
71.003   Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
   
71.004   Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Usage Act
   
71.005   Financial Responsibility of Motor Vehicle Owners and Operators Act
   
71.006   Off-Highway Vehicles Act
   
71.007   Motor vehicle insurance laws
   
71.008   Duty to keep proper lookout
   
71.009   Negligent collision
   
71.010   Noise emanating from motor vehicle
   
71.011   Dynamic braking devices prohibited
 
   
71.999   Penalty
§ 71.001 TRAFFIC CODE.
   The Motor Vehicle Act, U.C.A. Title 41, Chapter 1a, as amended, is hereby
adopted as a city ordinance; provided, however, that, any provision of the
foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.010)
§ 71.002 UNIFORM DRIVER’S LICENSE ACT.
   The Uniform Driver License Act, U.C.A. Title 53, Chapter 3, as amended, is
hereby adopted as a city ordinance; provided, however, that, any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.020)
§ 71.003 UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON HIGHWAYS.
   The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, U.C.A. Title 72, Chapter 4,
as amended, is hereby adopted as a city ordinance; provided, however, that, any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a city ordinance is not adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.030)
§ 71.004 MOTOR VEHICLE SEAT BELT USAGE ACT.
   The Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Usage Act, U.C.A. Title 41, Chapter 6a, Article
18, as amended, is hereby adopted as a city ordinance; provided, however, that,
any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a city ordinance is not adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.040)
§ 71.005 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE OWNERS AND OPERATORS ACT.
   The Financial Responsibility of Motor Vehicle Owners and Operators Act,
U.C.A. Title 41, Chapter 12a, as amended, is hereby adopted as a city
ordinance; provided, however, that, any provision of the foregoing having a
penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not
adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.050)
§ 71.006 OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ACT.
   The Off-Highway Vehicles Act, U.C.A. Title 41, Chapter 22, as amended, is
hereby adopted as a city ordinance; provided, however, that, any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.060)
§ 71.007 MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE LAWS.
   The Motor Vehicle Insurance laws, U.C.A. Title 31A, Chapter 22, Part III, is
hereby adopted as a city ordinance; provided, however, that, any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.070)
§ 71.008 DUTY TO KEEP PROPER LOOKOUT.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on the streets of the city without keeping a
reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.090) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.009 NEGLIGENT COLLISION.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care and in
such negligent manner as to cause the same to collide with any vehicle, person
or object.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.100) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.010 NOISE EMANATING FROM MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, while operating, driving or parking any
motor vehicle, to use or operate any electronic device, radio, stereo, tape
player, disc player or other device for the producing or reproducing of sound
in such a manner that it disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of persons in
the vicinity of the motor vehicle, unless said person is operating under
authority duly and properly given by the city.
   (B)   It is a prima facia violation of this section if the sound emanating
from the electronic device, radio, stereo, tape player, disc player or other
device for producing or reproducing sound in or on the motor vehicle is clearly
audible from a distance of 50 feet.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.110) (Ord. 98-46, passed 9-24-1998) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.011 DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a
dynamic braking device engaged, except for the aversion of imminent danger or
emergency services.
   (B)   This restriction does not apply to the following street segments:
      (1)   The portion of U.S. Highway 89 east of Main Street to the eastern
city corporate boundary;
      (2)   The portion of 200 S./SR-90 east of the intersection of 350 S.
Street to the eastern city corporate boundary; and
      (3)   On and off-ramps at I-15 interchanges 363 (Forest Street) and 365
(900 North Street), as illustrated in the following image.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2934.jpg]
   (C)    A DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE is defined as any device used primarily on
trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to
an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES are commonly referred to as JACOB BRAKES, JAKE BRAKES,
ENGINE BRAKES or COMPRESSION BRAKES.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.120) (Ord. 20-21, passed 11-19-2020) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
71.010 of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.110) (Ord. 98-46, passed 9-24-1998)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
   
72.001   Definitions
   
72.002   Parallel parking
   
72.003   Angle parking, restriction on
   
72.004   Main Street parking
   
72.005   Limitation on use of parking stalls identified as reserved for
handicapped
   
72.006   Restrictions on trucks and buses
   
72.007   Commercial truck and recreational vehicle parking prohibited
   
72.008   Double parking
   
72.009   Unlawful to park; restricted areas; red curbs
   
72.010   Disabled vehicles; unlawful to leave or dismantle on public streets
   
72.011   Motor vehicle left unattended; brakes to be set and engine stopped
   
72.012   Police officer to move vehicle illegally parked
   
72.013   Approach to parking space
   
72.014   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
72.015   Parking in alleys
   
72.016   Standing and parking on one-way roadways
   
72.017   Parking prohibited at all times on certain hours on certain streets
   
72.018   Parking on walk or curbing
   
72.019   Corporation parking lots
   
72.020   Evidence required on parking violations
   
72.021   Prohibited parking when
   72.022   Removal of illegally parked vehicles
   72.023   Enhanced penalty
 
   
72.999   Penalty
§ 72.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRAILER. A vehicle without a motor designed for carrying persons or property
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that no part of the
vehicle weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
   VEHICLE. Includes a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, off-highway
vehicle, camper, park model recreational vehicle, manufactured home, and mobile
home.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.010) (Ord. 07-05, passed 3-29-2007; Ord. 23-26, passed 12-
7-2023)
§ 72.002 PARALLEL PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on any of the streets in the
city other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of street, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.020) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003 ANGLE PARKING, RESTRICTION ON.
   Angle parking is permitted only where the curb and gutter has been designed
and constructed to facilitate angle parking or the roadway has been properly
and clearly marked.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.030) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.004 MAIN STREET PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park or leave a motor vehicle upon Main Street in
the city between Second South Street and First North Street, and upon Forest
Street between Main Street and First West Street, and upon First South Street
between First East Street and First West Street, for a length of time in excess
of two hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each day, except
on Sundays and legal holidays.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.040) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.005 LIMITATION ON USE OF PARKING STALLS IDENTIFIED AS RESERVED FOR
HANDICAPPED.
   (A)   Any parking stall identified by either sign, painting or other plainly
visible marking as reserved for use by the handicapped shall mean that a motor
vehicle may not be parked in such parking stall unless said motor vehicle has
either license plates or a window identification issued by the state and
identifying the operator of the vehicle as handicapped. The parking privileges
granted by this section also apply to vehicles displaying a distinctive
handicapped license plate or transferable identification issued by any other
state or nation; provided, such identification is displayed on the vehicle
utilized by the handicapped person.
   (B)   This section applies to and may be enforced on both public property
and private property which is used or intended for use by the public.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.050) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.006 RESTRICTIONS ON TRUCKS AND BUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for trucks and buses with a length overall of greater
than 20 feet to park on either side of Main Street of the city between 200
South and 100 North, except between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.060) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.007 COMMERCIAL TRUCK AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park a commercial licensed vehicle with a load
capacity greater than 21,000 pounds on any city street for a period of time
longer than the time reasonably necessary to load or unload the vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle over 30 feet in length on any city
street for a period of time longer than the time reasonably necessary to load
or unload the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Divisions (A) and (B) above shall not apply to stops made by
such vehicles for meals during the day or night for one hour, if the street is
well lighted at the point of parking.
      (2)   In addition, divisions (A) and (B) above shall not apply in the
case of an accident or other emergency when the operator of any such vehicle is
reasonably required to leave said vehicle.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, as defined in this section,
upon any street unless it is currently registered and displays current license
plate and registration, and:
      (1)   If unattached to a motorized vehicle, is secured by the use of a
wheel chocks; and/or
      (2)   Any utility vehicle exempt from registration by state statue shall
not be parked on any city street for a period of longer than 48 hours.
   (E)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, as defined in this
section, upon any street for a period longer than 48 hours. Such vehicle shall
be considered in violation of this section if parked in any one location for
longer than 48 hours or if the vehicle has been parked in one or more locations
within the same block for such 48-hour period.
      (2)   Except: any above described vehicle parked in the street associated
with a current, ongoing and continuing construction or repair project is
exempted from this section as long as it is otherwise in compliance with this
section. Vehicles and trailers shall not be placed or parked within 30 feet of
an intersection.
   (F)   Vehicles and trailers, as defined in this section, shall not be placed
or parked within 30 feet of an intersection.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle defined in this section on
the street which is connected to any water, electric or other utility wire,
pipe or hose which crosses a public right-of-way or sidewalk.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful to park, place, store, abandon or otherwise leave
any unmounted camper or watercraft on any public street, alley, sidewalk or
right-of-way at any time.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.070) (Ord. 97-25, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. 07-05, passed 3-
29-2007; Ord. 23-26, passed 12-7-2023)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.008 DOUBLE PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the city upon the Main
Street between 800 South and 800 North and on Forest Street from Main Street to
100 West Street to park a motor vehicle parallel to and outside of the marked
lines or stalls so laid out and designated for parallel parking wherein another
car is so parked within said lines or stalls, in a manner commonly called
double parking.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.080) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.009 UNLAWFUL TO PARK; RESTRICTED AREAS; RED CURBS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park or cause to
be parked, any motor vehicle upon the streets in front of any curb painted red
or designated “no parking” by any sign or device placed in said area.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.090) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.010 DISABLED VEHICLES; UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE OR DISMANTLE ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to leave or
cause to be left upon the public streets of the city, any disable vehicle for a
period longer than 48 hours.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dismantle,
or cause to be dismantled, any disabled vehicle upon the public streets of the
city. The Chief of Police or any police officer is hereby empowered to remove,
or cause to be removed from the streets of the city, at the expense of the
owner thereof any disabled vehicle found left upon the public streets of the
city contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.100) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.011 MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED; BRAKES TO BE SET AND ENGINE STOPPED.
   No driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
attended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing
the key, or when such motor vehicle is standing upon any perceptible grade
without effectively setting the brakes thereon and turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the street.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.110) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.012 POLICE OFFICER TO MOVE VEHICLE ILLEGALLY PARKED.
   Whenever any officer finds a vehicle parked or standing upon a street in
violation of any provisions of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized
to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move the same to a position off the main traveled part of such
street.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.120)
§ 72.013 APPROACH TO PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   No person shall move his or her vehicle in any manner or leave a
parking space and then re-enter it to avoid the intent of this code.
   (B)   Every driver about to enter a parking space being vacated shall stop
his or her vehicle and wait to the rear of the vehicle in the actual process of
vacating the parking space and having so waited shall have prior right to the
parking space over all other drivers.
   (C)   No driver shall stop his or her vehicle ahead of a parking space being
vacated and attempt to interfere with a driver who has waited properly to the
rear of a parking space being vacated.
   (D)   No driver shall stop and wait for a parking space unless the vehicle
vacating the space is actually in motion in the process of vacating.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.130) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.014 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle in such manner or under such
conditions as to obstruct any sidewalk, crossing or private driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.140) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.015 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except during the necessary
and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property or interfere with the free movement
of traffic through the alley.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.150) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.016 STANDING AND PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   In the event a street includes two separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon each of said roadways, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle upon the left side of either of such roadways.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.160) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.017 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When proper signs or traffic markings are erected or in place giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle or permit such vehicle to remain
standing at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.170) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.018 PARKING ON WALK OR CURBING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, or cause to be left or
parked, any vehicle upon, over or across any sidewalk, or that parking strip
area between the sidewalk and curb. SIDEWALK, for the purposes of this section,
means that portion of the street between curb lines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (B)   Should there be no paved sidewalk in place, the PARKING STRIP shall be
defined to be that area lying between the curb, or if no curb, the lateral line
of the street, and ten feet towards the adjacent property, along the length of
the street abutting the property. Should the property line of the property upon
which there is no paved sidewalk adjacent to the street be less than ten feet
from the curb or lateral line of the street, the PARKING STRIP shall be defined
as that area between the curb or lateral line of the street and the property
line.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.180) (Ord. 01-30, passed 7-19-2001) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.019 CORPORATION PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Unless previously authorized by the city, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or cause to be parked, any motor vehicle in any parking lot
owned by the city, except in the designated parking lots and within a single
lined parking stall. The city may designate (by sign, painting or otherwise)
specific lined parking stalls for use exclusively by designated individuals
and/or employees.
   (B)   Unless previously authorized by the city, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or cause to be parked, any motor vehicle in any parking lot
owned by the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.190) (Ord. 00-23, passed 7-6-2000) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.020 EVIDENCE REQUIRED ON PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   The presence of any vehicle in or upon any public street in the city parked
in violation of the city ordinance regulating the parking of vehicles, shall be
prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered,
as owner, committed or authorized the commission of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.200)
§ 72.021 PROHIBITED PARKING WHEN.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody, or
control of any vehicle or trailer, as defined in this section, to park, or
knowingly allow any vehicle or trailer to park on any city street or right-of-
way during the following periods:
      (1)   From November 1 through March 15 between the hours of 12:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   On any public roadway during any snowstorm or within 24 hours
following the cessation of snow after any snowstorm.
         (a)   Vehicles and trailers which have been plowed around will be
presented to be abandoned and/or in continued violation of this chapter and
shall be subject to removal. All costs for removal will be borne by the owner
of the subject vehicle or trailer.
      (3)   Longer than 48 consecutive hours in one location on any public
street or highway.
   (B)   The Mayor or his or her designee have the authority to designate
specific properties with inadequate off street parking as exempt from this
chapter.
   (C)   Penalties for violating this chapter shall be an infraction.
(Ord. 23-26, passed 12-7-2023) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.022 REMOVAL OR ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   Whenever any officer of the Police Department or the city finds a vehicle
parked or standing upon a street or highway in violation of this title, the
officer is authorized to move the vehicle or require the owner or other person
in charge of the vehicle to move it to a position not in violation of this
title.
(Ord. 23-26, passed 12-7-2023)
§ 72.023 ENHANCED PENALTY.
   Any person receiving three or more notices for violation of this title, or
for violations of the Brigham City Traffic Code, within the jurisdiction of
Brigham City, within a 180 day period, shall be subject to having his or her
vehicle impounded.
(Ord. 23-26, passed 12-7-2023)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter shall be classified as an infraction and
are subject to impound at owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.070)
   (B)   Any violation of §
72.005 of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed the
amount set by the state’s Uniform Fine/Bail Forfeiture Schedule.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.050)
   (C)   Any violation of §
72.019 of this chapter shall be punished as an infraction as defined by state
law. Any vehicles parked in violation of §
72.019 of this chapter may be towed away by the city at the registered owner’s
sole cost and expense.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.190)
(Ord. 97-25, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. 00-23, passed 7-6-2000; Ord. 07-05, passed
3-29-2007)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.001   Street-legal all-terrain vehicle use
Bicycles
   
73.015   Parents responsible
   
73.016   Mutilation, alteration, removal of license and the like
   
73.017   Equipment
   
73.018   Bicycle riders subject to code
   
73.019   Miscellaneous rules
   
73.020   Impounding of bicycles
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.001 STREET-LEGAL ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE USE.
   (A)   All public streets and highways within the jurisdictional limits of
the city are designated as open for street-legal all-terrain vehicles, as
defined in Utah Code.
   (B)   (1)   This designation does not apply to any individual operator of a
street-legal all-terrain vehicle under the age of 16 years old.
      (2)   All operators of street-legal all-terrain vehicles on the city
streets and highways must be 16 years of age or older and have obtained a
driver’s license in accordance with the state’s Uniform Driver License Act,
being U.C.A. Title 53, Chapter 3, or its successor statute.
   (C)   This designation specifically excludes any interstate freeway or
limited access highway located within the boundaries of the city.
(Prior Code, Ch. 15.05) (Ord. 08-15, passed 9-18-2008)
BICYCLES
§ 73.015 PARENTS RESPONSIBLE.
   It shall be unlawful for a parent or custodian of any child and the guardian
of any ward to knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.010) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.016 MUTILATION, ALTERATION, REMOVAL OF LICENSE AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, mutilate or alter the
number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this code, or remove, destroy
or mutilate any registration tag while the same is valid, or operate any
bicycle without having attached thereto a registration issued as provided
herein.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.020) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.017 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Any bicycle operated upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public way of
the city shall be equipped with a warning device consisting of a bell or horn
which must be sounded to warn all persons of its approach. However, no bicycle
shall be equipped with and no person shall use a siren or whistle as a warning
device.
   (B)   Any bicycle operated during the period of one-half hour after sunset
and one-half hour before sunrise, shall in addition to the foregoing, be
equipped with a lighted lamp, attached to the front of bicycle, under normal
atmospheric conditions visible for a distance of at least 500 feet. There shall
be attached to the rear of said bicycle a reflector or a lighted lamp visible
under like conditions for a distance of at least 500 feet.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.030) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.018 BICYCLE RIDERS SUBJECT TO CODE.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
ways of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.040)
§ 73.019 MISCELLANEOUS RULES.
   It shall be unlawful for operators of bicycles:
   (A)   When riding upon a sidewalk to fail to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and sound a warning device before overtaking or passing any
pedestrian;
   (B)   To ride more than two abreast upon any street and must proceed on a
single file upon any sidewalk;
   (C)   To carry extra passengers or carry any packages, bundle or article
which would require the removal of the hand or hands from the handle bars of
said bicycle, nor permit the bicycle he or she is riding to be towed by another
vehicle; and/or
   (D)   To operate or ride a bicycle upon the sidewalks adjoining Main Street
between Second South and First North.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.050) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.020 IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   The Police Department is hereby directed and authorized to impound any
bicycle so used in violation of this code for a reasonable period of time
pending investigation of any alleged violation of this code or until such
bicycle is registered and licensed by the owner thereof and equipped as herein
provided.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.060)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   CITY FACILITIES
      
92.   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS; RECREATION
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
94.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.015   Animal Control Department
   
90.016   Animal Control Officials; powers and duties
   
90.017   Right of entry for enforcement
   
90.018   Interfering with officers prohibited
   
90.019   Animal shelter provided
   
90.020   Investigation
   
90.021   Fees adjusted by resolution
Licensing and Regulatory Permits
   
90.035   Licensing and registration of dogs
   
90.036   Exemptions for licensing
   
90.037   Tag and collar required
   
90.038   Removal of tag unlawful
   
90.039   Number of cats and/or dogs per residence
   
90.040   Kennels/cattery permits
   
90.041   Residential chickens
   
90.042   Beekeeping
Maintenance and Conduct of Animals
   
90.055   Animals attacking persons or other animals
   
90.056   Nuisance animals
   
90.057   Female dogs in heat
   
90.058   Disruptive dogs
   
90.059   Animals at large prohibited
   
90.060   Allowing domestic fowl to trespass prohibited
   
90.061   Staking animals improperly on unenclosed premises
   
90.062   Keeping of certain animals prohibited; exceptions
Impoundment
   
90.075   Impoundment authorized
   
90.076   Impoundment/record keeping requirements
   
90.077   Redemption requirements
   
90.078   Terms of impoundment, destruction and disposal of animals
Rabies Control/Animal Bites
   
90.090   Vaccination requirements
   
90.091   Exception for transient animals
   
90.092   Vaccination certification and tags
   
90.093   Impoundment of animals without valid rabies vaccination tags
   
90.094   Rabid animal reports
   
90.095   Quarantine and disposition of biting animals
   
90.096   Bites; duty to report
Animal Care and Offenses
   
90.110   Defense
   
90.111   Injuries and communicable diseases
   
90.112   Charge of violator seizure of animals
   
90.113   Harboring of animals prohibited; duty to notify
   
90.114   Places prohibited to animals
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any and all types of livestock, dogs and cats, and all other
subhuman creatures, both domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and
plural.
   ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment that takes in animals and
boards them for profit.
   ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR. Any establishment maintained for the purpose of
offering cosmetology services for animals at a profit.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility owned and operated by a governmental entity or
any animal welfare organization which is incorporated within the state for the
purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and used for the care and custody of
seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other
domestic animals.
   ANIMALS AT LARGE. An animal shall be considered to be “at large” when it is
off the owner’s property and not under immediate control, by means of a durable
restraint device capable of keeping the animal restrained; or an animal that is
on the property of the owner and not securely confined by a leash, building,
fenced area or appropriate transport device.
   BITE. Any actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the
teeth of an animal.
   CAT. Any age feline, of the domestic type.
   CATTERY. Land or building used in the keeping of three or more cats, six
months or older.
   DOG. Any Canis Familiaris over six months of age. Any Canis Familiaris under
the age of six months is a puppy.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMALS. Animals accustomed to living in or about the
habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, rabbits,
fowls, horses, swine, goats, sheep, mules, donkeys, lamas and cattle.
   GOVERNMENT WORKING DOG. A dog trained to assist officials of government
agencies in law enforcement exercises.
   GUIDE DOG. A dog trained and certified by a nationally recognized training
establishment to assist persons that are “visually-impaired”, “hearing-
impaired” or “mobility-limited”.
   KENNEL. Land or buildings used in the keeping of three or more dogs older
than four months.
   LIVESTOCK. Any normally domesticated animal that is ordinarily kept on a
farm, such as cattle, swine, sheep, goats, mules, burros, horses, geese, ducks,
turkeys, llamas and the like.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm association or corporation or other
entity owning, keeping or harboring the animal in question, or any person
having charge, care, custody or control of such animal.
   PET. Any animals ordinarily permitted in the city residences and kept for
the company or pleasure of city residents, such as domesticated dogs,
domesticated cats and domesticated birds. PETS also include tropical fish,
amphibians, reptiles or invertebrates of a number that do not constitute a
health hazard or nuisance, and can be safely and humanely kept in aquariums,
cages or enclosures, the cumulative size of which shall not exceed 50 cubic
feet per household. PETS shall not include exotic, pygmy or dwarf variations of
animals defined as either “wild animals” or “livestock”, including, but not
limited to, miniature horses, pygmy goats and Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs,
notwithstanding that such animals may be kept as household pets by residents of
other communities.
   PET SHOP. Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of
the kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are
kept or displayed.
   QUARANTINE. The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure, so the
animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
   RESIDENCE. A place where a person or persons live. A dwelling unit is
considered one RESIDENCE and not construed to mean multiple residences based
upon the number of individual persons, whether related or not, living at the
residence in further reference, a single-family dwelling is one RESIDENCE, a
duplex is considered two RESIDENCES and a four-unit apartment building would be
considered four RESIDENCES, and so forth.
   RESTRAINT DEVICE. Any chain, leash, cord, rope or other device commonly used
to restrain an animal.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. As defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) §
35.104, or its successor law, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., or its
successor statute, which at the time of its adoption to this chapter, means any
dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of
an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric,
intellectual or other mental disability.
      (1)   Other species of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or
untrained, are not SERVICE ANIMALS for the purposes of this definition. The
work or tasks performed by a SERVICE ANIMAL must be directly related to the
individual’s disability.
      (2)   Examples of work or tasks include, but are not limited to,
assisting individuals who are blind or have low vision with navigation and
other tasks, alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to the
presence of people or sounds, providing non-violent protection or rescue work,
pulling a wheelchair, assisting an individual during a seizure, alerting
individuals to the presence of allergens, retrieving items such as medicine or
the telephone, providing physical support and assistance with balance and
stability to individuals with mobility disabilities and helping persons with
psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing or interrupting impulse
or destructive behaviors.
      (3)   The crime deterrent effects of an animal’s presence and the
provision of emotional support, well-being, comfort or companionship do not
constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this definition.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which is not commonly domesticated, or which is of a
wild or predatory nature, or any animal which, because of its size, growth
propensity, vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute an
unreasonable danger to human life, health or property if not kept, maintained
or confined in a safe and secure manner. Those animals, however domesticated,
shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Alligators, crocodiles, caiman;
      (2)   Bears (ursidae); all bears including grizzly bears, brown bears and
black bears;
      (3)   Cat family (felidae); all except the commonly accepted domestic
cats; including cheetahs, cougars, leopards, lions, lynx, bobcats, panthers,
mountain lions, tigers and wildcats. Any cat crossbred with a WILD ANIMAL as
described herein shall be considered to be wild;
      (4)   Dog family (canidae); all dogs, with the exception of domesticated
dogs, including, but not limited to, fox, coyote, wolf and wild dingo. Any dog
crossbred with a WILD ANIMAL, as described herein, shall be considered to be a
WILD ANIMAL;
      (5)   Porcupines;
      (6)   Primates (all subhuman primates);
      (7)   Raccoons (all varieties);
      (8)   Skunks;
      (9)   Venomous snakes or lizards;
      (10)   Any snake or reptile of such size or characteristics as to pose a
threat to human life;
      (11)   Weasels (all weasels, martins, wolverines, badgers, otters,
ermine, mink and mongoose); except that, the possession of mink shall not be
prohibited when raised commercially for their pelts, in or upon a property
constructed for a legally operated ranch; and
      (12)   Marsupials.
(Prior Code, Ch. 4.01) (Ord. 99-25, passed 9-23-1999; Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-
2002; Ord. 16-13, passed 9-1-2016)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.015 ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The city has created the city’s Animal Control Division, a subdivision
of the city’s Police Department, for the purpose of resolving animal related
disputes in the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   The Department shall participate in the disposing of the same.
(Prior Code, § 4.02.010) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.016 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICIALS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   Any person employed by the Division of Animal Control as an
Animal Control Officer shall take the oath of office and shall be vested with
the power and authority to enforce this chapter.
      (2)   The Animal Control Officers or assistants are hereby authorized and
empowered to apprehend and take with them and impound any animal found in
violation of this chapter, and all other duties prescribed in the enforcement
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.02.020)
   (B)   (1)   In the performance of his or her duties, the Animal Control
Officer is hereby vested with the power and authority of that office, within
the city’s Police Department.
      (2)   Badges of authority shall be issued by the city’s Police Department
or officers having received and been sworn to the oath of office.
(Prior Code, § 4.08.010)
(Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.017 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   In the enforcement of this chapter, all peace officers or Animal Control
Officers or Animal Control Officials of the city are hereby authorized to enter
onto the open premises of any person or entity to take possession of any animal
in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.02.030) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.018 INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with
any Animal Control Officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties as
prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.02.040) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.019 ANIMAL SHELTER PROVIDED.
   (A)   The city shall provide suitable premises and facilities to be used as
the city’s Animal Shelter, wherein impounded animals can be adequately kept.
   (B)   The city shall also purchase and supply adequate food for all
impounded animals.
(Prior Code, § 4.02.050) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.020 INVESTIGATION.
   Animal Control Officer and/or peace officers may enter upon privately-owned
land to investigate reports of vicious animals, cruelty cases, rabies and other
contagious animal disease or to investigate violations of and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.08.020) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.021 FEES ADJUSTED BY RESOLUTION.
   Any and all of the fees and/or licensing costs established by this chapter
may be revised, adjusted or amended by resolution, duly and properly passed by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4.02.050) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
LICENSURE AND REGULATORY PERMITS
§ 90.035 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or
maintain a dog over the age of six months of age, without registering and
obtaining a license for such dog(s) from the city.
      (2)   The registering and licensing period shall be set by resolution as
approved by the City Council.
      (3)   All dogs brought into the city shall require registering and
licensing within 30 days after they enter the city, or within 30 days after
having reached the age of six months.
   (B)   No dog shall be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that the
surgery has been performed.
   (C)   Proof that the dog has a current rabies inoculation shall be presented
at the time the license is applied for. Proof must be in writing and must
include the licensed veterinarian who administered the vaccine.
   (D)   All dogs, including guide, service animal, comfort and government
working, shall be licensed with the city.
   (E)   Licensing fees are set by resolution as approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.010) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 16-13, passed 9-1-
2016; Ord. 19-23, passed 11-21-2019; Ord. 23-05, passed 2-16-2023) Penalty, see
§
90.999
§ 90.036 EXEMPTIONS FOR LICENSING.
   (A)   The provisions of §
90.035 of this chapter shall not apply and no city license is required for
licensed dogs whose owners are non-residents, temporarily up to 30 days within
the city.
   (B)   The exempt licensed dog(s) count toward the maximum number of allowed
dogs per residence as described in §
90.039 of this chapter, even though it is for a temporary time frame.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.020) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 16-13, passed 9-1-
2016; Ord. 23-05, passed 2-16-2023)
§ 90.037 TAG AND COLLAR REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon payment of the license fee, there shall be issued to the owner, a
metallic tag for each dog so licensed. Every owner shall be required to provide
each dog with a collar to which the license tab must be affixed, and shall see
that the collar and tag are constantly worn.
   (B)   (1)   In the event a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be
issued by the City Administration office, upon presentation of a receipt
showing payment of the license fee, and payment of a “duplicate license” fee.
      (2)   The license shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and
no refund shall be made on any dog license for any reason whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.030) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.038 REMOVAL OF TAG UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to deprive a registered dog of its collar and/or its
tag.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.040) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.039 NUMBER OF CATS AND/OR DOGS PER RESIDENCE.
   (A)   No person or persons at any one residence or property within the city
shall at any one time own, harbor or license more than three adult dogs or
three cats and no more than four total animals (dogs or cats) in any
combination, except as otherwise provided in this section. If a person owns an
appropriate service animal, comfort or government working, as defined in this
chapter, that animal shall not count toward the maximum number of three dogs
per residence.
   (B)   If more than two disabled persons reside at any one residence within
the city, each individual in the residence is allowed one service dog.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.050) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 16-13, passed 9-1-
2016; Ord. 23-05, passed 2-16-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.040 KENNELS/CATTERY PERMITS.
   (A)   General. No person shall operate or maintain a kennel or cattery
without first obtaining a permit from the Community Development Department. All
applications for permits to operate or maintain a dog kennel or cattery shall
be submitted in writing upon printed forms provided for such purposes by the
Community Development Department. The applications shall first be referred to
the city’s Community Development Department and the Animal Control Officer and,
upon their approval, the Community Development Department shall issue the
permit upon payment of the proper fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct, operate or maintain a kennel or cattery as defined by the provisions
of this chapter of the city, in any area not zoned for the operation of a
kennel/cattery by the zoning ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Kennel/cattery permit. Any person conducting, operating or maintaining
a kennel/cattery shall for pay the fees and obtain a license to operate said
kennel/cattery from the city.
   (C)   Kennel/cattery. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to
periodically inspect all registered kennels and catteries to see that the
provisions of the city ordinances pertaining to the sanitation and care of such
places are being observed.
   (D)   Display of permit. A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in each establishment, and said permit shall be considered as appurtenant
to the premises, and not transferrable to another location. The permittee shall
notify the Animal Control Department within 30 days of any change of its
establishment or operation which may affect the status of the permit. In the
event of a change in ownership of the establishment, the permittee shall notify
the Department of Animal Control immediately. Permits shall not be transferable
from one owner to another.
   (E)   Renewal of permit. Any permit issued, pursuant to this section, shall
automatically expire one year immediately following the date of issue. Within
two months prior to the date of expiration of the permit, the permittee shall
apply for a renewal of the permit and pay the required fee. Any application
made after the expiration date, except in application for a new establishment
opening subsequent to that date, shall be accompanied by a late application
fee, in addition to the regular permit fee.
   (F)   Suspension or revocation of permit.
      (1)   Grounds. A kennel/cattery permit may be suspended or revoked or a
permit application rejected on any one or more of the following grounds:
         (a)   Falsification of facts in a permit application;
         (b)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
regulation governing the establishment including noise, building and zoning
ordinances or maintaining or selling illegal species; or
         (c)   Conviction of a charge of cruelty to animals.
      (2)   Procedure. If an inspection of any facility operating with a permit
reveals a violation of this chapter, the inspector shall notify the permit
holder or operator of such violation by means of an inspection report for, or
other written notice. The notification shall:
         (a)   Set forth the specific violation found;
         (b)   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violation(s) found;
         (c)   State that any failure to comply with any notice issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall result in immediate
suspension of the permit; and
         (d)   State that an opportunity for an appeal from any notice of
inspection finding shall be provided if a written request for hearing is filed
with the Department of Animal Control within five days of the date of notice.
Upon request of a hearing, a minimum of five days’ notice shall be given to the
permittee, advising him or her of the date and time of such hearing and listing
the cause or causes for such suspension or revocation. No new permit shall be
issued to any person whose permit has been previously revoked, except upon
application for a new permit, accompanied by the required application fee and
unless or until all requirements of this chapter have been met. Any permit
granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Animal Control
Department for violations listed in this chapter.
   (G)   Notice served. Notice provided for under this chapter shall be deemed
to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form or
other notice has been delivered, personally, to the permit holder or person in
charge, or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last known
address of the permit or license holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed
with the records of the Animal Control Department.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.060) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.041 RESIDENTIAL CHICKENS.
   A permit is required. See §
156.358 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.070) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 11-11, passed 5-
19-2011; Ord. 23-05, passed 2-16-2023)
§ 90.042 BEEKEEPING.
   The purpose of this section is to authorize beekeeping subject to certain
requirements intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with
beekeeping in populated areas.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APIARY. Any place or area where one or more colonies of bees are kept.
      BEEKEEPER. A person, licensed by the state, who owns or has charge of one
or more colonies of bees.
      BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such
as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
      COLONY. Bees in any hive including queens, workers or drones.
      FLYWAY. The flight path the bees travel unimpeded.
      HIVE. A human-made or natural receptacle which is used to house bees.
      HONEYBEE. The common honeybee, Apis mellifera species, at any stage of
development, but not including the African honeybee, Apis mellifera scutellata
species or any hybrid thereof.
      STATE OF UTAH. Utah Department of Agriculture and Food.
   (B)   Certain conduct unlawful. Notwithstanding compliance with the various
requirements of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain
an apiary or to keep any colony on any property in a manner that threatens
public health or safety or creates a nuisance.
   (C)   Prohibited areas. Beekeeping is prohibited in the following areas:
      (1)   Central Business District (CBD);
      (2)   General Commercial District (GC), except for individual dwelling
units which have a separate legal lot or parcel of record; and
      (3)   Multiple dwelling units located on the same lot or parcel
(apartments, townhomes and the like), except for individual dwelling units
which have a separate legal lot or parcel of record.
   (D)   Beekeeper registration. Each beekeeper shall be registered with the
state’s Department of Agriculture and Food, as provided in the state’s Bee
Inspection Act set forth in the Utah Code, being U.C.A. §§ 4-11-101 et seq., or
its successor title.
   (E)   Hives.
      (1)   Pursuant to the aforementioned State Bee Inspection Act, honeybee
colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames or bars which shall be
kept in sound and usable condition.
      (2)   Hives shall be placed at least five feet from any property line.
      (3)   Hives shall be operated and maintained as provided in the state’s
Bee Inspection Act.
      (4)   Each hive shall be conspicuously marked with the owner’s name,
address, telephone number and state registration number.
   (F)   Hives on residential lots.
      (1)   As provided in this section, an apiary, consisting of not more than
five hives or an equivalent capacity, may be maintained in a side yard or the
rear yard of any residential lot.
      (2)   A person shall not locate or allow a hive on property owned or
occupied by another person without first obtaining written permission from the
owner.
      (3)   In no case shall a hive be located in a front yard of a residential
lot.
      (4)   The number of hives on residential lots within the multiple use,
agricultural, and rural residential zoning districts shall be regulated by the
state, unless it threatens public health or safety, or creates a nuisance.
   (G)   Flyway barriers. A hive shall be placed on property so the general
flight pattern of bees is in a direction that will deter bee contact with
humans and domesticated animals.
      (1)   If any portion of a hive is located within 15 feet from an area
which provides public access or from a property line on the lot where an apiary
is located, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property
line, a flyway barrier at least six feet in height may be required to be
established and maintained around the hive, except as needed to allow access.
      (2)   If the flyway barrier is located along the property line or within
five feet of the property line, it shall consist of a solid wall or fence,
dense vegetation, or a combination thereof, which extends at least ten feet
beyond the hive in each direction so that bees are forced to fly an elevation
of at least six feet above the ground level over property lines in the vicinity
of the apiary.
   (H)   Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water
is available to the colony continuously between March 1 and October 31 of each
year. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by
bees seeking water on neighboring property.
   (I)   Beekeeping equipment. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or
other beekeeping equipment is left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon
removal from a hive, all such equipment shall be disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure within a
three-day period to allow the bees to clean the equipment.
   (J)   Conflict. In the event of a conflict between any regulation set forth
in this section and honeybee management regulations adopted by the state, the
most restrictive regulations shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 4.03.080) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 13-09, passed 3-
21-2013; Ord. 23-05, passed 2-16-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
MAINTENANCE AND CONDUCT OF ANIMALS
§ 90.055 ANIMALS ATTACKING PERSONS OR OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow
such animal to bite, attack, chase or worry any person, domesticated animal or
any species of hoofed, protected wildlife or domestic fowl.
   (B)   Owner liability.
      (1)   Any owner in violation of division (A) above shall be strictly
liable for violation of this section.
      (2)   In addition to being subject to prosecution under division (A)
above, the owner of such animal shall also be liable for damages to any person
injured or to the owner of any animal injured or destroyed thereby.
   (C)   Defenses. The following shall be considered in mitigating the
penalties or damages, or in dismissing the charge:
      (1)   The animal was properly confined on the premises; and
      (2)   The animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
   (D)   Animal may be killed. Any public safety officer or person may kill an
animal while it is committing any of the acts specified in division (A) above
or while such animal is being pursued thereafter, pursuant to Utah Code.
   (E)   Impound. After any animal bites, attacks, chases or worries any
person, domesticated animal, or any species of hoofed, protected wildlife or
domestic fowl, the Animal Control Officer may impound the animal, which may not
be redeemed while awaiting final disposition of any criminal charges associated
with said animal.
   (F)   Destruction of animal. Upon conviction of any offense under this
section, or upon failure to appear after citation, the court may, after
attempting to notify the animal’s owner, order the Animal Control Officer or
other authorized person of the city, to destroy the animal, or may order such
other disposition of the animal, as will protect the inhabitants and animals of
the city.
   (G)   Allow. The term ALLOW in this section shall be defined broadly, and
such definition shall include, but not be limited to, the following: directing,
commanding and giving permission as well as failing to adequately restrain or
failing to effectively control.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.010) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.056 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   Defined. Any owner of an animal causing a NUISANCE, as defined below,
shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided
herein. Any animal shall be deemed a nuisance if the animal:
      (1)   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
      (2)   Causes unreasonable odors;
      (3)   Causes unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   Defecates on any public property, or on any private property
without the consent of the owner of such private property, unless the owner of
such animal shall remove any such defecation to a property trash receptacle;
      (5)   Barks, whines or howls or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion;
      (6)   Unreasonably and continuously disturbs or threatens passers-by by
barking, snapping, pawing, clawing, biting or growling;
      (7)   Chases vehicles;
      (8)   Is continuously or excessively found to be an animal at large or in
violation of city ordinances; or
      (9)   Is determined by the Animal Control Officer to be a public nuisance
by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or
safety.
   (B)   Remedy. Any individuals or entities making a complaint of a nuisance
animal must sign a written statement against the violator and deliver it to the
Animal Control Officer. Nuisances will be cited as a Class C misdemeanor. Any
nuisance which continues subsequent to the receipt of a citation shall be
deemed a separate offense and may be cited as such.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.020) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.057 FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.
   Any owner of any female dog in heat, shall, in addition to restraining such
dog from running at large, cause such dog to be constantly confined in a
building or secure enclosure so as to prevent it from attracting, by scent, or
coming into contact with other dogs and creating a nuisance, except for planned
breeding.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.030) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.058 DISRUPTIVE DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which by loud barking,
howling or yelping interferes with the health and welfare of any person or
neighborhood.
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be an infraction and subject to
penalty, and such is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and each day a violation
is permitted to exist or continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the city’s Animal Shelter, animal
boarding establishments, animal grooming parlors, pet shops or veterinary
hospitals.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.040) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.059 ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any animal, as defined herein, to be allowed,
either negligently or with specific intent, to run at large as defined in this
chapter. However, dogs may be at large while participating in field trials and
obedience classes organized and sanctioned by recognized dog clubs, while
assisting their owner or trainer in legal hunting or in herding of livestock,
while assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties or while
being trained for the above purposes, or while on the owner’s private property,
so long as such dogs are under the direct and effective sound or gesture
control, and within sight of owners or such individuals noted above, to assure
that such animals do not violate any provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.050) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.060 ALLOWING DOMESTIC FOWL TO TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any domestic fowls such as: turkeys,
ducks, geese, chickens, peacocks or any other variety of fowl, to permit such
fowl to trespass or go upon the premises of another or to run at large on any
public property or roadway.
   (B)   Fowl that are kept and maintained by municipalities within the
confines of public parks or aviaries are exempt, excepting that they shall not
be allowed on public roadways.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.060) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.061 STAKING ANIMALS IMPROPERLY ON UNENCLOSED PREMISES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal
on any unenclosed premises, in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the
property line, unless such person has permission of the owner of the affected
property, or the person with whom he or she shares joint tenancy.
   (B)   No animals are to be staked along public roadway easements.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.070) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.062 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, give away,
keep, own, harbor or purchase any animal not defined as a “pet” under §
90.001 of this chapter, or any wild animal, as defined in C.F.R. Title 50,
state law or regulation, or §
90.001 of this chapter, or which is fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally
inclined to do harm; provided, however, that, an animal shelter, zoological
park, veterinary hospital, humane society shelter, public laboratory, circus,
sideshow, amusement show or facility for education or scientific purposes may
keep such animal if protective devices are provided and adequate to prevent
such animal from escaping or injuring the public.
(Prior Code, § 4.04.080) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.075 IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Animal Control Department shall place all animals which are taken
into custody in a designated animal impound facility.
   (B)   The following animals may be taken into custody and impounded as
deemed necessary:
      (1)   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter;
      (2)   Any animal running at large, with any reasonable means used to
immobilize or capture such animal;
      (3)   Any animal which is by this chapter required to be licensed and is
not licensed; an animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed
for the purposes of this section;
      (4)   Sick or injured animals, whose owner requests impoundment, and
agrees to pay a reasonable fee for services rendered;
      (5)   Any abandoned, neglected animal, whose safety may be threatened,
should the animal not be readily placed into protective custody;
      (6)   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
      (7)   Any animal needing to be held for quarantine; and
      (8)   Any animal, in the custody of any person or persons who are
arrested or otherwise detained, by any police officer, in the event another
responsible party cannot be located by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 4.05.010) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.076 IMPOUNDMENT/RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
   The impounding facility shall keep a record of each animal impounded, which
includes the following information:
   (A)   Complete description of the animal, including any tag numbers;
   (B)   The manner and date of impoundment;
   (C)   The location of the pickup and identification number of the impounding
officer;
   (D)   The manner and date of disposal;
   (E)   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser;
   (F)   The name and address of any person relinquishing the animal;
   (G)   All fees received; and
   (H)   All expenses occurring during impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 4.05.020) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.077 REDEMPTION REQUIREMENTS.
   An impounded animal whose redemption has been authorized by the Animal
Control Officer, may be redeemed by the owner or his or her authorized
representative, before disposition, provided he or she pays:
   (A)   The impound fees;
   (B)   The daily board charges;
   (C)   The veterinary costs incurred during the impoundment period;
   (D)   License fee, if applicable;
   (E)   A transportation fee, if transportation of an impounded animal, by
specialized equipment, is required. SPECIALIZED EQUIPMENT is that equipment,
other than the usual patrol and operation vehicles of Animal Control, which is
designed for specific purposes such as, but not limited to, livestock trailers
and carcass trailers. This fee shall be determined by the City Council at a
level which approximates the cost of utilizing the specialized equipment in the
particular situation; and
   (F)   Any other expenses incurred, to impound an animal in accordance with
state or local laws, including any reasonable restitution for property damage
created by the animal, or that occurs as a result of the impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 4.05.030) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.078 TERMS OF IMPOUNDMENT, DESTRUCTION AND DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of five working days
before further disposition. If an animal is licensed or has other
identification, the impoundment shall be for five working days. Reasonable
effort shall be made to notify the owner of any animal wearing a license or
other identification during that time.
      (2)   Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of
the listed owner. Any animal voluntarily relinquished to the animal control
facility by the owner thereof, for destruction or other disposition need not be
kept for the minimum holding period before release or other disposition, as
herein provided.
   (B)   (1)   All animals, except those quarantined or confined by court
order, or those subject to U.C.A. § 4-25-4, which are held longer than the
minimum impoundment period, and all animals voluntarily relinquished to the
impound facility, may be destroyed. Any healthy dog or cat may be sold after
payment of all applicable fees.
      (2)   Other small animals, not included as livestock, may also be sold at
the discretion of the Animal Control Department.
   (C)   Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having
serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring medical attention, may,
at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer be released to the care of a
veterinarian with or without the consent of the owner.
   (D)   When, in the judgment of an Animal Control Officer, it is determined
that an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons or to protect the public
from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be destroyed
without regard to any time limitation otherwise established in this chapter,
and without court order.
   (E)   (1)   An Animal Control Officer may destroy any animal upon request of
the owner, without transporting the animal to county facilities.
      (2)   An appropriate fee may be charged the owner of the destruction and
any subsequent disposal of the carcass done by the Animal Control Department.
(Prior Code, § 4.05.040) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
RABIES CONTROL/ANIMAL BITES
§ 90.090 VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All dogs, cats or other animals susceptible to rabies, for which a federally
approved vaccine is available, shall be vaccinated at six months of age by a
licensed veterinarian or rabies clinic. Every dog shall be revaccinated every
36 months and every cat revaccinated every 36 months thereafter. Any
unvaccinated dog or cat over six months of age, adopted or brought into the
jurisdiction, must likewise be vaccinated initially. Thereafter, valid
protection must be maintained.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.010) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 05-24, passed 11-
17-2005; Ord. 23-05, passed 2-16-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.091 EXCEPTION FOR TRANSIENT ANIMALS.
   The provisions of this chapter, with respect to vaccination, shall not apply
to any animal owned by a person temporarily remaining within the jurisdiction
for less than 30 days. Such animal(s) shall be confined by a restraining device
and under supervision of the owner. It is unlawful to bring any animal into the
jurisdiction which does not comply with the animal health laws and import
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.020) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.092 VACCINATION CERTIFICATION AND TAGS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian when vaccinating any animal
for rabies to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination, in duplicate, which
includes the following information:
      (1)   Owner’s name and address;
      (2)   Description of the animal;
      (3)   Date of vaccination;
      (4)   Rabies vaccination tag number;
      (5)   Type of vaccine administered; and
      (6)   Manufacturer’s serial number of vaccine.
   (B)   A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner of the
animal, and original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The veterinarian and
the owner shall retain their copies of the certificate for the interval between
vaccinations specified in this chapter.
   (C)   Additionally, a metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag or
rabies identification microchip implanted beneath the skin, serially numbered,
shall be securely attached to the collar, implanted microchip or harness of the
animal. An animal not wearing such a tag shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and
may be impounded and dealt with pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.030) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.093 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS WITHOUT VALID RABIES VACCINATION TAGS.
   (A)   Any vaccinated animal impounded because of a lack of a rabies
vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner by furnishing proof of a rabies
vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees prior to release.
   (B)   Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed prior to disposal by payment
of impoundment fees and by obtaining or providing proof of a rabies vaccination
within 72 hours of release.
   (C)   Any animal not reclaimed within the prescribed period of time shall be
disposed of pursuant to provisions of §
90.078 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.040) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.094 RABID ANIMAL REPORTS.
   Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have
been exposed to or suspected of having rabies or of an animal or person bitten
by such a suspected animal shall notify the Department of Animal Control or the
State or County Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.050) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.095 QUARANTINE AND DISPOSITION OF BITING ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies and
every animal bitten by another animal affected with rabies or that has been
exposed to rabies, shall be reported by the owner as set forth above and shall
immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner.
      (2)   The owner shall turn over the animal to the Animal Control Agents
upon demand.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of any animal or species subject to rabies, which has
been bitten by another animal known to be capable of harboring the rabies
virus, shall surrender the animal to an authorized official upon demand.
      (2)   Any person authorized to enforce this chapter may enter upon
private property to seize the animal if the owner refuses to surrender the
animal.
   (C)   (1)   Any animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a person or
animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined for
observation for a period of not less than 12 days by the Animal Control
Department. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement.
      (2)   The Animal Shelter shall be the normal place for such quarantine
but other arrangements, including confinement by the owner, may be made by the
Animal Control Department if the animal has current rabies vaccinations at the
time the bite is inflicted or if there are other special circumstances
justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine
shall immediately notify the Animal Control Department if the animal shows any
signs of sickness or abnormal behavior or if the animal escapes confinement.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined
animal to fail or refuse to allow a health or Animal Control Officer to make an
inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies
within 12 days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall
immediately notify the Animal Control Department in order that the Department
may immediately remove and deliver the head to the state’s Health Department.
      (4)   If, at the end of the 12-day period, an investigating officer of
the Department of Animal Care and Control examines the animal and finds no sign
of rabies, the animal may be released to the owner, or in the case of a stray,
it shall be disposed of as provided in §
90.078 of this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies,
which is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, such bitten or
exposed animal shall be immediately destroyed.
      (2)   If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed animal,
the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for six months under
veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in advance by
the owner. The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply herewith.
   (E)   (1)   If the bitten animal is currently vaccinated and not
revaccinated within 24 hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined
under veterinary supervision for ten days.
      (2)   The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with
division (E)(1) above or this division (E)(2), regarding exposure by known
rabid animals.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any such animal from the
place of quarantine without written permission of the Chief of Police of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.060) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.096 BITES; DUTY TO REPORT.
   (A)   Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been
bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident
immediately to the Animal Control Department.
   (B)   The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person bitten by an
animal shall report the bite to the Animal Control Department within 24 hours
of the bite, regardless of whether or not the biting animal is of a species
subject to rabies.
   (C)   (1)   A physician or other medical personnel who renders professional
treatment to a person bitten by an animal, the bite of which might cause
rabies, shall report the fact that he or she has rendered professional
treatment to the Animal Control Department within 24 hours of his or her first
professional attendance.
      (2)   He or she shall report the name, sex and address of the person
bitten, as well as the type and location of the bite. If known, he or she shall
give the name and address of the owner of the animal that inflicted the bite,
and any other facts that may assist the Animal Control Department.
   (D)   Any person treating an animal bitten, injured or mauled by another
animal shall report the incident to the Animal Control Department. The report
shall contain the name and address of the owner of the wounded, injured or
bitten animal, the name and address of the owner and description of the animal
which caused the injury and the location of the incident.
   (E)   Any person not conforming with the requirements of this chapter shall
be in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.06.070) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
ANIMAL CARE AND OFFENSES
§ 90.110 DEFENSE.
   (A)   Any person may kill an animal while it is attacking, chasing or
worrying any domestic animal having a commercial value, or any species of
hoofed protected wildlife, while attacking domestic fowls or while such animal
is being pursued thereafter.
   (B)   Any animal making vicious and unprovoked attack on any person, except
when the attack is in defense of the person, family or property of the animal’s
owner, may be killed by a person while it is making such an attack.
(Prior Code, § 4.07.010) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.111 INJURIES AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal with a serious injury,
or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper, parvo, kennel cough or any other
contagious disease, unless such animal is being given adequate treatment to
control or eliminate disease.
(Prior Code, § 4.07.020) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.112 CHARGE OF VIOLATOR SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be the duty of a person filing charges, under this chapter, to
seize or arrange to be seized, an animal found in the keeping or custody of a
person being charged, and which are being used or will be used, as evidence in
the case, resulting from such charge. The person making said seizure shall
cause such animals to be delivered immediately to the Animal Control
Department, or in such cases as may be necessary, to a veterinarian for
treatment. It shall be the duty of that Department to humanely hold such
animals until further court order regarding their disposal. The perpetrator of
any such act shall be responsible for the cost of impoundment, board and any
medical expenses incurred during the holding period of the animal.
(Prior Code, § 4.07.030) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002)
§ 90.113 HARBORING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED; DUTY TO NOTIFY.
   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within this jurisdiction any
lost or strayed animal. Whenever any animal shall be found which appears to be
lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the city’s Animal
Shelter within 72 hours. An Animal Control Officer may take the animal into
protective custody or authorize the finder to maintain possession of the animal
until its owner is located or the animal is properly licensed.
(Prior Code, § 4.07.040) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.114 PLACES PROHIBITED TO ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animals, whether
on a leash or in the arms of the owner, in any establishment or place of
business where food or food products are sold or distributed, including, but
not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets and fruit and
vegetable stores. This, however, shall not apply to guide dogs or to government
working dogs, while they are being used in law enforcement exercises.
(Prior Code, § 4.07.050) (Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any violation of this chapter, either by failing to do those acts
required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor. A person who violates §
90.018 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 4.08.030)
   (B)   Any incident relating to animals attacking persons or livestock, where
such incident is not reported within 24 hours, constitutes a civil dispute.
Neither the city, nor its employees, shall become involved in civil disputes
arising between persons because of damages caused by animals. Should any civil
dispute arise from a violation of this chapter, and if the Animal Control
Officer responds, the limit of the city’s responsibility is to provide
testimony by order of a subpoena as to what was personally observed by such
officer, and make public records available. Any settlement or claims for
damages are strictly a civil matter and must be pursued by the damaged party.
(Prior Code, § 4.08.040)
(Ord. 02-25, passed 8-15-2002; Ord. 24-07, passed 4-4-2024)
CHAPTER 91: CITY FACILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Purpose
   
91.002   Name and location of facilities; control of
   
91.003   Authority to make rules; unlawful to violate
   
91.004   Definitions
   
91.005   Facility use provisions
   
91.006   Rules of use
   
91.007   Facility fee schedule
Naming and Renaming of City Facilities
   
91.020   Purpose
   
91.021   Scope
   
91.022   Naming or renaming procedures
   
91.023   Naming or renaming criteria
   
91.024   Revision, addition, revocation or removal of names
   
91.025   Sponsorship naming
Airport
   
91.040   Governing land use regulations
   
91.041   Airport master plan
   
91.042   Airport rules, regulations and minimum standards
   
91.043   Airport overlay zones
Cemetery
   
91.055   Sexton; authority
   
91.056   Burial permit
   
91.057   Information to be obtained by Sexton before burial
   
91.058   Sale of certificates of burial rights
   
91.059   Perpetual Care Fund
   
91.060   Burial in cemetery required; permission required to establish
cemetery; permit to bury in another’s lot required
   
91.061   Cemetery hours of operation for interments and burials
   
91.062   Disinterments
   
91.063   Permits to be filed with City Recorder
   
91.064   Temporary markers required
   
91.065   Monument, headstone or marker requirements
   
91.066   Cremations or cremation wall in meditation garden
Library
   
91.080   Public library established
   
91.081   Library Board of Trustees; powers and duties
   
91.082   Library Fund
   
91.083   Donations of money or property
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a location where certain adopted
standards and regulations by the city can either be referenced or included.
(Prior Code, Ch. 3.01) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015)
§ 91.002 NAME AND LOCATION OF FACILITIES; CONTROL OF.
   (A)   (1)   The Fire Station is located at 442 West Forest, Brigham City.
      (2)   The Community Center is located at 24 North 300 West, Brigham City.
      (3)   The Brigham City Park Boweries are located throughout the City.
      (4)   The Brigham City Pool is located at 740 West Forest, Brigham City.
      (5)   The Brigham City Library is located at 26 East Forest, Brigham
City.
      (6)   Brigham City Hall is located at 20 North Main Street, Brigham City.
      (7)   The Brigham Academy Center is located at 58 North Main Street,
Brigham City.
   (B)   All other city facilities not listed herein are not intended to be
rented or scheduled for private events or are reserved through a separate
management agreement.
   (C)   All ordinances of the city relating to the keeping of the peace, the
maintenance of the order and the protection of persons and property, all health
ordinances and regulations and all other pertinent provisions of the city code
shall be applicable to and effective upon these facilities.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.010) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015; Ord. 15-18, passed 10-
15-2015)
§ 91.003 AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES; UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE.
   (A)   The City Council is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules
and regulations, and enforce said rules and regulations as adopted by the city.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to violate the rules and regulations as
set forth in this chapter. Persons violating this code may be deprived of use
of city facilities.
   (B)   The city and its employees will allow use of facilities based on the
criteria listed below on a first come, first served basis, without
discrimination. No preferential treatment will be given based on past use,
political affiliation and the like.
   (C)   No use of city facilities will be allowed for the purpose of endorsing
one political candidate over another, nor shall any city employee or city
official operate any city equipment for any political campaign purpose.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.020) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015; Ord. 15-18, passed 10-
15-2015; Ord. 20-19, passed 11-5-2020; Ord. 21-15, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 91.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACADEMY. All of the city-owned property comprising Brigham Academy Center,
located at 58 North Main, Brigham City, which shall include all of its
facilities, portico and grass area.
   CITY. The corporate municipal entity known as “Brigham City Corporation”.
   CITY HALL. All of the city owned property comprising Brigham City Hall,
located at 20 North Main, Brigham City, which shall include all of its
facilities.
   COMMUNITY CENTER. All of the city-owned property comprising Brigham City
Community Center, located at 24 North 300 West, Brigham City which shall
include all of its facilities.
   FIRE STATION. All of the City owned property comprising Brigham City Fire
Station at 442 West Forest, Brigham City, which shall include all of its
facilities.
   GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY. A governmental agency is an executive, legislative or
judicial agency, department, board, commission, authority, institution or
instrumentality of the federal government or of a state or of a county,
municipality or other political subdivision of the state.
   LIBRARY. All of the City owned property comprising the Brigham City Library,
located at 26 East Forest, Brigham City, which shall include all of its
facilities.
   OTHER BRIGHAM CITY FACILITIES. All other city facilities not listed herein
are not intended to be rented or scheduled for private events.
   OUTDOOR POOL. All of the city-owned property comprising the Brigham City
Outdoor Pool contained within the fenced perimeter, located at 740 West Forest,
Brigham City, which shall include all of its facilities.
   PARK BOWERY. The facilities located in the following city parks: Davis Park,
Horsley, John Adams, Rotary Constitution, Rees Pioneer, Lindsay, Mary E.
Christensen and Watkins; consisting of the bowery, tables and volleyball
standards (where applicable).
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. A written agreement between the city and a person which
gives rise to a new or renewed relationship of landlord and tenant or lessor
and lessee for use of city facilities.
   SERVICE CLUB. A service club or service organization is a voluntary non-
profit organization where members meet regularly to perform charitable works
either by direct hands-on efforts or by raising money for other organizations.
A SERVICE CLUB is defined firstly by its service emission and secondly by its
membership benefits, such as social occasions, networking and personal growth
opportunities encourage involvement.
   STANDARDS. The qualifications established herein, as amended from time to
time by the City Council, setting forth the minimum requirements to be met as a
condition for the right to use city facilities.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.030) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015; Ord. 15-18, passed 10-
15-2015; Ord. 20-19, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 91.005 FACILITY USE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Academy Center. Brigham Academy Center may be available upon request,
through the current lessor of the facility, and proper execution of the user
agreement/reservation form that requires compliance with the city’s standards
set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   City Hall. City Hall shall have its principle use as first a city
office building, secondly as an Emergency Operations Center when activated. The
facility shall also be utilized as meeting space for city purposes. Upon
appropriate approval by the Mayor’s office, other governmental agencies may be
allowed to use City Hall for professional meetings. Any such use shall be in
accordance with the rules set forth herein. There shall be no charge for such
use by other governmental agencies. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 10-3-1108(2)(d), city
employees are not allowed to use city equipment while engaged in a political
activity, including the city’s audio/visual equipment.
   (C)   Community Center. The Brigham City Community Center may be available
upon request and proper execution of the user agreement/reservation form. The
Community Center is available to government agencies, non-profit organizations,
service organizations and citizens.
   (D)   Fire Station. The Fire Station shall have its principle use as a fire
station and secondly as an Emergency Operations Center when activated. The
facility shall also be utilized as meeting space for city purposes. Other
governmental agencies may be allowed to use the Fire Station for professional
meetings. Any such use shall be in accordance with the rules set forth herein
and subject to the fee schedule attached hereto. This facility is only
available to governmental agencies. Pursuant to U.C.A. § 10-301108(2)(d), city
employees are not allowed to use city equipment while engaged in a political
activity, including the city’s audio/visual equipment.
   (E)   Library. The library may be available upon request and proper
execution of the user agreement/reservation form. The library is available to
government agencies, non-profit organizations, service organizations and
citizens.
   (F)   Other facilities. All other city facilities not specified herein are
not intended to be rented or scheduled for private events or are rented and
scheduled through a separate management agreement.
   (G)   Outdoor pool. Opening day for pool reservations will be advertised
annually through the local paper, city email blasts and social media.
Reservations may be made in person at the Recreation Office or online. The
reservation season begins the first Saturday after school is let out in Box
Elder County and ends the week before school commences in the county.
   (H)   Park Boweries. Opening day for bowery reservations will be advertised
annually through the local paper, city email blasts and social media.
Reservations may be made in person at the city offices or online. The
reservation season begins Memorial Day weekend and runs through September 30.
No reservations will be accepted during the week of Peach Days. Bowery use is
subject to the fee schedule attached hereto. Fees must be paid before the
reservation is calendared.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.040) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015; Ord. 15-18, passed 10-
15-2015; Ord. 20-19, passed 11-5-2020; Ord. 23-19, passed 8-17-2023)
§ 91.006 RULES OF USE.
   (A)   Brigham Academy Center.
      (1)   No smoking allowed. No smoking, including e-cigarettes, is allowed
upon the premises pursuant to state law and local ordinances. It shall be the
sole responsibility of the user to enforce this rule. In the event this rule is
violated, the city will withhold all deposits as a penalty for the failure of
the user to enforce this condition.
      (2)   Alcohol use and consumption. No alcohol may be sold on the premises
or distributed to the public. Private parties, not open to the public, may be
allowed to bring alcohol onto the premises provided the alcohol dispensed is to
invited adult guests only, the alcohol dispensing and consumption occurs only
indoors, without cost, and in accordance with state law, city’s ordinances and
terms and conditions regarding any alcohol dispensing, use and consumption by
members of the private party.
      (3)   Lewd conduct on premises. The lessor and all permitted users shall
not allow any conduct by any individual on the premises that is prohibited by
state law, include any lewd behavior prohibited by state law or the city’s
ordinances or showing of any visual reproduction showing the same.
      (4)   Property damage. Any damage to the facility or any of its contents
arising out of the user’s use of the facility shall be the sole responsibility
of the user. In the event of such damage, the lessor, with permission from the
city, shall make a determination as to the cost of repairs or replacement, and
the user shall immediately pay said determined cost to the lessor and/or the
city.
      (5)   City use. The city and county shall have use of the facility one
time per year at no cost to the city or county
   (B)   City Hall.
      (1)   Reservations.
         (a)   Reservations for the use of the facility shall be made by
contacting the Mayor’s executive assistant.
         (b)   A form shall be completed by the applicant identifying, among
other things, the applicant, the dates and times of use, the nature and type of
function(s) and an agreement to abide by all of the rules governing the use of
the facility.
         (c)   The city reserves the right to cancel any reservation due to
emergency scheduling of city functions.
      (2)   User fees. There are no user fees associated with governmental use
of City Hall.
      (3)   Setting up. No articles are to be pinned onto the walls as
decorations or signs. Large items must be pre-approved and may only be brought
in during the scheduled activity. The city is not responsible for any damage to
said items.
      (4)   Use only of area reserved. The user shall be allowed to use the
Council Chambers and restrooms. Access to all other areas is prohibited.
      (5)   No smoking or alcoholic beverages allowed. No smoking, including e-
cigarettes or alcoholic beverages shall be allowed upon the premises pursuant
to state law and local ordinances. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
user to enforce this rule. In the event this rule is violated, the city will
withhold all deposits as a penalty for the failure of the user to enforce this
condition.
      (6)   Lost items. Any lost or misplaced items found will be held for one
month, after which time these items will be discarded.
      (7)   Time. The facility will only be available during regular business
hours, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. unless specific
circumstances exist to allow after-hours use. Any after-hours use must be
approved by the Mayor.
      (8)   Users. Only governmental agencies may be allowed to use the
facility. No use of city-owned audio/visual equipment is allowed. Social events
such as dances, receptions, parties and private user groups are prohibited with
the exception of marriage ceremonies conducted by the Mayor.
      (9)   Property damage. Any damage to the facility or any of its contents
arising out of the user’s use of the facility shall be the sole responsibility
of the user. In the event of such damage, the city shall make a determination
as to the cost of repairs or replacement, and the user shall immediately pay
said determined cost to the city.
   (C)   Community Center.
      (1)   Reservations. Reservations for the use of the Community Center
shall be made through the city. Reservation time includes setup and cleanup
time. Booking of reservations may only be made up to 12 months in advance.
      (2)   User fees. All fees for the use of this facility shall be paid
prior to use pursuant to the attached fee schedule.
      (3)   Cleaning costs. Any and all costs related to the user’s use of the
facility which exceed the normal cleaning costs associated with the city’s use
of the facility, shall be paid by the user to the city pursuant to the fee
schedule in §
91.007 of this chapter.
      (4)   Setting up.
         (a)   No articles are to be taped on the walls as decorations or
signs. Large items such as props, must be approved by the facility supervisor
and may only be brought in during the scheduled activity.
         (b)   The city is not responsible for any damage to said items. If
user requires the use of tables and chairs, an additional set up fee may be
charged. User is responsible to set up tables and chairs and to put them away
at the conclusion of use.
      (5)   Use only area reserved. The user shall only be entitled to use
those portions of the building actually reserved and paid for by the user. The
kitchen is not available for public use. Access to all other areas is
prohibited. Telephones located in the building are not for public use.
      (6)   No smoking or alcoholic beverages allowed. No smoking, including e-
cigarettes, or any alcoholic beverages are allowed upon the premises pursuant
to state law and local ordinances.
         (a)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the user to enforce this
rule.
         (b)   In the event this rule is violated, the city will withhold all
deposits as a penalty for the failure of the user to enforce this condition.
      (7)   Lost items. Any lost or misplaced items found will be held for one
month, after which time these items will be discarded.
      (8)   Catering. If the user contracts a caterer, the caterer must have a
current Health Department permit.
      (9)   Time. The doors will be opened for the scheduled activity only at
the time previously scheduled. Use of the facility shall be allowed only during
the reserved hours. All reservations must conclude by 10:00 p.m. Thirty minutes
thereafter will be allowed for vacating the parking lot. The facility is not
available on Sundays or on legal holidays.
      (10)   Property damage. Any damage to the facility or any of its contents
arising out of the user’s use of the facility shall be the sole responsibility
of the user. In the event of such damage, the city shall make a determination
as to the cost of repairs or replacement, and the user shall immediately pay
said determined cost to the city.
      (11)   Dances and/or bands. No dances and/or bands are allowed, except
dances sponsored by the Community Center as part of their approved programming.
   (D)   Fire Station.
      (1)   Reservations. Reservations from governmental agencies for the use
of the facility shall be made by contacting the Fire Chief or designee.
      (2)   User fees. All fees for the use of this facility are as specified
on the attached fee schedule.
      (3)   Setting up. User is responsible to set up tables and chairs and to
put them away at the conclusion of use. No articles are to be pinned onto the
walls as decorations or signs. Large items must be approved by the Fire Chief
and may only be brought in during the scheduled activity. The city is not
responsible for any damage to said items.
      (4)   Use only of area reserved. The user shall be allowed to use the
main meeting/training room and associated restrooms. Access to all other areas
is prohibited.
      (5)   No smoking or alcoholic beverages allowed. No smoking, including e-
cigarettes, nor any alcoholic beverages are allowed upon the premises pursuant
to state law and local ordinances. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
user to enforce this rule.
      (6)   Lost items. Any lost or misplaced items found will be held for one
month, after which time these items will be discarded.
      (7)   Time. The doors will be opened for the scheduled activity only at
the time previously scheduled. Use of the facility shall be allowed only during
the reserved hours. The facility is not available on Sundays, except emergency
situations.
      (8)   Users. Only governmental agencies may be allowed to use the
facility. Social events such as dances, receptions, weddings, parties and
private user groups are prohibited.
      (9)   Property damage. Any damage to the facility or any of its contents
arising out of the user’s use of the facility shall be the sole responsibility
of the user. In the event of such damage, the city shall make a determination
as to the cost of repairs or replacement, and the user shall immediately pay
said determined cost to the city.
   (E)   Library.
      (1)   Reservations. Reservations for the use of the facility shall be
made by contacting the library. The facility is available for rental Monday
through Saturday, with the exception of legal holidays, as the scheduling
calendar allows. Rooms may be scheduled up to 30 days in advance in accordance
with the library’s meeting room policy.
      (2)   User fees. All fees for the use of this facility shall be pursuant
to the attached fee schedule and according to the library’s meeting room
policy.
      (3)   Cleaning costs. Any and all costs related to the user’s use of the
facility which exceed the normal cleaning costs associated with the city’s use
of the facility, shall be paid by the user to the city.
      (4)   Setting up. No articles are to be pinned or taped on the walls
without prior approval. Large items may be brought in with prior approval. All
items must be removed at the conclusion of the activity. The city is not
responsible for the loss of or damage to said items.
      (5)   Use only area reserved. The user shall only be entitled to use
those portions of the building actually reserved and paid for by the user.
Access to all other areas is prohibited. There is no public telephone
available.
      (6)   No smoking or alcoholic beverages allowed. No smoking, including e-
cigarettes, or any alcoholic beverages shall be allowed upon the premises
pursuant to state law and local ordinances. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to enforce this rule. Additionally, no food or other beverages
are allowed in the library’s meeting rooms with an exception for covered
beverages. Refreshments may not be served without prior approval from the
Library Director.
      (7)   Lost items. Any lost or misplaced items found will be held for one
week, after which time these items will be discarded.
      (8)   Time. Staff will open the doors for the scheduled activity only at
the time scheduled. Both set up and clean up time should be included in the
request. Reservations shall end at 8:30 p.m., Monday through Thursday, and 5:30
p.m., Friday and Saturday.
      (9)   Property damage. Any damage to the facility or any of its contents
arising out of the user’s use of the facility shall be the sole responsibility
of the user. In the event of such damage, the city shall make a determination
as to the cost of repairs or replacement, and the user shall immediately pay
said determined cost to the city.
   (F)   Outdoor swimming pool.
      (1)   Reservations.
         (a)   Opening day for pool reservations will be advertised annually
through the local paper, city email blasts and social media.
         (b)   The facility is available Monday through Saturday beginning the
first Saturday after school is let out in the county until the week before
school commences in the county.
      (2)   User fees. The fees for the use of this facility shall be pursuant
to the fee schedule in §
91.007 of this chapter.
      (3)   Time. Times for pool reservations are listed on the fee schedule in
§
91.007 of this chapter.
      (4)   Use only area reserved. Reservations include use of the pool and
restroom areas. In order for the concession stand to be open during
reservations, a request must be made one week prior to the date of the
reservation.
      (5)   Food and beverages. No glass containers are allowed in the
facility. Any outside food preparation equipment must be preapproved by the
pool supervisor.
      (6)   No smoking or alcoholic beverages allowed.
         (a)   No smoking, including e-cigarettes, or alcoholic beverages shall
be allowed upon the premises.
         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to enforce this
rule.
         (c)   In the event this rule is violated, the city will withhold all
of the cleaning and property damage deposit as a penalty for the failure of the
user to enforce this condition pursuant to resolution by the City Council.
      (7)   Lost items. Any lost or misplaced items found will be held for one
week, after which time these items will be discarded.
      (8)   Property damage. Any damage to the facility or its contents arising
out of the user’s use of the facility shall be the sole responsibility of the
user. In the event of such damage, the city shall make a determination as to
the cost of repairs or replacement, and the user shall immediately pay said
determined cost to the city pursuant to resolution of the City Council.
   (G)   Park Boweries.
      (1)   Reservations. Opening day for park reservations will be advertised
annually through the local paper, city email blasts and social media. The
bowery facilities are available seven days a week beginning Memorial Day
weekend through September 30. Bowery reservations must be made seven days ahead
of the desired reservation date. No reservations will be accepted during the
week of Peach Days.
      (2)   User fees. The fees are due at the time of reservation for the use
of this facility shall be pursuant to the fee schedule in §
91.007 of this chapter.
      (3)   Time. The boweries are available from 9:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.
daily.
      (4)   Use only area reserved. Reservations include the bowery only and do
not include exclusive use of tennis courts, ball diamonds, volleyball court,
playgrounds or other facilities.
      (5)   Bounce houses/inflatables. The use of bounce houses and/or
inflatables in city parks is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.050) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015; Ord. 15-18, passed 10-
15-2015; Ord. 20-19, passed 11-5-2020; Ord. 21-15, passed 11-18-2021; Ord. 22-
13, passed 7-7-2022; Ord. 23-19, passed 8-17-2023) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 91.007 FACILITY FEE SCHEDULE.
                                            Non-profit/       Non-resident and
                           Resident (city   service           commercial groups
                           residents, this  organizations*    (reservations
         Governmental      does not include (proper 501c3     made on-line
         Agency (not       groups,          documentation is  paying the
Facility including the     associations,    required for non- resident fee, but
         city or           clubs or         profits; service  do not qualify as
         affiliated with a organizations    organizations     a resident will
         city program)     that a resident  must show         be billed
                           may be a member  affiliation and   additional
                           of)              approval from the amounts due)
                                            city)
                                                Non-profit/     Non-resident
                                Resident (city  service         and commercial
                                residents, this organizations*  groups
                Governmental    does not        (proper 501c3   (reservations
                Agency (not     include groups, documentation   made on-line
                including the   associations,   is required for paying the
Facility        city or         clubs or        non-profits;    resident fee,
                affiliated with organizations   service         but do not
                a city program) that a resident organizations   qualify as a
                                may be a member must show       resident will
                                of)             affiliation and be billed
                                                approval from   additional
                                                the city)       amounts due)
Boweries, Small
Lindsay, Mary
Christensen,    $30             $30             $30             $60
Snow, Horsley,
Davis and
Watkins
Boweries, Mid-
Sized
John Adams and  $40             $40             $40             $80
Rotary
Constitution
Bowery, Large
Rees Pioneer    $60             $60             $60             $120
Park
Community                       $20 per hour    $20 per hour    $40 per hour
Center (rental                  $5 per table    $5 per table    $5 per table
of the                          set (1 table +  set (1 table +  set (1 table +
Community       *No charge      8 chairs)       8 chairs)       8 chairs)
Center does not                 $5 per 12       $5 per 12       $5 per 12
include use of                  chairs          chairs          chairs
the kitchen)                    $10 sound       $10 sound       $10 sound
                                system          system          system
Fire Station    *No charge      Not available   Not available   Not available
Library
(Commercial
groups only-                    See library     See library
all others      *No charge      policy          policy          $40 per hour
please refer to
library meeting
room policy)
                From date of pool opening to June 30
                Monday-Saturday (up to 200 people), 8:30 p.m. – 10:00 p.m.:
                $350
                Tuesday-Saturday, 6:30 - 8:00 p.m.: $350; or 6:30 - 10:00 p.m.:
                $700
                Groups over 200 people will be charged an additional $1 per
                person
                July 1 to pool closing
                Monday-Thursday (up to 200 people), 8:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.:
                $400
                Tuesday - Thursday, 6:30 - 8:00 p.m.: $400; or 6:30 - 10:00
Outdoor pool    p.m.: $800
               Friday & Saturday, 6:30 - 8:00 p.m.: $500
                Friday-Saturday, 8:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.: $500
                Friday-Saturday, 6:30 p.m. - 10:00 p.m.: $1,000
                Groups over 200 people will be charged an additional $1 per
                person
                Swim Meets: $750
                All times must be arranged and approved through the Recreation
                Division. Online registrations for swim meets are not available
                Marketing and Promotions
                The Recreation/Pool Division may have discretion from time to
                time to offer promotions to help market and increase activity
                at the pool. Any promotions offered will be reported to the
                Mayor and City Council.
NOTES TO TABLE:
*This does not apply to city events and training or approved city-sponsored
events. Government agencies charging registration fees for their events will be
charged $20 per hour.
Cleaning costs/property damage deposits may be required for facility rentals
which may be refunded upon post event inspection.
 
(Prior Code, § 3.03.070) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015; Ord. 15-18, passed 10-
15-2015; Ord. 20-02, passed 3-5-2020; Ord. 20-19, passed 11-5-2020; Ord. 21-15,
passed 11-15-2021; Ord. 23-19, passed 8-17-2023)
NAMING AND RENAMING OF CITY FACILITIES
§ 91.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish criteria, guidelines and
procedures for the naming and renaming of certain city owned real property,
facilities and amenities, which are collectively referred to in this subchapter
as “city facilities”.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.010) (Ord. 20-13, passed 7-2-2020)
§ 91.021 SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall only apply to the naming or renaming of certain
city facilities, as defined or identified under this subchapter.
   (B)   As used in this subchapter, CITY FACILITIES are defined as any
buildings, parks, cultural arts and recreational facilities and other
infrastructure, that are solely owned by the city and have a fair market value
of more than $30,000.
   (C)   This subchapter shall not apply to the naming or renaming of the
following city facilities:
      (1)   Any street;
      (2)   Any monuments, historical markers, statues, plaques or other
similar objects located on city property; and
      (3)   Any building the city leases to a tenant who places that tenant’s
name or information on such building consistent with lease terms.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.020) (Ord. 20-13, passed 7-2-2020)
§ 91.022 NAMING OR RENAMING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city that the naming or renaming of any city
facility shall be mutually accomplished through joint cooperation of the Mayor
and City Council.
   (B)   Accordingly, an ordinance naming or renaming any city facility
described in this subchapter shall only be adopted consistent with a joint
resolution of the City Council and the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.030) (Ord. 20-13, passed 7-2-2020)
§ 91.023 NAMING OR RENAMING CRITERIA.
   The criteria set forth in this section may be considered by the City Council
and Mayor in determining whether to name or rename a city facility. Additional
criteria may also be considered by the City Council and Mayor, as may be deemed
appropriate.
   (A)   (1)   The following accomplishments, achievements and circumstances
may be considered when evaluating any proposal to name or rename a city
facility after any individual or group of individuals:
         (a)   Extraordinary civic contribution to the community;
         (b)   Loss of life in the line of duty while serving as a city
employee;
         (c)   Loss of life and/or performing a heroic act while serving in any
branch of the United States armed forces;
         (d)   Widespread recognition as a national or historical figure; and
         (e)   Contributions of significant cost of acquisition and/or
development of a specific city facility.
      (2)   The naming of a city facility for a deceased person will generally
not be considered until at least one year after the date of death.
   (B)   The following accomplishments, achievements and circumstances may be
considered when evaluating any proposal to name or rename a city facility after
any organization, including any non-profit or for-profit entity:
      (1)   Extraordinary civic contribution to the community; and
      (2)   Contributions of significant cost of acquisition and/or development
of a specific city facility.
   (C)   Any city facility may be appropriately named or renamed after an event
(or series of events) with cultural or historical significance; provided, such
event has a meaningful and direct nexus to the city.
   (D)   Any city facility may be appropriately named after adjacent or nearby
streets, landmarks, neighborhoods or other similarly identifiable geographic
areas.
   (E)   With regard to naming or renaming a city facility after any
individual:
      (1)   The individual should not be an incumbent elected or appointed
official in local, state or federal government;
      (2)   The individual should not have been convicted of a felony; and
      (3)   The city shall obtain, or shall make a reasonable attempt to
obtain, consent from such individual or, if such individual is deceased or
cannot be contacted, from members of the individual’s family.
   (F)   City facilities should not be given any name that may:
      (1)   Cause confusion due to duplication of, or similarity to, an
existing named city facility or location within the city;
      (2)   Include or may be associated with the name of:
         (a)   Any individual, group of individuals or organization commonly
associated with tobacco, alcohol, obscenity or any sexually oriented business
or activity;
         (b)   Any religious or political organization, unless the name relates
to a historic or civic contribution of such organization; or
         (c)   Any religious leader, unless such leader is being honored or
recognized solely for the leader’s civic contribution.
      (3)   Have an inappropriate acronym, short form or modification;
      (4)   Is discriminatory, derogatory or offensive;
      (5)   Relates to or may create a controversial event or situation; and
      (6)   Recognizes a single individual for a contribution similar or
identical to a contribution made by others within a particular group associated
with that individual.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.040) (Ord. 20-13, passed 7-2-2020)
§ 91.024 REVISION, ADDITION, REVOCATION OR REMOVAL OF NAMES.
   (A)   The naming or renaming of such city facility shall not be deemed as
permanent nor exclusive, nor shall it constitute a property interest owned by
any person or organization.
   (B)   Names may be revised or added to any city facility pursuant to the
criteria, guidelines and procedures of this subchapter.
   (C)   The ordinance approving the naming or renaming of a city facility may
include a sunset provision under which the name will be removed from the city
facility at the end of a specified period of time or upon a particular date. In
the event the ordinance fails to include such a sunset provision, the naming or
renaming of such city facility shall endure until modified.
   (D)   When a city facility is removed, replaced or destroyed, the name of
the city facility shall cease to endure unless renamed pursuant to this
section.
   (E)   Upon circumstances arising after naming that would cast a negative
image upon the city, the name of any city facility may be immediately revoked
at the sole discretion of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.050) (Ord. 20-13, passed 7-2-2020)
§ 91.025 SPONSORSHIP NAMING.
   (A)   The Mayor may, on behalf of the city, with the approval of the City
Council, enter into a sponsorship naming agreement with an individual, group of
individuals or organization under which a city facility specifically used to
promote cultural arts or recreation is named or renamed in exchange for cash or
other significant contributions to the city. Any such agreement must be in
writing, and the naming or renaming of any city facility pursuant to such
agreement must comply with the naming criteria of this chapter. The written
agreement must be specifically referenced in the joint resolution approving
such naming or renaming. The sponsorship naming agreement must:
      (1)   Describe the consideration given in exchange for naming rights;
      (2)   If deemed necessary, provide for an endowment fund or other
financial resources sufficient to pay the city facility’s ongoing maintenance
costs;
      (3)   State that the city reserves the right to immediately and
unilaterally remove the city facility name should the city learn or otherwise
determine that the individual, group of individuals or organization (including
any owner, officer or director of such organization) has engaged in conduct or
activities deemed contrary to community standards of justice, honesty or good
morals, or has breached the sponsorship naming agreement;
      (4)   Specify the circumstances under which the agreement may be
terminated;
      (5)   Specify the exact length of time the city facility name will be
used. A sponsorship naming right should not endure in perpetuity and is subject
to renaming, except as limited in the sponsorship naming agreement; and
      (6)   Be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney’s office prior to
execution by the mayor. A sponsorship naming agreement signed by the Mayor is
subject to and contingent upon adoption of a joint resolution and ordinance
pursuant to this subchapter to name the city facility.
   (B)   The donation of land, facilities or funds for the acquisition,
renovation or maintenance of any real property, facilities, amenities or any
other resources directly or indirectly related to any city facility shall not
constitute an obligation by the city to name such city facility, or any portion
thereof, after any individual, group of individuals or organization, except as
set forth in a sponsorship naming agreement executed and approved pursuant to
this section.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.060) (Ord. 20-13, passed 7-2-2020)
AIRPORT
§ 91.040 GOVERNING LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   The adopted Brigham City Municipal Airport Master Plan, Brigham City
Regional Airport Rules, Regulations and Minimum Standards and Airport Overlay
Zones as amended shall serve as the governing land use regulations for the
Brigham City Regional Airport.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.010) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015)
§ 91.041 AIRPORT MASTER PLAN.
   There is hereby adopted by the City Council an “Airport Master Plan” to
guide decision makers, airport users and the general public for implementing
airport development actions in an effort to provide an attainable phased
development plan concept that will satisfy the airport’s needs in a safe,
efficient, economical and environmentally sound manner.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.020) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015)
§ 91.042 AIRPORT RULES, REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City Council the manual entitled
Brigham City Regional Airport Rules, Regulations and Minimum Standards most
current edition, containing certain rules, regulations and minimum standards
for the management, government and use of the airport and to ensure the
continued viability and safety of the airport for its users and for the
citizens of the city.
   (B)   Any amendments, modifications, supplements or later editions of said
manual shall constitute the manual then in effect under this subchapter;
provided, however, that, before any later editions shall take effect, the City
Council, by resolution, shall certify that the later editions are available and
one copy of all amendments, modifications, supplements or later editions shall
be filed for examination and use by the public in the office of the City
Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.030) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015)
§ 91.043 AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONES.
   There is hereby adopted by the City Council airport overlay zones, where
certain zone are created and established to reinforce and implement specific
provisions of the Airport Master Plan. The Airport Zones are located within
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.040) (Ord. 15-08, passed 5-7-2015)
CEMETERY
§ 91.055 SEXTON; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Under the supervision of the Director of Public Works, the cemetery
sexton shall take charge of the cemetery, to supervise the work, care,
maintenance, improvement and the beautifying of the grounds thereof; and to dig
or cause to be dug, all graves required for the burial of the dead therein, to
keep a record of burials and removals and to take charge of all funeral
corteges while in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.010)
   (B)   The cemetery sexton may, with the approval of the Council, make such
rules and regulations for the government of the cemetery, not in conflict
herewith, as shall from time to time prove necessary.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.020)
(Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.056 BURIAL PERMIT.
   (A)   A 24-hour notice is required for burials. Before burying the body of
any deceased person in the city cemetery, there shall be procured from the
sexton a permit to bury the deceased person in such lot, block and plat as may
be designated. Permit fees as established by resolution of the City Council
will be assessed and collected by the sexton. Special requests or requirements
may be handled with the cemetery sexton. Vaults are required for all casket
burials. Vaults shall be of concrete, steel or other structurally sound
material as approved by the cemetery sexton.
   (B)   It is normal practice to allow only one burial per space; however,
double burials can be accommodated provided one of the deceased has been
cremated.
   (C)   Burials will not be permitted on Sunday, observed city holidays, the
Saturday before Memorial Day or the Friday and Saturday of Peach Days.
   (D)   Designated areas on the cemetery plats are set aside for interment of
infants. No remains, other than those of infants, shall be permitted in those
designated areas.
   (E)   Fees for cemetery services may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.030) (Ord. 05-22, passed 9-29-2005; Ord. 18-09, passed 8-2-
2018; Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.057 INFORMATION TO BE OBTAINED BY SEXTON BEFORE BURIAL.
   (A)   Before burying any remains in the city cemetery, the cemetery sexton
shall require the funeral director or persons having charge of the remains to
furnish in writing a statement of the death, giving the name of the person
deceased; with the names of parents and/or spouse; date and place of birth;
date and place of death; and the plat, block and lot where the person is to be
buried. The sexton shall keep a record of and shall report such information to
the City Recorder.
   (B)   Information for all interments must be submitted in written form. In
extenuating circumstances, information may be given by telephone. Information
given by telephone will be taken with particular care, all such orders must be
confirmed in writing.
   (C)   The cemetery shall not be responsible for any mistakes occurring from
the lack of precise and correct information provided by the lot owner or
owner's representative as to the proper space in the lot where interment is
desired. When information regarding the location of a grave on a lot cannot be
obtained, is indefinite, or for any reason the grave cannot be opened where
specified, the cemetery sexton may, at his or her discretion, after
notification of the owner or representative and the funeral director, open it
in such location on the lot as he or she deems best and proper, so as not to
delay the funeral and affect the interment.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.040) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.058 SALE OF CERTIFICATES OF BURIAL RIGHTS.
   (A)   The cemetery sexton is hereby empowered to sell certificates of burial
rights and to collect prior to burial all amounts arising from such sales. A
certificate describing said rights, including the location, with the price
thereof shall be given each purchaser. The fees for certificates of burial
rights shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The charges for certificate of burial rights include perpetual care
fee for full size spaces and niches and for designated areas on the cemetery
plat set aside for interments of infants. Perpetual care fees are considered
paid in full at the time of interment. Transfers of certificates of burial
rights shall be allowed and the sexton shall collect a fee for the
administrative costs of making such transfer.
   (C)   The City retains title to the cemetery property. A maximum of eight
lots can be purchased by any one individual. A certificate of burial rights
will be issued to each purchaser after fees are paid in full.
   (D)   Burial rights are conveyed to the person or persons named therein and
their heirs perpetually. All legal heirs are presumed to have legal claim to
the rights of burial unless specified differently in a verified legal will, a
recorded trust, or by a probate court's order. Burials by or of heirs, after
the original parties named on burial certificates are deceased, requires the
permission of all living heirs, in writing, on forms supplied by the sexton, or
by a probate court's order.
   (E)   The cemetery master file is considered the correct record. Any
discrepancy between the master file and the certificate of burial rights will
be considered a clerical error. The city reserves the right to recall, correct
and reissue the correct certificates.
   (F)   Unused lots that have been unused or have no written notices of claim
or interest on, for more than 60 years will be reclaimed by the city. Brigham
City will follow State Code when reclaiming cemetery lots.
   (G)   If a reverted certificate of title or right to a lot is presented
later the legal holder is entitled to be compensated at the buyback price
established by resolution of the City Council. All proceeds of the resale of
reverted property will be replaced in the perpetual care fund (Chapter 5, Title
8 Utah Code Annotated, 1953).
   (H)   Purchase of unused lots by the city. The city may buy back unused lots
when directed by the owner or by authorized living heirs at the buyback price
established by resolution of the City Council. The certificate of burial rights
must be turned in or other document proof of ownership must be given to the
cemetery sexton before the transaction can be accomplished.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.050) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.059 PERPETUAL CARE FUND.
   (A)   The fees which are collected for the Perpetual Care Fund shall be
deposited in an account and separately receipted by the city. No withdrawals of
any deposited amounts may take place other than for the maintenance and care of
the cemetery, or for growth/development of the cemetery approved by ordinance
of the City Council, or otherwise allowed by law. As part of the annual budget
process, the city may budget and withdraw from said account the interest which
accrues annually and said interest may be used to offset the expense of
maintenance at the cemetery.
   (B)   Perpetual care shall consist of the care and maintenance at the
cemetery generally. This would include such care as mowing, trimming, watering
and the like, but shall not include any repairs or maintenance of markers,
monuments or memorial structures of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.060) (Ord. 23-17, passed 7-20-2023; Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-
2024)
§ 91.060 BURIAL IN CEMETERY REQUIRED. PERMISSION REQUIRED TO ESTABLISH
CEMETERY; PERMIT TO BURY IN ANOTHER’S LOT REQUIRED.
   No person shall be allowed to bury the dead within the limits of the city,
except in the cemetery, and no cemetery shall be established unless by
permission of the Council. No person, except the owner of the lot upon which
interment is to be made, shall bury in the city cemetery without first
obtaining a written permit from the owner of the lot, upon blank forms to be
furnished by the city, which permit shall be filed with the cemetery sexton.
All burials shall be in vaults approved by the sexton.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.070) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 91.061 CEMETERY HOURS OF OPERATION FOR INTERMENTS AND BURIALS.
   Hours will be set by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.080) (Ord. 18-09, passed 8-2-2018; Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-
2024)
§ 91.062 DISINTERMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall disinter any remains buried in the cemetery, except
under the direction of the cemetery sexton. All disinterments shall comply with
applicable state law.
   (B)   Fees will be set by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.090) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 91.063 PERMITS TO BE FILED WITH CITY RECORDER.
   The cemetery sexton shall file all permits, whether for burial or
disinterment, with the City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.100) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.064 TEMPORARY MARKERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   The owners of lots or relatives of deceased persons buried in
the city cemetery are hereby required to place temporary markers at the heads
of graves at the time of burial, with the name of the deceased plainly
inscribed thereon.
      (2)   All markers shall be of a suitable material and be erected
according to regulations of the cemetery.
      (3)   Temporary markers shall be allowed for only a period of six months
(unless an extension is granted by the sexton) at which time they shall be
replaced with a permanent headstone. Once permanent headstones are placed the
temporary marker will be removed.
   (B)   The city and its employees shall have no liability for any damage to
any headstone or temporary markers, except such as may occur as a direct result
of maintenance of other activities by city employees.
   (C)   Prior to the installation of any headstone or temporary marker, the
sexton shall collect the established fees, which fees shall be paid into the
Perpetual Care Fund and shall be in addition to any other fees set forth in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.110) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.065 MONUMENT, HEADSTONE OR MARKER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No permanent headstones or markers of marble or granite or other rock
construction shall be installed in the cemetery without also installing a
foundation of cement, solid rock or other suitable material as approved by the
sexton around such headstone or marker six inches in width, which border shall
be flush with the lawn so that the lawn may be cut conveniently without contact
with the headstones or markers. All permanent vases must be attached to the
monument, stone base, or cast into the ends of the concrete border. No open
holes in the concrete base will be accepted as flower vases. No vases separate
from the memorial will be permitted.
   (B)   All monuments must be placed within the boundary of the grave or
graves of the owner in conformity with established rows. Monuments, including
foundations, shall not exceed 42 inches in height, nor be wider than 28 inches,
including the six inches of foundation that extends beyond the headstone.
   (C)   Flat markers, level with the ground, with approval of the cemetery
sexton, may be installed between established rows. No flower vases or
containers, permanent or otherwise, will be permitted on these markers.
Cemetery allows one raised marker and one flat marker on one grave.
   (D)   All monument dealers that install a headstone that do not comply with
the standards stated above will have 30 days to remedy the non-compliance.
Brigham City reserves the right to prohibit future monument installation by the
violating monument dealers that do not comply, until the previous violation(s)
have been corrected.
   (E)   Interference with excavation. The owner or responsible party is
responsible for the removal and replacement of a marker that must be removed
for the excavation of a grave or for the expenses of such services if
contracted. If the owner or responsible party wishes, the city will arrange for
the services with a local monument company, at the owner's expense.
   (F)   Veterans Crosses are available from local veteran groups and may be
installed in or on the permanent cement base of a monument. Crosses can be
installed on the north and south side of the foundation. Upkeep and maintenance
are the responsibility of the monument owner. The cemetery staff will repair
crosses damaged due to maintenance.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.120) (Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 91.066 CREMATIONS OR CREMATION WALL IN MEDITATION GARDEN.
   (A)   Up to four cremations can be accommodated in a full-size grave.
Cremation vaults are not required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stick, fasten, wire or otherwise attach any balloon, decoration or flowers on
top of the cremation wall or columbarium or on the face of the niche cremation
wall or columbarium, except flowers are permitted in rosebud vases that are
built into or attached professionally on niche face plates. Modifications to
the wall must be approved by the cemetery sexton. Cremation urns shall be 10 ½
inches by 10 ½ inches or smaller.
   (B)   Flowers or decorations are not permitted around the base of the
columbarium, walkways, or niche cremation wall.
   (C)   Face plate engraving, etching or brass name plate mounting, font,
style, and pictures, flush mounted and not protruding beyond the flat surface
of the face plate, are permitted and are the responsibility of the cremation
owner.
   (D)   Decorations, flowers and general clean up. No person shall erect a
fence, or planting of trees, flowers, shrubs, or any other obstructions upon
cemetery grounds without authorization from the cemetery sexton. Any such
obstructions shall be removed under the direction of the cemetery sexton. All
flowers, real or artificial, must be placed in a container or attached to the
monument. Flowers in movable containers must be placed on the headstone or base
to ensure easy access for grass cutting. No glass containers are permitted. Any
objects, such as wires, irons, sticks, or pegs, driven into the ground are not
permitted. Any object or decoration not in compliance will be removed
immediately. Flowers on monuments between designated rows are not permitted
except on Memorial Day.
   (E)   The cemetery allows the use of shepherd hooks and vertical structures
or decorations the week of Memorial Day and from November first through March
first only. Shepherd hooks and vertical structures will not be allowed during
the lawn maintenance season.
   (F)   The cemetery crew will remove decorations of flowers on new graves
after seven days. After the burial is completed, the funeral flowers will be
placed at the center of the grave. Flowers are laid down to prevent them being
blown around the cemetery by canyon winds.
   (G)   General clean-up will consist of all flowers and decorations not in
permanent containers and those that are wilted or damaged in permanent
containers will be removed during the last week of March and the first week of
April each year. Any faded artificial flowers will be removed and discarded.
All flowers and decorations picked up are disposed of. Those who bring in
decorations intended for use during the entire year are encouraged to wait
until the spring clean-up is completed before freshening up their displays.
Throughout the summer, unsightly or wilted decorations will be removed to
maintain the beauty of the cemetery.
   (H)   Animals must be on a leash at all times. The owner of the properly
restrained animal is responsible to remove any fecal matter the animal deposits
on cemetery property.
(Prior Code, § 8.01.160) (Ord. 05-22, passed 9-29-2005; Ord. 19-16, passed 9-
19-2019; Ord. 24-18, passed 6-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
LIBRARY
§ 91.080 PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.
   There is established the Brigham City Public Library, deeded to the city on
4-1-1913. The library shall be free to the use of the inhabitants of the city,
subject to the rules adopted by the Library Board of Trustees in accordance
with state law.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18.01) (Ord. 22-21, passed 9-15-2022)
§ 91.081 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Library Board of Trustees of
the Brigham City Public Library in accordance with U.C.A. § 9-7-4.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18.02)
      (1)   Compliance. The Library Board shall follow the state’s Open and
Public Meetings Act. The members of the Library Board are appointed officials
of the city and shall comply with the terms of the state’s Municipal Officers
and Employees Ethics Act, U.C.A. §§ 10-3-1301 through 10-3-1312, as currently
enacted or as it may be amended.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.010)
      (2)   Appointments.
         (a)   The Library Board shall consist of the following voting members:
            1.   Six Trustees, appointed by the Mayor of the city and approved
by the City Council, who are residents of the city, based on their fitness for
the office; and
            2.   One member of the City Council. Only one member of the city
governing body may be, at any one time, a member of the Library Board.
         (b)   Appointments shall be made annually prior to July 1.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.020)
      (3)   By-laws. The Library Board shall establish by-laws not inconsistent
with the law.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.030)
      (4)   Compensation and expenses. Each trustee shall serve without
compensation, but their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties may be paid from library funds in
accordance with U.C.A. § 9-7-402.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.040)
      (5)   Terms; organization; removal from office; vacancies.
         (a)   Each Trustee shall be appointed for a three-year term, or until
the successor to that trustee is appointed. Initially, appointments shall be
made for one-, two- and three-year terms. Annually thereafter, the city
governing body shall, before July 1 of each year, appoint for a three-year term
Trustees to take the place of the retiring trustees.
         (b)   Trustees shall serve not more than two consecutive full terms.
         (c)   The Trustees shall annually select a Chairperson and other
officers.
         (d)   The city governing body may remove any Trustee for misconduct or
neglect of duty.
         (e)   Vacancies in the Library Board shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as original appointments.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.050)
      (6)   Legal counsel. The city shall furnish legal counsel to the Board to
provide members with general legal advice concerning matters before them for
consideration. Board members shall be represented by legal counsel at the
library’s expense in all matters arising from service within the scope of their
duties in accordance with Utah Code.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.060)
   (B)   (1)   Basic duties. In adherence to U.C.A. § 9-7-404, the Library
Board shall:
         (a)   Maintain and care for the library by making recommendations for
the upkeep of its facilities and by participating in the financial planning to
find funds for associated costs;
         (b)   Establish policies for its operation; and
         (c)   In general, carry out the spirit and intent of the provisions
set forth in the Utah Code Annotated.
(Prior Code, § 18.04.010)
      (2)   Rules for the use of the library. In accordance with U.C.A. § 9-7-
405, the Library Board shall make, amend and repeal rules, not inconsistent
with law, for the governing of the library, as the Library Board deems
appropriate for public library service in the city. These include all rules and
policies governing the use of the library’s services to the public, including,
but not limited to, all fines and fees related to library programs and services
as set by resolution by the Library Board.
(Prior Code, § 18.04.020)
      (3)   Reports to City Council and the Director of the state’s Library
Division.
         (a)   The Library Board shall provide an annual report to the Mayor
and City Council on the condition and operation of the library.
         (b)   The Library Board shall provide an annual report that contains
information required by the state’s Library Board.
(Prior Code, § 18.04.030)
      (4)   Appointment of Library Director.
         (a)   The Library Director shall be appointed by the Library Board
with advice of the Mayor or their designee(s) to run the day-to-day operations
of the Brigham City Library.
         (b)   Upon appointment and confirmation, the Library Director shall:
            1.   Be an employee of the city:
               a.   The Library Director shall be an exempt employee of the
city;
               b.   The Library Director shall be assigned compensation and
benefits in accordance with Brigham City Employee Policy and Procedures, and
applicable wage studies, during the hiring process;
               c.   The Library Director shall be accountable to the City
Administrator or designee for the performance of the Brigham City Library and
its employees; and
               d.   The Library Director shall be subject to discipline up to
and including termination in accordance with Brigham City Employee Policy and
Procedures.
            2.   Have the following duties:
               a.   The Library Director shall manage the day-to-day operations
of the library; and
               b.   The Library Director shall act as the executive officer of
the Library Board.
(Prior Code, § 18.04.040)
      (5)   Appointment of other personnel. The Library Board shall appoint,
upon the recommendation of the Library Director, other personnel as needed.
Personnel shall be selected in accordance with the city’s hiring process at the
recommendation of the Library Director and with the approval of the Mayor and
the City Administrator. New hires will be announced at the next Library Board
meeting, for ratification.
         (a)   All library personnel, appointed or otherwise, qualify for
compensation, benefits and the like, as the city provides to all city employees
in accordance with the library’s budget and the Brigham City Employee Policy
Manual.
         (b)   Library personnel are subject to the employee and administrative
policies of the city and the policies of the library.
(Prior Code, § 18.04.050)
      (6)   Advising the City Council. The Library Board shall make
recommendations to and advise the City Council on matters before the Council
which affect the library.
(Prior Code, § 18.04.060)
§ 91.082 LIBRARY FUND.
   (A)   Accounting for the Library Fund.
      (1)   All funds that are in any manner received for the library shall be
deposited in an account maintained by the city, in accordance with state law,
said funds shall be used for the sole purpose of the library.
      (2)   The expenditure of money for the benefit of the library shall be
made in accordance with city’s procurement policy regardless of the source of
the money.
(Prior Code, § 18.03.010)
   (B)   Annual library budget and Library Fund responsibilities of the Library
Board of Trustees. The Library Board shall:
      (1)   Work with the Library Director each fiscal year to plan a budget.
This budget plan shall advise the Mayor of upcoming library needs and budget
recommendations for the use of money from the Library Fund, including donated
funds, during the upcoming fiscal year. These recommendations shall be
submitted to the Mayor for consideration and approval by the City Council;
      (2)   Authorize the Library Director to endorse expenditures within
amounts designated in the budget through the city’s approval process for
expenditures being paid from the Library Fund;
      (3)   Review such expenditures after the Library Director and the city’s
Finance Director have approved said expenditures;
      (4)   Make recommendations for the approval of the construction, lease or
sale of library buildings and land for the benefit of the library, subject to
final approval of the City Council;
      (5)   Maintain and care for the library consistent with the city’s
policies and procedures on facilities; and
      (6)   Make recommendations for the approval of the purchase, lease or
sale of library land and/or buildings, for the benefit of the library, subject
to final approval by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.03.020)
§ 91.083 DONATIONS OF MONEY OR PROPERTY.
   All donations on behalf of the library shall be held in accordance with
state law, and in accordance with the Library Board’s policies and procedures.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18.05)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS; RECREATION
Section
Administration and Enforcement
   
92.001   Parks Supervision
   
92.002   Recreation Manager
   
92.003   Aquatics Supervisor
   
92.004   Committees and commissions
   
92.005   Authority to make rules
   
92.006   Food and beverage concessions
   
92.007   Temporary closure of parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities
Reservation of Facilities
   
92.020   For bowery facilities
   
92.021   For special events
   
92.022   For sporting events
Prohibited Activities and Unlawful Conduct
   
92.035   Storm water and flood detention basin
   
92.036   Public elimination
   
92.037   Use of restroom facilities and drinking fountains
   
92.038   Restrictions on animals
   
92.039   Film, video, camera or picture-taking device
   
92.040   Consumption of alcohol
   
92.041   Firearms and explosives
   
92.042   Sprinkling systems
   
92.043   Excessive noise
   
92.044   Unlawful conduct
   
92.045   Defacing or destruction of property
   
92.046   Fires
   
92.047   Sledding and the like
   
92.048   Roads, trails, paths and pathways
   
92.049   Swimming and wading in lakes, ponds or streams
   
92.050   Distribution of advertising material and sales
   
92.051   Restrictions on certain recreational activities
   
92.052   Littering
   
92.053   Limitation on certain activities on the bridge at Pioneer Park
   
92.054   Bounce houses and inflatables
   
92.055   Motor vehicle restrictions
   
92.056   Eagle Mountain Golf Course
Camping in Undesignated Areas
   
92.070   Purpose and scope
   
92.071   Definitions
   
92.072   Unlawful camping
   
92.073   Exemption for certain special events
   
92.074   Removal of unlawful campsite
   
92.075   Removal, disposition and release of personal property
   
92.076   Enforcement
 
   
92.999   Penalty
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.001 PARKS SUPERVISION.
   Under the supervision of the Public Works Director, city personnel shall
take charge of and supervise the work, care, maintenance, improvement and
beautifying of all public parks, playgrounds, ballfields, trails and parkways
in the city.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.010) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008)
§ 92.002 RECREATION MANAGER.
   The Recreation Manager shall take charge and supervise leisure activities,
programming and special events for the purpose of physical and mental
improvement of participants.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.020) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-
18-2024)
§ 92.003 AQUATICS SUPERVISOR.
    Under the supervision of the Recreation Manager, the Aquatics Supervisor
shall coordinate the operation of the Municipal Swimming Pool.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.030) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-
18-2024)
§ 92.004 COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
    The Public Works Director or their designee shall be subject to appointment
on committees or commissions as directed by the City Administrator or the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.040) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-
18-2024)
§ 92.005 AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designees, with the help of
authorized commissions or committees, may adopt or recommend the adopting of
rules, regulations and where necessary, ordinances, for the use, care and
governing of their respective areas of responsibility with the approval of the
City Council.
   (B)   Rules and regulations shall be consistent with this chapter and other
city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.050) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008)
§ 92.006 FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONCESSIONS.
    The Community Development Department in coordination with the
Administration Department shall have control over all business licenses for
concession stands or dispensaries that sell any food or beverage items to the
public in any public park, playground or recreational facility and, before any
concession shall be permitted in any public park, playground or recreational
facility, an approval from the Public Works Director must be obtained and a
license purchased from the city’s License Department for the operation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.060) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-
15-2018; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-18-2024)
§ 92.007 TEMPORARY CLOSURE OF PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall have the authority to
temporarily close and/or restrict access to any park, playground or
recreational facility, or any portion thereof when such closure and/or
restriction is determined to be necessary for:
   (A)   The reasonable and proper protection of the park, playground or
recreational facility;
   (B)   The reasonable and proper protection of city residents or any other
potential user from any existing or potential hazard; and/or
   (C)   Any other emergency circumstance or situation which may arise.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.070) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008)
RESERVATION OF FACILITIES
§ 92.020 FOR BOWERY FACILITIES.
   Any individual or organization desiring to reserve the use of bowery
facilities at any of the public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities
within the city may do so by making his, her or their reservation through the
appropriate city office and paying the fees established by resolution of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.010) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008)
§ 92.021 FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   A special events permit, issued in accordance with city resolution, shall be
required for any use of any public park, playground or recreational facility
which constitutes a special event, as defined by city resolution.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.020) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008)
§ 92.022 FOR SPORTING EVENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Public Works Department shall have control over all use of
all public parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities for sporting and
special events.
      (2)   Accordingly, all public parks, playgrounds and recreational
facilities shall be reserved for use according to the policies of the city and
based on availability and priority.
      (3)    The Public Works Department reserves the right to cancel any
scheduled activity due to conditions or circumstances that are determined to be
unsafe or in conflict with city ordinances or policies.
   (B)   (1)   No automatic or protected right based upon previous use, to use
any public park, playground or recreational facilities, shall be granted.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to deny use of any public park,
playground or recreational facilities to any user that, in the city’s opinion,
has had public relations or financial problems, has previously misused or
abused facilities or property, has administered its programs or events in such
a way to cause discredit to the city, or has not paid all fees due or past due.
   (C)   Reservation and use of any public parks, playgrounds and recreational
facilities for sporting and special events shall also be governed or regulated
by policy.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.030) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-
15-2018; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-18-2024)
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND UNLAWFUL CONDUCT
§ 92.035 STORM WATER AND FLOOD DETENTION BASIN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into a storm water or flood
detention basin when there is water present in it. For purposes of this
section, STORM WATER AND FLOOD DETENTION BASIN shall mean those structures and
improvements designed and maintained for the purpose of temporarily controlling
storm and flood water run-off.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.010) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.036 PUBLIC ELIMINATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate, urinate or defecate at
any public park, cemetery, playground or other recreational facility, except
into a toilet provided for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.020) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.037 USE OF RESTROOM FACILITIES AND DRINKING FOUNTAINS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to put any object in any sinks, toilets
or drinking fountains, which is not normally used in those receptacles, which
is reasonably likely to clog or plug the plumbing.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.030) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-
18-2024) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.038 RESTRICTIONS ON ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog to enter or
remain in a public park, playground or recreational facility unless it is led
by a leash of suitable strength, not more than six feet in length.
   (B)   Any owner or person having control of a dog must properly dispose in a
waste receptacle or other designated place, any waste left by such dog in the
public park, playground or recreational facility.
   (C)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, no person
shall at any time, lead or let loose any of the bovine species, any horse,
mule, goat, sheep, swine, cat or fowl of any kind within a public park,
playground or other recreational facility.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse or
other animal in any public park, playground or recreational facility, unless
specifically authorized by the city.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch or fasten any horse or
other animal to any tree or other place or structure in any public park,
playground or recreational facility not especially designated and provided for
such purpose.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to annoy, injure or in any way
interfere with any bird or animal in any public park, playground or
recreational, unless conducted by the city as a nuisance management act.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.040) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.039 FILM, VIDEO, CAMERA OR PICTURE-TAKING DEVICE.
   (A)   I It shall be unlawful for any person to film, video or take pictures
with any device within any public restroom, locker room or swimming pool.
   (B)   The Recreation Manager may authorize such activities for special
occasions at the city’s public swimming pool.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.050) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-
18-2024)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.040 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or to
have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage within any public park,
playground or recreational facility, with the exception of:
   (A)   Eagle Mountain Golf Course and in accordance with the established
rules and regulations of the Eagle Mountain Golf Course;
   (B)   As permitted under a special event permit at sports venues at Pioneer
Park and excluding the swimming pool and playground portions of Pioneer Park;
   (C)   As permitted under a special event permit at Watkins Park; and
   (D)   The Academy Conference Center.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.060) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 17-12, passed 8-
3-2017; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-15-2018; Ord. 19-03, passed 2-7-2019) Penalty, see
§
92.999
§ 92.041 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms,
firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, powder or any other fireworks or explosives
in any park or playground. This section is not applicable to a fireworks
display specifically authorized by the city or the management and control of
wildlife under the authority of the Department of Natural Resources.
   (B)   The Community Development Department or designee shall have authority
to perform hazing of the nuisance birds at Pioneer Park and Mayor’s Pond or
other controlled aquatic features under authority of the Department of Natural
Resources.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.070) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.042 SPRINKLING SYSTEMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to adjust or tamper with any sprinklers,
sprinkling valves or sprinkling or irrigation systems at any public park,
playground or recreational facility, without the express consent of the Public
Works Director or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.080) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.043 EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to play or cause to be
played amplified sound or music in any public park, playground or recreational
facility without obtaining a special event permit in accordance with the
provisions of the city code.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining such permit
to ensure that the permit is available for inspection at the location for which
the permission is granted and during the time for which it was granted.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit does not exempt the holder thereof from city
ordinances or the rules and regulations of the Health Department regarding
noise emissions.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.090) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.044 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.
   No person shall engage in fighting or in riotous, boisterous, threatening or
indecent conduct or use any abusive, threatening language in any public park,
playground or recreational facility.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.100) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.045 DEFACING OR DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall cut, break, remove, injure, deface, destroy or disturb any
wood, turf, grass, soil, sand, gravel, tree, shrub, plant, rock, building,
cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property, or
pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant, flower, or mark or
write upon any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure in any
public park, playground or recreational facility.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.110) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.046 FIRES.
   (A)   No person shall make or kindle a fire within any public park,
playground or recreational facility for any purpose, except in a designated
fireplace, fire pit or facility specifically designed and set apart for that
purpose.
   (B)   No hot ashes or briquettes are to be placed in garbage receptacles
located in any public park, playground or recreational facility.
   (C)   Gas grills and other self-contained barbeques may be used within any
public park, playground or recreational facility; provided that, such grills
and self-contained barbeques shall not be placed on picnic tables.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.120) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.047 SLEDDING AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ski, snowboard, sled, toboggan or
ride inner tubes or similar means of descending a hill on snow or ice in any
public park, playground or recreational facility where such uses are prohibited
by posted signs.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.130) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.048 ROADS, TRAILS, PATHS AND PATHWAYS.
   (A)   When a road, trail, path or pathway within a public park, playground
or recreational facility is designated for any specific purpose or purposes,
such as an equestrian trail, bicycle path or other use, then such trail may
only be used for the specific purposes designated or for incidental uses in
connection therewith that are necessary to accomplish the use permitted.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or construct any path or
pathway within any public park, playground or recreational facility without the
express written consent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.140) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.049 SWIMMING AND WADING IN LAKES, PONDS OR STREAMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe or wade in any
lake, pond, fountain or stream located within a public park, cemetery,
playground or recreational facility and not specifically set aside by the city
for that purpose (except that persons fishing may wade where fishing is
allowed).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute the waters of any
fountain, pond, lake or stream located in any public park, cemetery, playground
or recreational facility.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.150) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.050 DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATERIAL AND SALES.
   (A)    No person shall distribute any handbills or circulars, or post, place
or erect any bills, notice paper or advertising device or matter of any kind in
any public park, cemetery, playground or recreational facility, except such as
may be authorized in writing by the City Administrator or designee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to practice, carry on or conduct
any trade, occupation, business or profession, or to sell or offer for sale any
merchandise, article or thing whatsoever within any public park, playground or
recreational facility without being properly authorized and licensed by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.160) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-22, passed 7-
18-2024)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.051 RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the city, it shall be
unlawful for any person within a public park, playground or recreational
facility, to:
      (1)   Hit or throw balls or other hard objects against fences, or against
baseball, soccer or other backstops;
      (2)   Golf or drive golf balls in any park other than Eagle Mountain Golf
Course;
      (3)   Shoot any projectile, paint ball or participate in archery; and
      (4)   Play on or otherwise use an athletic field or ball diamond that has
been prepared by the Parks Division for a scheduled game or tournament.
   (B)   (1)   No digging or staking (with the exception of tents for
authorized tournaments and scout groups) is allowed inside any public park,
playground or recreational facility for any reason (examples: holes for
volleyball standard and the like).
      (2)   No structure of any kind is to be erected in any public park,
playground or recreational facility without the written consent of the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or lodge in any park or
playground without the express approval of the Public Works Director or
designee.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.170) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.052 LITTERING.
   No person shall throw or deposit any bottles, cans, broken glass, nails,
tacks, crockery, wire, paper, clothes, scrap or sheet iron, boxes, boards,
lumber, stone, grass clippings, rubbish or garbage of any kind on the property
of a public park, cemetery, playground or recreational facility, except in
receptacles set out for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.180) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.053 LIMITATION ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES ON THE BRIDGE AT PIONEER PARK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or to push any motor
vehicle, as such are described by the statutes of the state across or upon the
bridge located at the Pioneer Park pond.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle across or upon
the bridge located at Pioneer Park pond. Bicyclists must dismount and push
their bicycles while upon or crossing the bridge.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or walk upon the side
rails of the bridge located at Pioneer Park pond, or to be anywhere upon said
bridge other than the floor portion normally used by pedestrian traffic.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to jump or leap from the bridge located at
Pioneer Park pond.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.190) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.054 BOUNCE HOUSES AND INFLATABLES.
   Use of bounce houses and other inflatables are strictly prohibited in any
city park facility.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.200) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 22-14, passed 7-
7-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.055 MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Speeding. It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor
vehicle within any public park, cemetery, playground or recreational facility
upon any road, trail or pathway at a speed in excess of that posted on the
particular road, trail or pathway. If no speed is posted, then no motor vehicle
shall be operated at a speed in excess of seven mph.
   (B)   Careless, reckless or hazardous operation. No person shall operate a
motor vehicle within a public park, cemetery, playground or recreational
facility, even within the permissible speed limit or within the area designated
for such vehicle’s use, in a careless or reckless manner, or in a manner which
causes significant hazard to life, safety or property, unless authorized by the
city.
   (C)   Operation of motor vehicles in designated areas. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle within a public park, cemetery, playground or
recreational facility in areas not specifically designated and posted by the
city for that particular purpose. This shall not apply, however, to motorized
or self-propelled equipment used by on-duty city or city employees or emergency
personnel for transportation, maintenance or service of facilities, or in
performance of their duties.
   (D)   Parking in no parking areas. No person shall park a motor vehicle in
areas designated as “no parking” areas at any time.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.210) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.056 EAGLE MOUNTAIN GOLF COURSE.
   (A)   No person shall have access onto the Eagle Mountain Golf Course
without being specifically authorized by the city or as provided in division
(C) below.
   (B)    The following activities are specifically prohibited access to the
golf course unless the city grants special permission:
      (1)   Jogging, running, and walking;
      (2)   Golf ball retrieval without paid active golfing;
      (3)   Bicycling, four-wheeling, motorcycling or use of other self-
propelled or motorized vehicles;
      (4)   Skateboarding;
      (5)   Snowmobiling; and
      (6)   Horses and horseback riding.
   (C)   (1)   All individuals who have paid the established “green fees” are
authorized to have access upon the Eagle Mountain Golf Course pursuant to
established golf course rules.
      (2)   In addition, the city may from time to time authorize other
individuals to have access onto the course by:
         (a)   Action of the City Council; and
         (b)   Authority of the golf professional or his or her authorized
agents.
   (D)   The following individuals are authorized by the city to enforce the
terms of this section:
      (1)   The golf professional, or his or her assistant or starters; and
      (2)   Any city police officer or authorized city personnel.
(Prior Code, § 17.03.220) (Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 24-23, passed 8-
1-2024)  Penalty, see §
92.999
CAMPING IN UNDESIGNATED AREAS
§ 92.070 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to maintain public lands, streets,
sidewalks, rights-of-way, creeks, waterways, parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, plazas, open spaces, lots, parcels and other public areas within the
city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter is intended to interfere with otherwise
lawful and ordinary uses of public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.010) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
§ 92.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To do any of the following:
      (1)   Sleep or establish oneself at any time during the day or night in
any of the following:
         (a)   Outdoors, with or without bedding, sleeping bag, blanket,
mattress, tent, hammock or other similar protection, equipment or device; or
         (b)   In, on or under any structure or thing not intended for human
occupancy, whether with or without bedding, sleeping bag, blanket, mattress,
tent, hammock or other similar protection equipment or device.
      (2)   Establish or maintain, outdoors or in, on or under any structure,
object or thing not intended for human occupancy, at any time during day or
night, a temporary or permanent place for sleeping by setting up any bedding,
sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock or other sleeping equipment or
device in such a manner as to be used for sleeping purposes, or by setting up
any cooking equipment, with intent to remain at that location overnight.
   CAMPING PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but not limited to, bedrolls, blankets,
tarpaulins, cots, beds, mattresses, pads, sleeping bags, hammocks, lanterns,
stoves or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.
   CAMPSITE. Any place where bedding, sleeping bag, or other material used for
bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for
the purpose of maintaining a place to dwell or sleep, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any bedding, sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent,
hammock or other sleeping equipment, lean-to, shack or any other structure, or
any vehicle or part thereof.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials onto
public property for the purpose of camping or operating or using camping
facilities.
   HUMAN HABITATION.
      (1)   Any use of camping paraphernalia and/or a campsite establishment.
Evidence of HUMAN HABITATION shall include activities such as sleeping, setting
up housekeeping or cooking among camping paraphernalia, and/or any other
similar activity where it reasonably appears, in light of all the
circumstances, that a person or persons is using the area as a living
accommodation and not for any recreational purposes.
      (2)   The use of a camping paraphernalia on private property for non-
recreational purposes and without permission from the landowner shall per se
constitute HUMAN HABITATION for purposes of this subchapter. Private property
owners and permitted guests using camping paraphernalia on private property for
recreational purposes does not constitute HUMAN HABITATION.
   MAINTAIN. Keeping or permitting self, equipment, supplies or materials to
remain on public property in order to camp or operate or use camping
facilities.
   OPERATE or OPERATING. Participating or assisting in establishing or
maintaining a camp or camping facility.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any tangible items reasonably recognizable as belonging
to a person and having apparent utility or monetary value.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All publicly-owned property including, but not limited to,
public streets, sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-way, creeks, waterways, parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, plazas, open spaces, lots, parcels and other
forms of improved or unimproved land or real property.
   REASONABLE NOTICE. Notice reasonably calculated under all the circumstances
to appraise a person that camping is prohibited at a particular location and,
where personal property is deposited, affording the person time to gather his,
her or their personal property and depart to an available shelter within a
reasonable distance.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.020) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
§ 92.072 UNLAWFUL CAMPING.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person or group of persons to
establish any site for the purpose of human habitation without a special event
permit or approved business license to provide overnight or short-term camping,
to camp, establish or occupy camping facilities, or use camping paraphernalia
within the corporate limits of the city or any of the following areas:
   (A)   Any public property, improved or unimproved, including, but not
limited to, public streets and sidewalks, parks, open space and other property;
   (B)   Public places restricted as day use;
   (C)   Public restroom facilities;
   (D)   Areas established as closed to public use;
   (E)   Within 500 feet of any roadway, highway, freeway, water source, river,
wetland or waterway, pathway or walkway, bridge, rail yard or train tracks;
   (F)   Within 500 feet of:
      (1)   A public or private school grounds;
      (2)   A building, park or other structure which at the time of the act,
being used for an activity sponsored by or through a school or institution; or
      (3)   A preschool or childcare facility.
   (G)   In an area deemed for other public recreational use.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.030) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.073 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   The Mayor or Mayor designee, in his, her or their discretion, may
issue a special event permit to allow camping in connection with this chapter.
Activities and programs the Mayor deems to be in the public interest and shall
not constitute a public nuisance nor be a threat to the public health, safety
or welfare.
   (B)   Ordinary city sponsored outdoor events, special events, parades and
the recreational use of parks such as picnicking and use of designated public
cooking facilities, or resting or sleeping on a blanket that does not involve
camping during normal park hours.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.040) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
§ 92.074 REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL CAMPSITE.
   Upon discovery of a campsite on public property, removal of the campsite by
the authorized agents of the city may occur if:
   (A)   After reasonable notice, the person or persons refuses to remove his,
her or their personal property from the premises;
   (B)   Personal property appears to be abandoned;
   (C)   There is probable cause for law enforcement officials to believe that
illegal activities other than camping are occurring at the campsite; and/or
   (D)   There is immediate danger to human life, health or safety, including,
but not limited to, possible contamination of public or private property by
unsanitary and/or hazardous materials.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.050) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
§ 92.075 REMOVAL, DISPOSITION AND RELEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   Upon removal of a campsite, all litter, including items having no apparent
utility or monetary value and items in an unsanitary condition, may be
immediately discarded. All other personal property shall be gathered, retained
and released, with notice being provided to the property owner, in accordance
with U.C.A. § 72-5-110, or its successor statute, the Forfeiture and
Disposition of Property Act; U.C.A. Title 77, Chapter 24A, Lost or Mislaid
Personal Property; and relevant City Police Department policy.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.060) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
§ 92.076 ENFORCEMENT.
   In enacting this subchapter, it is not the city’s intent to criminalize
camping, nor criminalize homeless persons seeking shelter when shelters are
full or when homeless persons lack reasonable notice of available shelter, nor
violate a person’s constitutional rights. Likewise, the city does not wish to
prohibit city sponsored outdoor events, special events, parades and the
ordinary recreational use of parks such as picnicking and use of designated
public cooking facilities, or resting or sleeping on a blanket that does not
involve camping during normal park hours.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.070) (Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be in violation of §§
92.001 through
92.007,
92.020 through
92.022 and
92.035 through
92.056 of this chapter may be evicted immediately from the public park,
playground or recreational facility.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in and/or return to
any public park, playground or recreational facility after such person has been
given direction from authorized city personnel to leave such public park,
playground or recreational facility.
      (3)   The violation of any of provision of §§
92.001 through
92.007,
92.020 through
92.022 and
92.035 through
92.056 of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.080)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
92.070 through
92.076 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. In addition to
the violation set forth herein, the City Attorney may institute civil actions
to abate a public nuisance under §§
92.070 through
92.076 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.080)
(Ord. 08-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 19-02, passed 1-20-2019)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Title
   
93.002   Definitions
Waste Collection and Disposal
   
93.015   Hazardous waste
   
93.016   Unlawful to collect, transfer or dispose of refuse without a business
license
   
93.017   Unlawful acts
   
93.018   Collection and disposal; duty of owner
   
93.019   Building or demolition contractors
   
93.020   Unlawful dumping
   
93.021   Control of collection, transportation and disposal by supervisor
   
93.022   Residential collections
   
93.023   Special community services
   
93.024   Regulations applicable to city residential collection
   
93.025   Limitations on residential collection
   
93.026   City as a commercial hauler
   
93.027   Business license for commercial haulers
   
93.028   Insurance
   
93.029   Regulations for commercial haulers
   
93.030   Refuse collection containers
   
93.031   Recycling
   
93.032   Regulations for recycling collection
   
93.033   Charges for refuse collection by city
Nuisances
   
93.045   Definitions
   
93.046   Enumeration
   
93.047   Exceptions
   
93.048   Responsibility for nuisances
   
93.049   Nuisance abatement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 TITLE.
   The provisions of this chapter may be cited and referred to as the “Brigham
City Code Chapter on Refuse Management”.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.010) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL COLLECTION. The collection, transportation or disposal of refuse
other than residential.
   COMMERCIAL HAULER. A person, entity or the city when engaged in commercial
collection who collects, transports or disposes of refuse generated in the
city.
   CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION MATERIALS. Refuse from construction or demolition
activities, including wood, brick, stone, rubble, concrete, drywall and other
building materials, but does not include small amounts of such materials that
are susceptible to collection by the regular methods.
   DISPOSE or DISPOSAL. To abandon, deposit, inter or otherwise discard
material as a final action after its use has been achieved or a use is no
longer intended, including the deposition of material at a refuse management
facility.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. A refuse or combination of which is a hazardous waste under
the state’s Solid and Hazardous Waste Act, U.C.A. § 19-6-101, as amended, and
regulations issued under it.
   NIGHT SOIL. The contents from privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks, grease
tanks and water closets.
   OWNER. One or more persons owning an interest in a structure, and includes
tenants and other occupants.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible materials or substances
discarded or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the
owner’s needs at the time of discard or rejection, including, but not limited
to, garbage, industrial and commercial waste, sludge from air or water control
facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue,
demolition and construction debris, discarded automobiles and offal, but not
including sewage and other highly diluted water-carried materials or substances
and those in gaseous form.
   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION. The collection, transportation or disposal of refuse
generated by the occupants of the following units:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings, as defined by
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings, as defined by
Chapter 156of this code of ordinances;
      (3)   Three-family dwellings, as defined by
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances;
      (4)   Four-family dwellings, as defined by
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances; and
      (5)   Condominiums and townhouses, as defined by
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
   REFUSE COLLECTION CONTAINERS. A receptacle with an attached lid or cover of
varying sizes and material capable of collecting refuse and designed to
interact with an automated collection vehicle (except for containers used
solely for recycling collection).
   STRUCTURE. Any building or part thereof in the city whether or not used for
human habitation and includes the parcel of real property upon which it is
located and includes any business or activity occurring in the building or on
the parcel of real property.
   SUPERVISOR. The Supervisor of the city’s Street Division, or his or her
designee.
   UNSANITARY CONDITION. A condition found and determined by any local or State
Health Department to be a health risk to any people or animals.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.020) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 93.015 HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   This chapter does not apply to the generation, transportation, treatment,
storage or disposal of hazardous waste.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.030) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.016 UNLAWFUL TO COLLECT, TRANSFER OR DISPOSE OF REFUSE WITHOUT A BUSINESS
LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person or entity other than the city to collect, transport or dispose of refuse
in the city for profit without a business license thereof.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.040) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.017 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful, and punishable as a Class B misdemeanor, for a person:
   (A)   To use the public streets or other municipal property to collect,
transport, remove, dispose of or deposit refuse in any manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   To tamper or permit an animal under the control of a person to tamper
with any city-owned container or its contents, or to tamper with any other
refuse collection container;
   (C)   To set fire, except when authorized, to refuse on a public street, on
city property, in any refuse collection container, or within any refuse
management facility;
   (D)   To maintain (or cause to be maintained) refuse collection containers
or refuse collection container storage areas in an unsanitary condition;
   (E)   To do or fail to do any act prohibited or required by this chapter;
   (F)   To transport refuse over the public streets of the city without
sufficient restraint or cover to prevent the refuse from escaping from vehicles
or containers onto the public streets;
   (G)   To place for collection by the city any material that is not refuse,
as defined herein, or that is prohibited from collection by the term of this
chapter;
   (H)   To place a refuse collection container on any sidewalk, roadway,
alleyway or parking lot so as to impede pedestrian movement or vehicle traffic;
   (I)   To engage in residential collection. This provision shall not apply to
the city or to a private hauler under contract to the city;
   (J)   To act as a commercial hauler without a business license therefor;
   (K)   For the owner of a structure, which does not qualify to receive
residential refuse collection service, to fail or refuse to contract for
sufficient service from a commercial hauler to remove or otherwise provide for
the removal, in a manner approved by the Supervisor, all refuse generated at
the structure with respect to which he or she is an owner;
   (L)   For the owner of a structure receiving service from a commercial
hauler to fail or refuse to maintain the site of the refuse collection
container in a reasonably clean condition; and/or
   (M)   To place, deposit or dump any type of refuse or waste in or around the
Box Elder Creek Channel.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.050) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.018 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL; DUTY OF OWNER.
   The owner of a structure shall lawfully cause the collection, transportation
and disposal of refuse which has been generated at his or her structure. The
owner of a structure shall not cause or permit putrescible refuse to remain at
his or her structure for more than seven days or non-putrescible refuse to
remain at his or her structure for more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.060) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.019 BUILDING OR DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS.
   A licensed building or demolition contractor shall not be required to obtain
a separate license under this chapter to collect, transport and dispose of
construction or demolition materials from a site at which he or she is acting
as a building or demolition contractor.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.070) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.020 UNLAWFUL DUMPING.
   (A)   This section shall not apply to single-family residences in which
refuse generated on-site is completed and the finished organic compost is used
on-site.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful, and punishable as a Class B misdemeanor, for a
person:
      (1)   To place, deposit or dump garbage, ashes, market waste, paper
boxes, cartons, trade waste, manure or night soil, or any other refuse, upon
any real property within the limits of the city, including the water and
riparian area of the Box Elder Creek, whether such lot is occupied or vacant,
and whether such person so placing, depositing or dumping such refuse is the
owner, tenant, occupant or lessor thereof or has the same under his or her
jurisdiction and control; and/or
      (2)   To place refuse in a refuse container owned, leased, rented or
controlled by another without the consent of the person or entity that owns,
leases, rents or controls said container.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.080) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.021 CONTROL OF COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL BY SUPERVISOR.
   The Supervisor may impose reasonable and uniform rules not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter upon the collection, transportation and disposal
of refuse throughout the city, including, but not limited to, rules regarding:
   (A)   The operation of all collection, transportation and disposal services
by the city and by commercial haulers;
   (B)   The operation of all city refuse management facilities; and
   (C)   Days and times of operation of all of the above to ensure efficient
city operations.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.090) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.022 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS.
   The city will provide for all residential collection, as defined herein,
under the supervision of the Department of Public Works pursuant to the
following.
   (A)   Owner responsible for charges. Except where water, sewer and garbage
service to the owner’s premises is properly terminated, the owner of every
premises subject to residential collection shall obtain a city refuse
collection container and be responsible and liable for the monthly charges for
residential collection as established by resolution. The charge for such
service shall be billed with the city’s regular electric, water and sewer
billings to such address as the city’s Utility Billing Department has records,
and directly to the address of all other such premises where residential
collection is provided. In those instances where the electric, water and sewer
bill is currently being sent to a tenant at the owner’s request, the refuse
collection service will be similarly billed. However, the owner will pay for
all refuse collection services furnished such tenant, or any other occupant of
the premises named in the city’s Utility Billing Department application in case
such tenant or occupant shall fail to pay the same.
   (B)   Billing.
      (1)   Delinquency.
         (a)   Fees and charges levied in accordance herewith shall be a debt
due to the city. If this debt is not paid within 30 days after billing, it
shall, at the option of the Director of Finance, be deemed delinquent and
subject to recovery in a civil action for which the city may recover reasonable
attorney’s fees, and/or said Department shall have the right to terminate
water, sewer and refuse collection services to said premises in accordance with
all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to such terminations.
         (b)   Any uncollected amount due from the owner on any inactive,
terminated or discontinued account, may be transferred to any active account
under the owner’s name and upon failure to pay said bill after at least five
days’ prior written notice, water, sewer and/or refuse collection services to
that account and premises may be discontinued.
      (2)   Restoration of service. Water, sewer and refuse collection service
shall not be restored until all charges shall have been paid.
   (C)   Enterprise Fund. All funds received from such refuse collection
services shall be placed in the Refuse Enterprise Fund, which is part of the
city’s Public Utility Fund. The collection, accounting and expenditure of all
refuse funds shall be in accordance with existing fiscal policy of the city.
   (D)   Termination of service. An owner may terminate the city refuse
collection only upon vacancy of the rental or housing premises.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.100) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.023 SPECIAL COMMUNITY SERVICES.
   The city may from time to time provide special collection and disposal
services related to refuse for which a charge may be imposed upon the
recipients of those services.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.110) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.024 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CITY RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.
   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to residential refuse collection
provided by the city.
   (B)   Violation of any of the following shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
      (1)   For all residential collection, the city shall provide a refuse
container for use in residential collection. The owner of every premise subject
to residential collection shall be responsible for the proper care and
maintenance of said refuse container, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
      (2)   Residential refuse shall be collected only from containers obtained
from the city. (Containers obtained from the city are specially designed for
use in an automated collection system.)
      (3)   The city shall at reasonable times and places, but not less than
once each week, collect and dispose of a reasonable accumulation of refuse from
each residential unit. Additional service may be provided by the city, for
which an additional fee may be imposed.
      (4)   Except where the Supervisor shall otherwise agree, residential
collection of refuse shall be made from the street. Containers shall be placed
at the edge of the street in a manner that will allow a refuse collection truck
to be driven to the side of the container.
      (5)   Containers shall be placed at curbside for collection at such time
as may be designated by Department Policy, but not earlier than the day before
the day scheduled for collection and shall be removed within 24 hours after
collection.
      (6)   The owner of the premise receiving residential collection shall
maintain the refuse containers serviced at said premises in a clean and
sanitary condition.
      (7)   Fluids shall be separately packaged when placed in a container.
Fluids shall not be allowed to accumulate in the bottom of a refuse container.
      (8)   Ashes shall be cold before being placed in a container.
      (9)   This section shall apply only to collections made by the city or a
private contractor working for the city.
         (a)   Small animal waste material must be dry and mixed with sand,
sawdust, commercial pet litter or similar absorptive material, and double-
wrapped in paper or placed in a separate plastic bag before being placed in a
refuse container for disposal.
         (b)   Sharp objects such as broken glass, knives and hypodermic
needles, must be double-wrapped in paper or other suitable material so that no
sharp edge is exposed before being placed in a refuse container for disposal.
      (10)   The Supervisor or his designee is hereby authorized and required
to inspect the condition of refuse containers.
      (11)   No refuse shall extend vertically beyond the top of any city
refuse container in such a manner that its contents may be reasonably expected
to spill onto the ground prior to or during collection operations.
      (12)   Refuse collection for residential construction; the city may
provide a refuse container for residential construction sites. Such refuse
containers shall be limited to 300-gallon containers.
      (13)   The owner shall pay the replacement cost for lost or damaged
containers. Such damage shall include fire damage, heat, vandalism, natural
disasters or any other circumstances other than for normal wear.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.120) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.025 LIMITATIONS ON RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.
   Except when otherwise agreed or provided for, the city residential refuse
collection shall not include collection or disposal of the following:
   (A)   Large quantities of construction and demolition materials;
   (B)   Large quantities of dirt, sod, rocks and concrete;
   (C)   Contagious disease waste. Such waste shall not be placed in containers
for regular collection;
   (D)   Large bulky waste items such as appliances, furniture or metal
objects;
   (E)   Dead animals;
   (F)   Septic tank waste or holding tank waste from recreational vehicles or
travel trailers;
   (G)   Highly flammable or explosive materials such as oil, gas or paint;
   (H)   Hazardous or radioactive waste material; and
   (I)   Any substance or material which is not refuse, as defined herein, or
which the city reasonably determines to be unsuitable for collection and
disposal because of its physical or chemical properties, size or quantity.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.130) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.026 CITY AS A COMMERCIAL HAULER.
   (A)   The city may act as a commercial hauler, under the following
conditions:
      (1)   When servicing the city-owned or operated facilities;
      (2)   When servicing special public events; or
      (3)   Other commercial service shall be limited to one 90-gallon
container per customer.
   (B)   When acting as a commercial hauler for other than government agencies,
the city shall:
      (1)   Conform to all regulations, except for business licensing and
insurance, which apply to commercial haulers generally; and
      (2)   Pay all other fees imposed generally by the city on the operations
of commercial haulers.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.140) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.027 BUSINESS LICENSE FOR COMMERCIAL HAULERS.
   A commercial hauler must obtain a business license subject to the
requirements of
Chapter 118 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.150) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.028 INSURANCE.
   All commercial haulers shall have and maintain at all times general
liability insurance in an amount not less than: $2,000,000, aggregate;
$1,000,000, occurrence/general liability; and $1,000,000, automobile liability
or as amended by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.160) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.029 REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL HAULERS.
   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to all licensed commercial
haulers.
   (B)   Violation of any of the following shall be a Class B misdemeanor and
shall constitute a sufficient basis to suspend or revoke a hauler’s license.
      (1)   Commercial haulers shall not engage in residential collection.
      (2)   (a)   All vehicles used to collect or carry refuse must be in good
mechanical condition and all mechanisms relevant to the hauling of refuse must
be fully operable.
         (b)   Each vehicle, except roll-off vehicles, manufactured after 1-1-
1990, shall be equipped with a backup alarm and one or more amber warning
lights.
         (c)   The warning light(s) shall be mounted near the rear of the
vehicle in an area visible to the public.
         (d)   Roll-off vehicles shall be equipped with a backup alarm.
      (3)   All vehicles used to collect or transport, except for roll-off
service containers, shall be fully enclosed with water-tight sides and bottom.
      (4)   The tailgate of each vehicle used to collect or carry refuse shall
be so constructed as to prevent the contents of the body spilling or blowing
from the vehicle while in motion.
      (5)   The outside of the body of each vehicle used by a commercial hauler
to collect or carry refuse must be clearly painted and identified with the name
and telephone number of the licensee.
      (6)   All vehicles used to collect or carry refuse shall comply with all
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations relating to such
vehicles.
      (7)   Haulers shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and all
applicable state or federal regulations or laws concerning the collection,
transportation or disposal of refuse.
      (8)   Commercial hours of operation shall be in accordance with §
132.002 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.170) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.030 REFUSE COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
   (A)   All refuse collection containers shall be of a type approved by the
Supervisor prior to being placed.
   (B)   All refuse collection containers used or intended for use by
commercial haulers shall be located and maintained as follows.
      (1)   Each refuse collection container shall be located and maintained as
described in an applicable project plan.
      (2)   (a)   If there is no applicable project plan, each refuse
collection container shall be located or screened so as to minimize its
visibility from public property.
         (b)   No such container shall be placed upon any public street, right-
of-way or easement adjacent to public streets, except in areas designated for
the servicing of the structures on which located.
         (c)   Automated containers with wheels which are designed to be placed
out for collection may be placed on public right-of-way in accordance with
provisions set forth for residential pickup in §
93.024 of this chapter.
         (d)   In no case shall any refuse container be placed at any time as
to block or hinder public vehicular, or pedestrian access, or otherwise pose a
threat to public health or safety by its placement.
         (e)   Containers may be placed on public streets for temporary, short-
term special services when approved by the Supervisor.
      (3)   If there is no applicable project plan, and there is no reasonable
way in which a particular refuse collection container can be located or
screened so that it cannot be observed from public property, the location and
maintenance of said refuse collection container shall be as approved by the
Supervisor.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail or refuse to provide a site
conforming to the requirements of this section with respect to the following:
      (1)   Each refuse collection container located on property owned or
controlled by owner; and
      (2)   Each refuse collection container which is used to deposit refuse
from the structure of the owner.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a commercial hauler to fail or refuse
to return a refuse collection container to the specific site or location
conforming to the requirements of division (B) above, after it has been
emptied.
      (2)   This shall not apply to automated containers with wheels which are
designed to be set at the curb for pickup.
   (E)   If the required location of a refuse collection container is
obstructed by spilled or excess refuse, the hauler who moves said container
shall clean the required location sufficiently that the container can be
reasonably returned to the required location.
   (F)   All contracts entered into by a commercial hauler for the servicing of
refuse collection containers shall be deemed subject to further amendment as
necessary to comply with this section.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.180) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.031 RECYCLING.
   A person who collects refuse for the primary purpose of reusing or recycling
said refuse shall be subject to all regulations and financial charges
applicable to commercial haulers, except the following.
   (A)   This section shall not apply to a person who sells refuse generated by
that person, if the refuse which is sold is to be reused (recycled). This
section shall, however, apply to a person who buys refuse from a person who
generates it.
   (B)   Such person shall be allowed to engage in curbside residential
collection for the sole purpose of reusing or recycling the refuse collected.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.190) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.032 REGULATIONS FOR RECYCLING COLLECTION.
   (A)   Recycling collection haulers shall collect and transport only city-
approved recyclable items.
   (B)   All vehicles and/or trailers used to collect or transport recyclable
items shall be in good mechanical condition and all mechanisms relevant to the
hauling of such items must be fully operable and in compliance with the
following.
      (1)   For residential curbside recycling, each vehicle and/or trailer
shall be equipped with a backup alarm.
      (2)   Recycling vehicles and/or trailers with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of 26,100 pounds or more shall, in addition to prior requirements
of this section, be equipped with the following:
         (a)   A remote camera and monitor appropriately mounted for viewing
the vehicle’s backing area; and
         (b)   Amber warning beacons installed on the vehicle.
   (C)   All vehicles and/or trailers used to collect or transport recyclable
items shall be fully enclosed and/or have enclosed bins to prevent the contents
from spilling, falling, blowing or leaking from the vehicle.
   (D)   The outside of the body of each vehicle used by a recycling collection
hauler to collect or transport recyclables must be identified with the name of
the licensee clearly painted on the outside of the vehicle.
   (E)   All vehicles used to collect or transport recyclable items shall
comply with all applicable state and federal regulations relating to such
vehicle.
   (F)   Recycling collection haulers shall comply with all provisions of this
chapter and all applicable state and federal regulations regarding the
collection, transportation and/or disposal of recyclable items.
   (G)   Recycling collection hours of operations shall be in compliance with §
132.002 of this code of ordinances.
   (H)   Recycling collection containers used for the purpose of storing,
staging and collecting recyclables and the placement of said containers for
collection shall be approved by the city’s Public Works Department.
   (I)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to non-profit
organizations engaged in fund raising activities.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.200) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.033 CHARGES FOR REFUSE COLLECTION BY CITY.
   Charges for refuse collection by the city shall be as fixed by resolution by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.210) (Ord. 00-37, passed 12-7-2000; Ord. 13-23, passed 11-
21-2013)
NUISANCES
§ 93.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATE. To repair, replace, remove destroy, correct or otherwise remedy a
condition which constitutes a nuisance.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any code enforcement officer(s) hired by the city
to enforce city ordinances.
   COMPLETION DATE. The date by which the responsible person must abate a
nuisance. The COMPLETION DATE is originally set by the Code Enforcement Officer
in the voluntary correction agreement.
   EMERGENCY. A situation which, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer
or applicable city official, requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate
an immediate threat to the health or safety of a person or property.
   PUBLIC PLACE. An area generally used by or visible to the public.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S). The owner(s), lessor(s), lessee(s) or other person(s)
entitled to control, use and/or occupy property upon which a nuisance is found;
and any person, whether as owner, agent or occupant, who creates, aids in
creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains
a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.220) (Ord. 02-17, passed 6-20-2002; Ord. 13-23, passed 11-
21-2013)
§ 93.046 ENUMERATION.
   Without limiting or impairing the effect of other sections of the code, the
following, when they exist within the limits of the city, are specifically
declared to be public nuisances:
   (A)   Nuisances as defined by state code. Nuisances as defined within the
state code, specifically U.C.A. Title 78B, Part 6, U.C.A. §§ 76-10-801 through
76-10-803, or as amended, and all other sections meeting the definition of a
nuisance;
   (B)   Fire hazard. A fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal, and also
the burning of material which causes a dangerous or offensive smell, smoke,
soot or cinders;
   (C)   Improper accumulation or storage. Accumulation of soil, sand, gravel
or rock, litter, debris, plant trimmings or trash, in the public right-of-way
or visible from the street or an adjoining property. Material stored as part of
an active construction project shall not be considered a nuisance;
   (D)   Accumulation of junk. Accumulation of used or damaged lumber; junk;
salvage materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves, sinks,
toilets, cabinets or other fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible
from a public street, alley or adjoining property, or which is likely to harbor
rats, vermin or other pests. However, nothing herein shall preclude the
placement of stacked firewood for personal non-commercial use on the premises;
   (E)   Attractive nuisances. Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children
and other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken or neglected
household appliances, equipment and machinery, abandoned foundations or
excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools;
   (F)   Vegetation. Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, noxious weeds,
hedges, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which is in a hazardous
condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, is a potential
fire hazard or which is likely to harbor rates, vermin or other pests;
   (G)   Fugitive dust. Any premises or property from which dust escapes due to
human disturbance of the landscape such as removal of or lack of landscaping,
non-maintenance, manufacturing or other business activity, mining activity,
construction activity or other cause;
   (H)   Construction equipment. Construction equipment or machinery of any
type or description parked or stored on property, without a business license
specifically regulating the parking or storage of such equipment or machinery,
when it is readily visible from a public street, alley or adjoining property,
except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an
active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining
property, or where the property is zoned for the storage of construction
equipment and/or machinery. This section shall not apply to the keeping or
storage of equipment, implements or tools normally kept for the maintenance of
residential yards such as lawn mowers, roto-tillers and the like;
   (I)   Graffiti. Any graffiti including, but not limited to, graffiti
consisting of vulgar or indecent words or pictures, which remains on the
exterior of any building, fence, sign or within a public place which is visible
to the general public;
   (J)   Improper maintenance.
      (1)   Maintenance of buildings, structures, walls, signs, fences, gates,
hedges or structures in such condition as to be deemed defective or in a
condition of deterioration or disrepair including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Any building or structure which is unfit for human habitation or
which is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, and which is not reasonably secured against entry;
         (b)   Any building or structure that presents an unreasonable fire
hazard in the vicinity where it is located;
         (c)   Any building or structure which is abandoned, partially
destroyed, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction for a
period of six months or longer. The building or structure shall not be
considered to be a nuisance if it is under active construction as evidenced by
a current building permit, or a plan for its rehabilitation is being reasonably
pursued;
         (d)   Any building or structure having dry rot, warping, termite
infestation, decay, excessive cracking, peeling or chalking finish material, so
as to render the building unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair, and for
which no plan for its rehabilitation is being reasonably pursued; and
         (e)   Any building, structure or condition that violate any building,
electrical, plumbing, fire, housing or other code adopted by the city.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed to require the removal of
buildings which have a legitimate and demonstratable historic significance to
the community; however, such buildings shall be maintained in a condition that
does not create a health or safety hazard to persons working or residing in the
vicinity, or to the general public.
   (K)   Dangerous conditions. Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage,
building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole,
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, subspace,
dock or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in its
entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same
is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health,
safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience,
discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city; and
   (L)   Other conditions. Anything which is injurious to the health or morals
or which is indecent or offensive to the senses or whatever is dangerous to
human life or health or whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or
unwholesome or whatever is an obstruction to the free use of property so as to
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.230) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.047 EXCEPTIONS.
   No situation, conduct, activity and the like, which is done or maintained
under the express authority of an authoritative statute, ordinance or court
ruling, shall be declared a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.240) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.048 RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCES.
   (A)   Every responsible person(s) is responsible for abating any nuisances
found on the responsible person’s property pursuant to this subchapter, and
every responsible person(s) is liable, both civilly and criminally, for any and
all costs, fees, damages or penalties associated with such nuisance.
   (B)   Every successive owner or tenant of a property or premises who fails
to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property or premises
caused by a former owner or tenant is responsible therefore in the same manner
as the one who first created it.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.250) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 93.049 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Administration. This subchapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Code Enforcement Officer. In case of nuisances involving criminal
violations, or violations of codes typically administered and enforced by the
Police Department, this subchapter may also be administered and enforced by the
Police Department.
   (B)   Finding of nuisance. If a Code Enforcement Officer finds that a
nuisance exists, they shall attempt to have the responsible person abate the
nuisance. Although the Code Enforcement Officer’s first step in correcting or
abating the nuisance will always be to seek voluntary compliance, the Code
Enforcement Officer may pursue any remedy or combination of remedies available
pursuant to Ord. 13-23, contained herein, state law or common law in order to
abate the nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit
the city from engaging in its standard prosecution practices. Therefore, the
city may prosecute violators of city ordinances or state laws without first
having to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, even though the
activity or conduct prosecuted may also constitute a nuisance under this
subchapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted to prevent the city
from enforcing applicable city ordinances or codes without first treating the
offending conduct, situation, activity and the like as a nuisance pursuant to
this subchapter.
   (C)   Repeated short-term nuisances. It is recognized by this subchapter
that certain nuisances by their nature may occur for a short period of time
such that at the time of contact with the responsible person by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the nuisance may not be occurring or evident. In such
cases, the Code Enforcement Officer shall document at least three such
occurrences before initiating any action to abate the nuisance. Upon such
documentation, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed to abate the nuisance
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, notwithstanding that the
nuisance is not occurring or evident during the abatement process. In such
case, the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that a reasonable
probability exists that the nuisance will continue to occur periodically if
abatement is not pursued.
   (D)   Voluntary correction; contact. Before taking other steps to abate the
nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make a reasonable attempt to
secure voluntary correction or abatement of the nuisance by:
      (1)   Contacting the responsible person(s), where possible; and
      (2)   Explaining the nuisance.
   (E)   Non-voluntary correction.
      (1)   Enforcement. If the land owner or resident fails to correct or
abate the nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer may still abate the nuisance
using one or more of the procedures set forth in this subchapter, state law or
common law.
      (2)   Civil actions. Either the city or any private person directly
affected by a nuisance may bring a civil action as allowed by law to abate or
enjoin the nuisance, or for damages for causing or maintaining the nuisance
(including the cost, if any, of cleaning the subject property).
      (3)   Criminal actions. Criminal actions may be initiated by criminal
citation from the Code Enforcement Officer, Police Department or by long-form
information.
         (a)   Any responsible person who maintains or assists in maintaining a
nuisance is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the alleged nuisance is also a violation of a provision of
city code (other than this subchapter) or state law, the responsible person may
be charged under the specific provision of city code or state law, even if the
Code Enforcement Officer did not first attempt to obtain voluntary correction
as provided in division (D) above.
         (c)   Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes or interferes with
the city or its agents, or with the responsible person, in the performance of
duties imposed by this subchapter is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
      (4)   Abatement by eviction. Whenever there is reason to believe that a
nuisance is kept, maintained, or exists in the city, the City Attorney or any
citizen(s) residing in the city, or any person or entity doing business in the
city, in his, her or their own names, may maintain an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and obtain an order for the
automatic eviction of the tenant of the property harboring the nuisance. The
eviction shall take place as specified in state law.
      (5)   Lien for costs. If a person fails to pay any fines or costs related
to nuisance abatement when due, the city may record a lien on the property or
premises of the full amount of the unpaid fines and costs.
      (6)   Non-exclusive remedies. The city may take any or all of the above-
mentioned remedies (administrative, civil or criminal) to abate a nuisance and/
or to punish any person or entity that creates, causes or allows, a nuisance to
exist. The abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the right of the city or
any person to recover damages or penalties for its past existence.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.260) (Ord. 13-23, passed 11-21-2013)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Open Burning Prohibited and Fire Restrictions
   
94.001   Purpose and scope
   
94.002   Permit required
   
94.003   Definitions
   
94.004   Authority and applicable laws
   
94.005   Permissible burning; permit required
   
94.006   Lawful burning; without permit
   
94.007   Recreational fires; without permit
   
94.008   Enforcement
Annual Fire Restriction Order
   
94.020   Annual fire restriction order
   
94.021   Enforcement
   
94.022   Revision
   
94.023   References
 
   
94.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
Emergency services, see §§
33.045 through
33.050
Fire Department and EMS, see §§
33.030 through
33.033
Public Safety Cost Recovery, see §§
33.065 through
33.069
OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED AND FIRE RESTRICTIONS
§ 94.001 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to define the allowance and prohibition of
open burning to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.010) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021)
§ 94.002 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or entity may burn, permit to be burned, or allow to be
burned, on property owned or leased by that person or entity, any item outdoors
unless the person or entity has a valid burning permit issued by the city fire
authority, which specifies the date, period and location for where the open
burning will take place, unless the open burning activities may be conducted
without a permit pursuant to §§
94.006 and
94.007 of this chapter.
   (B)   Person(s) or entities seeking an open burning permit shall submit an
application to the city fire authority on a form provided by the city fire
authority for each separate burn.
   (C)   A permit shall be valid only on the property specified on the open
burning permit.
   (D)   No material may be burned unless it is clearly described and
quantified as material to be burned on a valid permit.
   (E)   No burning shall be conducted contrary to the conditions specified on
the permit.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.020) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPEN BURNING. To do any of the following:
      (1)   AGRICULTURAL BURNING.
         (a)   Burning incident to horticultural or agricultural operations of
which the following materials are burned:
            1.   Pruning’s from trees, bushes and plants; or
            2.   Dead or diseased trees, bushes and plants, including stubble.
         (b)   Burning of weed growth along ditch banks incident to clearing
these ditches for irrigation purposes.
         (c)   Controlled heating of orchards or other crops to lessen the
chances of these being frozen so long as the emissions from this heating do not
violate minimum standards as set forth by the state’s Department of
Environmental Quality.
      (2)   OPEN BURNING. Burning which involves residents or property owners
burning tree trimmings or yard trimmings.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire that is burning materials other than
rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor
fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit, and has
a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purpose.
   PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE.
      (1)   A portable outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be
constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other non-combustible material.
      (2)   A PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE may be open in design, or may be
equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in
the top.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.030) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021)
§ 94.004 AUTHORITY AND APPLICABLE LAWS.
   (A)   Utah State Code(s) applicable sections:
      (1)   U.C.A. § 11-7-1(2), Burning Permits;
      (2)   U.C.A. § 19-2-114, Agricultural/horticultural Allowable Items; and
      (3)   U.C.A. § 65A-8-211, Closed Fire Season: June 1 through October 31,
burning without permit violation.
   (B)   Utah State Tax Code:
      (1)   Section 59-2-502(1)(4)(5), Definitions of Agriculture and
Agriculture Use; and
      (2)   Section 59-2-503(a)(i)(A), Agriculture Qualifications.
   (C)   International Fire Code: § 307.4.2, 2021 Edition; and
   (D)   https://air.utah.gov/OpenBurning/index.htm
(Prior Code, § 13.04.040) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021)
§ 94.005 PERMISSIBLE BURNING; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as prohibited by local, state or federal laws, the following types of
burning are permitted; provided that, an open burn permit has first been
approved and obtained:
   (A)   The burning of trimmings from trees, bushes, plants, yards or of dead
and diseased trees; including stubble, incidental to horticulture;
   (B)   Open burning of materials or structures when conducted under the
direct control and supervision of the city’s Fire Chief or his, her or their
designee;
   (C)   Fires for the training of firefighters when conducted under the
control and supervision of the city’s Fire Chief or his, her or their designee;
   (D)   Open burning at an approved site of hazardous materials for which
there is no practical or reasonable alternative method of disposal; provided
that, such burning shall be under the supervision of the City Fire Chief or
his, her or their designee, and in accordance with state law; and
   (E)   Other open burning for special purposes or under unique circumstances
when approved by the city’s Fire Chief and the county’s Health Department
following a formal request.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.050) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021)
§ 94.006 LAWFUL BURNING; WITHOUT PERMIT.
   It is lawful for a person or entity to establish a fire without a permit for
the purposes of burning incident to agricultural or horticultural meeting all
of the following criteria:
   (A)   The person or entity owns or leases agricultural or horticultural land
over five acres in size, (as defined by state code), and the person or entity
is engaged in any of the following:
      (1)   Farming and/or crop production;
      (2)   Livestock grazing;
      (3)   Ditch and associated with farmland or crop production areas;
      (4)   Open fields (including stubble); and/or
      (5)   Controlled heating of orchards or other crops to lessen the chances
of their being frozen so long as the emissions from this heating do not violate
minimum standards as set forth by the state’s Department of Environmental
Quality.
   (B)   The controlled burning of not more than two structures per year by the
city’s Fire Department for the purpose of training fire service personnel when
the national weather service clearing index is above 500; or
   (C)   Governmental prescribed burning authorized by the City Fire Chief or
Fire Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.060) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.007 RECREATIONAL FIRES; WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   Recreational fires are not regulated and a permit is not required
where such fires are under the supervision of a responsible adult. The
following are considered recreational fires:
      (1)   Ceremonial burning when conducted by a Native American spiritual
advisor, as defined by Utah Administrative Code § 307-202-2;
      (2)   The use of devices for the primary purpose of preparing food such
as outdoor grills and fireplaces, and the combustible material is natural gas,
propane or clean, dry wood or charcoal; and
      (3)   Campfires and fires used solely for recreational purposes where
such fires are under control of a responsible person and the combustible
material is clean, dry wood or charcoal.
   (B)   (1)   Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a
structure or combustible material. Except burning in a portable outdoor
fireplace may be conducted if the burning occurs 15 feet or more from any
structure.
      (2)   As outlined in division (A)(2) above, recreational fires which are
for the primary purpose of preparing food are exempt from the distance
restrictions outlined herein.
      (3)   Buckets, shovels, garden hoses or a fire extinguisher with a
minimum 4-A rating must be readily available for use.
      (4)   (a)   Fires must be constantly attended by a responsible individual
who is knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguishing methods.
         (b)   An attendant shall supervise a recreational fire until such fire
has been extinguished.
      (5)   No burning of trash or paper products is allowed.
      (6)   If the smoke emissions are offensive to occupants of surrounding
property or the fire is determined to be hazardous, the fire then becomes a
public nuisance and shall be extinguished.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.070) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.008 ENFORCEMENT.
   Fire officers, Fire Department personnel, police officers and Code
Enforcement personnel are authorized to cause any fire which creates a
hazardous condition or public nuisance to be extinguished.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.080) (Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021)
ANNUAL FIRE RESTRICTION ORDER
§ 94.020 ANNUAL FIRE RESTRICTION ORDER.
   (A)   General. Effective annually on July 1, at 12:01 a.m., a fire
restriction order is enforced to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city and their property, as well as protect forest, rangelands
and watersheds from the destruction caused by fire, and when hazardous
environmental conditions necessitate controlled use of any ignition source to
prohibit the following acts:
   (B)   Prohibited acts. The following acts are prohibited on all private and
city-owned lands in the “area description” set forth herein:
      (1)   Setting, building, maintaining, attending or using open fires of
any kind, except campfires built within a designated area provided for them in
approved campgrounds, picnic areas or permanently improved places of
habitation;
      (2)   Smoking, except within an enclosed vehicle or building, a developed
recreation site or in an area at least three feet in diameter that is barren or
cleared to mineral soils;
      (3)   Discharging or using any kind of fireworks or tracer ammunition or
other pyrotechnic devices;
      (4)   Operating equipment without spark arresters;
      (5)   Operating any motorized vehicle off designed roads or trails;
      (6)   Blasting or any other activities which generate flames or flammable
materials; and
      (7)   Welding, except within a building, or a concrete driveway or in an
area with at least a 20- foot diameter fire break that is barren or cleared to
mineral soils.
   (C)   Location. The location of the annual fire restriction is as follows:
everything east of the following described line:
      (1)   Beginning at the north city boundary located at 1500 North and Main
Street;
      (2)   South on Main Street to 900 North;
      (3)   East on 900 North to Highland Boulevard;
      (4)   South on Highland Boulevard, including all properties adjoining
Highland Boulevard to Beecher Avenue;
      (5)   West on Beecher Avenue to Eliason Avenue and all adjoining
properties;
      (6)   South and west on Eliason Avenue to Poplar Drive;
      (7)   North on Poplar Drive to 100 North;
      (8)   West on 100 North to 1000 East;
      (9)   South on 1000 East to Eliason Avenue;
      (10)   West on Eliason Avenue to 700 East;
      (11)   South on 700 East to Forest Street;
      (12)   West on Forest Street to 600 East;
      (13)   South on 600 East to 100 South;
      (14)   East, south/east on 100 South to 200 South;
      (15)   East on 200 South to 350 South;
      (16)   South/west on 350 South to 600 East;
      (17)   South on 600 East to 600 South;
      (18)   East, south/east on 600 South to 700 South;
      (19)   East on 700 South on an east, south/east diagonal bordering Golf
Course boundaries to the east tip of the driving range;
      (20)   West on Highway 91 including properties adjoining Highway 91 to
Michelle Drive;
      (21)   All properties adjoining Michelle Drive to the Perry city line;
and
      (22)   (a)   This includes all of Tannevista subdivision.
         (b)   This includes all of Kotter Canyon subdivision.
         (c)   This includes all of the City Municipal Airport.
         (d)   This includes areas West of I-15 between Forest Street and the
Perry city line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2936.jpg]
    (D)   Exempted individuals. The following individuals are exempted from the
provisions of this fire restriction order:
      (1)   Any individual with a permit specifically authorizing the
prohibited act issued by the city’s Fire Chief or Fire Marshal; and
      (2)   Any federal, state, county or city law enforcement officer or
firefighting personnel engaged in the lawful performance of their official
duties.
   (E)   Effective date. This fire restriction order shall be effective
annually, from 12:01, July 1, and will remain in effect until rescinded by the
city’s Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.010) (Ord. 21-06, passed 6-15-2021)
§ 94.021 ENFORCEMENT.
   Fire officers, Fire Department personnel, police officers and Code
Enforcement personnel are authorized to cause any fire which creates a
hazardous condition or public nuisance to be extinguished.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.020) (Ord. 21-06, passed 6-15-2021)
§ 94.022 REVISION.
   This subchapter will be reviewed every five years for possible boundary
changes or sooner at the request of the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.030) (Ord. 21-06, passed 6-15-2021)
§ 94.023 REFERENCES.
   (A)   International Fire Code (IFC) § 110.4 (2021 IFC);
   (B)   U.C.A. § 53-7-104; and
   (C)   U.C.A. § 15A-5-103.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.040) (Ord. 21-06, passed 6-15-2021)
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or entity deemed to be in violation of the provisions of §§
94.001 through
94.008 of this chapter for a first offense may be charged with a criminal
infraction. Any individual or entity who have subsequent and repeat violations
of §§
94.001 through
94.008 of this chapter may be charged with criminal charges up to a Class B
misdemeanor. In addition to the violation set forth herein, a violation under
this code may be deemed a public nuisance and the city may institute any civil
action necessary to abate a public nuisance under §§
94.001 through
94.008 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.090)
   (C)   Any violation of §
94.020 of this chapter shall be punishable as a violation of
Chapter 33 of this code of ordinances and fire suppression costs may be
recovered as outlined in
Chapter 33 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.010)
(Ord. 21-04, passed 4-1-2021; Ord. 21-06, passed 6-15-2021)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSING AND FEES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
      
113.   VEHICLE-RELATED BUSINESSES
      
114.   LODGING AND RENTAL DWELLINGS
      
115.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
116.   SOLICITATIONS AND SALES
      
117.   PRIVATE SECURITY AND DETECTIVES
      
118.   GARBAGE AND WASTE COLLECTORS
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING AND FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.001   Purposes
   
110.002   Definitions
Licensing and Procedures
   
110.015   Unlawful to operate without license
   
110.016   Responsibility for obtaining license
   
110.017   Separate license required for each branch establishment
   
110.018   Duty to display license
   
110.019   Exemptions
   
110.020   Inspections for code compliance
   
110.021   Preparation and listing of licenses
   
110.022   Fees for business license; payments
   
110.023   License term and renewal procedure
   
110.024   Insurance company exemption
   
110.025   Unspecified fees or time periods
   
110.026   Mistakes in fee calculations
   
110.027   Deviations prohibited
   
110.028   Refunds
   
110.029   License transfers
   
110.030   Applications for general, specific licenses
   
110.031   Bonding
   
110.032   Denial, suspension or revocation of a license
   
110.033   Business owner responsible for concessionaire
   
110.034   Powers and duties of police
 
   
110.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.001 PURPOSES.
   Pursuant to powers granted by the state, as set forth in various provisions
of the Utah Code as amended, the city intends, by this business regulation
title, to regulate and license businesses and occupations within its corporate
limits; to maintain a current index of licensed businesses and occupations; and
to raise revenues sufficient, among other things, to offset the costs of
administering this business title by imposing license fees upon such businesses
and occupations.
(Prior Code, § 14.01.010)
§ 110.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this business regulation title, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT. A separate business location which is necessary to the
operation of a business. A BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT may include processing,
warehousing or distribution facilities which may be necessary for the full
functioning of a business.
   CITY. The City of Brigham City, Utah.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person, who for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage or other
compensation, other wages, undertakes with another to improve any building,
highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or
improvement of any kind, other than to personal property; provided further
that, the term CONTRACTOR, as used in this chapter, shall include anyone who
builds more than one structure on his or her own property during any one year
for the purpose of sale and shall include subcontractor, but shall not include
anyone who merely furnished materials or supplies without fabricating the same
into, or consuming the same in the performance of the work of a CONTRACTOR, as
herein defined.
   CRIMINAL HISTORY REPORT. A personal criminal history record and report
compiled by the state’s Bureau of Criminal Identification (BCI). BCI reports
are to be furnished by the applicant, employee, person or individual. They are
to be mailed directly from BCI to the Chief of Police.
   DEPARTMENT. Community Development Department.
   DIRECTOR. Director of Community Development.
   EMPLOYEE. The operator, owner or manager of a place of business; any person
or persons employed by an operator, owner or manager in the operation of a
place of business in any capacity, whether part-time or full-time; and any
salespersons, agents or independent contractors engaged in the operation of a
place of business in any capacity within the city.
   ENGAGING IN BUSINESS OR CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible personal
property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or property and the
rendering of services to others for a consideration by persons engaged in any
trade, craft, business or occupation including doctors, lawyers, accountants,
dentists and the like. The acts of employees rendering services to employers
shall not be included in such terms unless otherwise specifically prescribed.
      (2)   Separate licenses shall not be required for persons who engage in
business with others as a partnership or corporation legally constituted.
   LICENSE. Certificate or document issued by the city evidencing permission or
authority of its named holder to carry on a particular business or to pursue a
particular occupation.
   LICENSEE. The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this business regulation title.
   PERMIT. A written license or instrument issued by the city authorizing and
empowering the grantee thereof to some act not forbidden by law, but not
allowable without such authority.
   PERSON. Any individual or natural person, receiver, assignee, trustee in
bankruptcy, trust, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, club,
company, business trust corporation, association, society or other group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether social, cooperative, fraternal, non-
profit or otherwise.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. A location maintained or operated by a licensee within
the city where the licensee engages in business.
(Prior Code, § 14.01.020) (Ord. 02-30, passed 11-21-2002; Ord. 05-28, passed
12-15-2005)
LICENSING AND PROCEDURES
§ 110.015 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business within the city
without first procuring a license, or for any person to continue a business
when the license pertaining thereto has expired, or been suspended or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.010) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.016 RESPONSIBILITY FOR OBTAINING LICENSE.
   It shall be the responsibility of a person engaging in business within the
city to voluntarily apply for and maintain in full force and effect a valid
license. The application shall be issued by the Department and shall contain
the following information: business name, address, phone number and mailing
address; owner’s name, address, phone number and date of birth.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.020)
§ 110.017 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   (1)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch
establishment for a location of a business.
      (2)   Exception:
         (a)   Where a city licensee provides service in the customer’s
residence (example: tax preparation, massage therapy); and/or
         (b)   Where a city licensee provides service in a city-licensed
facility (example: cosmetologist, barber or doctor).
      (3)   Each license shall authorize the person obtaining it to carry on,
pursue or conduct only that business described in such license and only at the
location which is indicated thereon.
   (B)   A business which has separate processing, warehousing and distribution
facilities used in connection with and incidental to a business, licensed under
the provisions of this business regulation title shall not be deemed to be
separate places of business or branch establishments; provided, however, that,
each separate place of business shall comply with applicable zoning or other
codes.
   (C)   If the location of the primary office for the business is closed or
moved, it is the responsibility of the business to inform the city within 30
days of any change of location of the primary office.
   (D)   If the location of the primary office for the business is closed, then
branch establishments shall also close.
   (E)   If the location of the primary office for the business is relocated to
a jurisdiction outside of the city, then each branch establishment shall obtain
a city business license.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.030) (Ord. 04-31, passed 11-4-2004; Ord. 05-28, passed 12-
15-2005)
§ 110.018 DUTY TO DISPLAY LICENSE.
   Every licensee licensed pursuant to the provisions of this business
regulation title shall keep his or her license displayed and exhibited while
the same is in force in some conspicuous part of the place of business. Every
licensee not having a fixed place of business shall carry such license with him
or her at all times while carrying on the business for which the license is
issued and shall produce the license for inspection when requested to do so by
any person.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.040) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.019 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this business regulation title shall not be deemed
or construed to require the payment of a license fee by, or the issuance of a
license to:
      (1)   Any governmental entity, any institution or organization which is
conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes
from which profit is not derived, directly or indirectly, by any individual,
firm or profit corporation;
      (2)   Any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific,
historical, literary, musical, religious or moral subject, whenever the receipt
from such is to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or
benevolent purpose within the city;
      (3)   Any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any
religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or
municipal organization or association when the receipts from such are to be
appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or
organization is formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or
indirectly, by any individual firm or profit corporation;
      (4)   Any wholesalers whose place of business is not located within the
city and who hold a valid business license in another jurisdiction in the state
are exempted from licensure;
      (5)   Except as otherwise specified in provisions of Utah Code, any
activities conducted by an individual holding a valid license issued by the
state, Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing, for work within the
scope of their license, when such individual possesses a business license in
any other legal Utah municipality and they are working in a facility with a
current city business license or exempt facility (example: doctor licensed in
another Utah community doing work at a licensed facility within the city);
provided, however, this exemption shall not apply to activities requiring a
solicitor’s license under the provisions of §§
116.095 through
116.101 of this code of ordinances; and
      (6)   (a)   Any activities conducted by minor children under direction or
supervision of an adult, when such activity is conducted primarily as a pastime
or diversion for such minor children, or when such activity is conducted
primarily as a means of providing service to others within a neighborhood.
         (b)   By way of illustration, such activities may include, but are not
limited to, lemonade or other soft drink sales, candy sales, newspaper
delivery, lawn mowing and maintenance, snow shoveling, car washing, or other
similar activities.
   (B)   The Community Development Director or designee shall be responsible to
determine those activities that are exempt from licensing under this section.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.050) (Ord. 01-27, passed 7-19-2001; Ord. 04-31, passed 11-
4-2004)
§ 110.020 INSPECTIONS FOR CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Prior to conducting a business at a location within the city, the
applicant shall permit inspections to be made of the prospective place of
business by the appropriate departments of the city to ensure compliance with
building, safety, zoning and other applicable codes. Applicants are also
subject to inspections by the Bear River Health Department to ensure compliance
with health regulations. No license shall be granted without the approval of
all such required inspections. Pending compliance with the aforesaid codes, the
applicant may conduct business by obtaining a temporary permit which shall be
valid for a period specified by the city, but not to exceed 30 days. An
applicant shall have 30 days in which to comply with such codes and remedy any
defects or infractions after receiving written notice thereof from the
Department. Existing places of business licensed within the city shall be
inspected periodically by departments of the city for compliance with building,
fire and health codes. Written notice shall be given by the Department to a
licensee upon the finding of any code infractions, which notice shall provide
for 30 days in which to correct such infractions, the failure of which shall
result in the revocation of the license by the Department.
   (B)   (1)   Upon a showing of good cause therefor, the Division may grant,
in writing, an extension of time beyond the 30-day period for compliance to
required standards.
      (2)   The Community Development Director shall request the City Attorney
to file a complaint against any applicant or any licensee who continues to
conduct business beyond the time limits.
   (C)   (1)   The Community Development Director may designate any employee as
an enforcement official.
      (2)   Authorized officers shall be permitted to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this business regulation title or any other
applicable statute or ordinance, and may enter any building or may enter upon
any premises during regular business hours; or, if there are no regular
business hours, the officers or their authorized representatives shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry.
      (3)   If the property owner or other responsible person refuses to allow
the enforcement officers to enter and inspect the property, the officer may
obtain and execute a search warrant.
   (D)   No owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control
of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after property request is
made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the authorized
officer or his or her representative(s) for the purpose of inspection and
examination to ensure compliance with this business regulation title.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.060) (Ord. 02-10, passed 3-21-2002; Ord. 09-07, passed 5-
7-2009) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.021 PREPARATION AND LISTING OF LICENSES.
   The Department shall prepare and issue an appropriate license for every
person qualifying therefor under the provisions of this business regulation
title and shall state in each license the period of time for which it is
issued, the name of the person to whom issued and the location of the place of
business. All licenses shall be signed by the Mayor of the city and attested by
the City Recorder. The Department shall maintain a list of all persons holding
licenses and the status of each such license.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.070)
§ 110.022 FEES FOR BUSINESS LICENSE; PAYMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The license fee for all businesses shall be set by resolution of
the City Council. These fees may be changed from time to time as determined by
resolution of the City Council. Applicants for all such licenses shall pay
license fees as otherwise fixed in this business regulation title.
      (2)   In addition to the other penalties specified in this business
regulation title, in the event that a business has operated without a license,
it shall pay fees and penalties equal to the fees and penalties that would have
been assessed for that period of time for which the business operated prior to
obtaining a business license.
      (3)   By way of illustration, if a business has operated for one year or
portions of a year prior to obtaining a business license, the business shall
pay the license fee for that period of time in which the license application is
made, and shall also pay the appropriate fee for the year for the time prior to
that in which the license is obtained.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.080)
   (B)   All license fees shall be paid in advance in legal tender of the
United States at the office of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.100)
(Ord. 02-10, passed 3-2-2002)
§ 110.023 LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Business licenses shall be valid for 12 months from the day of
issuance, unless otherwise specified. On or before 30 calendar days before
expiration, the Department shall send a statement to each current licensee
within the city notifying the business of the need for renewal.
   (B)   Fees remaining due and unpaid as of the date of expiration shall have
added thereto a penalty (late fee) in an amount set forth by resolution of the
City Council. This fee may change from time to time as determined by resolution
of the City Council. Businesses may not renew its business license or apply for
any new business license in the name of any officer or member of the delinquent
business until the mandatory late fee is paid.
   (C)   In the event that a license has expired and an application is received
for a new business license for a business that has operated in violation of
this section, the applicant shall be responsible for payment of the penalty
amount.
   (D)   Operating a business without a current business license is considered
a separate Class B misdemeanor for every day that the business operates without
a license. In the event that the city pursues legal action under this section,
the city is entitled to recover attorney’s fees and court costs associated with
such action, in addition to the outstanding business license fees.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.110)
§ 110.024 INSURANCE COMPANY EXEMPTION.
   Although they shall apply in all respects for the obtaining of a business
license pursuant to this subchapter, the following licensees are exempt from
the payment of license fees: insurance companies paying fees and licenses to
the state pursuant to applicable provisions of Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
However, if they are not paying a city fee, a copy of the state license must be
submitted to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.120)
§ 110.025 UNSPECIFIED FEES OR TIME PERIODS.
   The fees and time periods for licenses not specifically set forth elsewhere
in this business regulation title for the conduct of any business shall be
those set forth in §§
110.022 through
110.024 of this chapter. The licenses shall be effective for the time period
specified on the license.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.130)
§ 110.026 MISTAKES IN FEE CALCULATIONS.
   (A)   In no event shall any mistakes made by an applicant, a licensee or the
Department in the calculation of a license fee prevent or prejudice the
collection by the city of the amount actually due from any person subject to
licensing under this subchapter.
   (B)   Likewise, no such mistakes shall prevent or prejudice the refund to
licensees of amounts overpaid by reason of mistakes.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.140)
§ 110.027 DEVIATIONS PROHIBITED.
   No greater or lesser amounts shall be charged or received for licenses and
no license shall be issued for any period of time other than as specifically
provided in this business regulation title.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.150)
§ 110.028 REFUNDS.
   No refund shall be made against any fee for a license issued pursuant to
this subchapter unless such refund is approved by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.160)
§ 110.029 LICENSE TRANSFERS.
   Except as otherwise specified in this business regulation title, a business
license may be transferred from one location to another or from one business
entity to another; provided, however, that, such transfer is contingent on the
same standards at the new business license location or for the new business
entity, as for the business license location or business entity that received
the original business license, and subject to an administrative fee as
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.170)
§ 110.030 APPLICATIONS FOR GENERAL, SPECIFIC LICENSES.
   (A)   Applications for general licenses will have no greater than a ten-
business-day review period unless extenuating circumstances apply as determined
by the Director.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.180)
   (B)   (1)   Applications shall be required and special licenses issued
pursuant to the provisions of other chapters of this business regulation title.
Approval by the Department must be given for special licenses required in this
business regulation title.
      (2)   Approval or denial of special licenses by the Department shall be
pursuant to the standards contained in the subchapter governing each license
and §
110.033 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.190)
(Ord. 02-02, passed 1-10-2002)
§ 110.031 BONDING.
   (A)   As specified in this business regulation title, certain occupations or
businesses require the posting of cash or corporate surety bond in the sum set
by resolution of the City Council in addition to whatever regular or special
licenses may be required pursuant to the provisions of this business regulation
title.
   (B)   All such bonds shall be conditional for the faithful observance by the
licensee of all laws and ordinances of the city and for the honest performance
of all duties required of the licensee by ordinance as well as for such
additional purposes as may be required in the particular chapter of this
business regulation title requiring a license for such occupation or business.
Proof of renewal of such bond must be presented each year.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.200)
§ 110.032 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.
   (A)   Denial of a business license or alcoholic beverage license. After a
person has made application to the city for a business license or alcoholic
beverage license, the application may be denied for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   The applicant does not meet the qualifications for a licensee as
provided under this business regulation title;
      (2)   For a new application, non-payment of a returned check for the
required license fees at the time the application is made. For a business
license renewal application, non-payment of the required license fees plus
penalty three months after it is due. For an alcoholic beverage license, non-
payment of the required license fees plus penalty after January 1 in any year;
      (3)   One of the reviewing departments or divisions of the city provided
for in this business regulation title has disapproved the application pursuant
to any applicable provision of the city code;
      (4)   False or incomplete information given on the application;
      (5)   Non-compliance with any requirement or condition set by the
Planning Commission or Community Development Department, if applicable, under a
conditional use permit or design review approval; by the Appeal Authority or
Community Development Department, if applicable, granting a variance or special
exception; by the City Council; by the Redevelopment Agency; or by agreement;
      (6)   Non-compliance with any city, state or federal statutes or any Bear
River Health Department regulations governing the applicant’s proposed
business; and
      (7)   Any other reason expressly provided for in this business regulation
title.
   (B)   Reasons for suspension or revocation. An existing business license or
alcoholic beverage license may be suspended or revoked for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   The licensee does not now meet the qualifications for a license as
provided under this business regulation title;
      (2)   False or incomplete information given on an application;
      (3)   The licensee has violated or is violating any provision of this
business regulations title or provision of the city code, state or federal
statutes or regulations governing the licensee’s business;
      (4)   The licensee has obtained or aided another person to obtain a
license by fraud or deceit;
      (5)   The licensee has failed to pay property taxes or sales tax;
      (6)   The licensee has refused authorized representative of the city to
make an inspection or has interfered with such representatives while in the
performance of their duty in making such inspection;
      (7)   The licensee is not complying with a requirement or condition set
by the Planning Commission or Community Development Department, if applicable,
under a conditional use permit or design review approval; by the Appeal
Authority or Community Development Department, if applicable, granting a
variance or special exception; by the City Council; by the Redevelopment
Agency; or by agreement;
      (8)   Violation of this business regulation title by the agents or
employees of a licensee and violations of any other laws by the agents or
employees committed while acting as an agent or employee of the licensee; or
      (9)   Any other reason expressly provided for in this business regulation
title.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The Community Development Director or designee shall have the
authority, without a hearing, to deny a license for the reasons provided for in
this subchapter.
      (2)   The Community Development Director or designee shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke a license without a hearing, for reasons
provided in this subchapter. However, the suspension or revocation shall not
take effect until the time period for appealing the decision as set forth in
this subchapter below has passed.
      (3)   The Community Development Director or designee may, on his or her
own initiative or in response to complaints from the general public or any city
department or division, investigate and gather evidence of violations of this
business regulation title or other circumstances which may give rise to a
denial, suspension or revocation.
   (D)   Procedure for suspension or revocation. The Community Development
Director or designee shall cause written notice to be given by personal service
or registered mail to the licensee of his or her decision to suspend or revoke
a license, the reason for such decision, that the operation of a business after
the effective date of the suspension or revocation is a Class B misdemeanor,
the licensee’s right to appeal the Community Development Director or designee’s
decision and have a hearing and the appeal procedure.
   (E)   License Hearing Board. The Mayor and City Council are hereby
designated as the city’s License Hearing Board. The License Hearing Board shall
have authority to hear evidence in business license matters referred to the
Board. The Mayor shall serve as Chairperson of the Board and the Board shall
designate one member to be Vice-Chairperson for a period of one year.
   (F)   Appeal procedure.
      (1)   Appeals of the Community Development Director or designee’s
decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license may be made by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Hearing Board within 15 days of receipt of the notice
of denial, suspension or revocation.
      (2)   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth with
specificity the reasons for which the appeal is taken.
   (G)   Hearing.
      (1)   The hearing shall be held prior to or following completion of a
regularly scheduled City Council meeting, and not later than the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting after receipt of the notice of appeal.
      (2)   At the hearing, the Hearing Board or representative from the City
Attorney’s office shall present the reason for the decision to deny, suspend or
revoke the license.
      (3)   The applicant or licensee, in person or through his or her
attorney, may then present any evidence showing why the decision was in error.
      (4)   All witnesses shall be sworn to testify truthfully. Either party is
entitled to confront and cross-examine any witness.
      (5)   Any oral or documentary evidence may be received, but the Hearing
Board shall exclude all privileged, irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
      (6)   If the denial, suspension or revocation appealed from is based on a
finding by the Community Development Department, Fire Department, Bear River
Health Department or Police Department that the business was or would be in
violation of their applicable ordinances or regulations, then that finding
shall be conclusive on the Hearing Board, and the Board’s decision may be based
only on whether the license was properly denied, suspended or revoked because
of that Department’s finding.
      (7)   If the denial, suspension or revocation appealed from is based on a
determination by the Community Development Director or designee that grounds
existed pursuant to this code, the Hearing Board may examine the factual nature
of the grounds and determine whether such grounds are sufficient to sustain the
decision of the Community Development Director or designee.
      (8)   The License Hearing Board does not have the authority to waive
compliance with applicable provision of this business regulation title, nor can
the Hearing Board extend deadlines set forth in the ordinances or change the
substance or form of the ordinances.
   (H)   Decision of the Hearing Board. The Hearing Board, after hearing all
the evidence, shall announce its decision within seven days from the date of
hearing. The Hearing Board may affirm or reverse the decision of the Community
Development Director or designee. The decision shall be in writing and shall be
based only upon findings of fact. The Hearing Board may designate that the
prevailing party draft the findings of fact and order. If the prevailing party
drafts the findings of fact and order, the opposing party shall have five days
from the date the draft is submitted within which to file objections to the
draft. Upon resolution of all objections to the draft, the Hearing Board shall
release the findings of fact and order.
   (I)   Appeal of Hearing Board Decision. Any decision of the License Hearing
Board may be appealed by the applicant, licensee or city to the district court
within 30 days from when the written decision is made.
   (J)   Licensing after revocation. A person, whose license has been revoked,
may not be issued a license for a period of 12 months after the revocation.
   (K)   Validity of business license or alcoholic beverage license during
appeal. Throughout the appeal process as outlined above, a licensee holding a
suspended or revoked business or alcoholic beverage license may continue to
operate his or her business in accordance with federal, state and local laws
pending final decision on the appeal, or until the time for appeal has passed,
whichever occurs first.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.210)
§ 110.033 BUSINESS OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR CONCESSIONAIRE.
   For purposes of business or premises’ owners who contract out the sale of
alcoholic beverages on the business premises to an independent concessionaire,
violation by said concessionaire of any provision of this business regulation
title shall constitute grounds for suspension and/or revocation of the license
of said business or premises owner.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.220)
§ 110.034 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE.
   (A)   All police officers of the city are hereby appointed inspectors of
licenses and, in addition to their several duties as police officers, are
empowered and required in the performance of their duties to examine all places
of business and persons who are required to have licenses to see that such
licenses are in fact valid and that they are posted in a conspicuous place
within the place of business or displayed as required.
   (B)   Police officers shall have and exercise the power:
      (1)   To enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for
which a license is required; to demand the exhibition of a current license by
any person engaged or employed in the conduct of such business; and, if such
person shall then and there fail to exhibit such license, such person shall be
liable for the penalties provided for violation of this business regulation
title; and
      (2)   To make arrests for the violation of any provisions of this
business regulation title.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the city police officers to cause complaints
to be filed for all persons violating any of the provisions of this business
regulation title.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.230)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this business regulation
title, any person violating any of the provisions of this business regulation
title shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.240)
   (B)   The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting business
without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of
any license fees due or unpaid at the time of such conviction; and nothing
herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.250)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Purpose
   
111.002   Definitions
   
111.003   Beer retailers; operational requirements; enforcement
License Regulations
   
111.015   License required
   
111.016   State-issued license required for alcohol establishments
   
111.017   Special event permits including alcoholic beverages
   
111.018   Annual license fees and bonds
Enforcement Actions
   
111.030   Applicability
   
111.031   Grounds
   
111.032   Hearing Board; membership; authority
   
111.033   Procedures
   
111.034   Appeals
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to normalize the regulation of alcoholic
beverages by the city by:
   (A)   Simplifying alcoholic beverage control regulation so that they do not
duplicate state regulations; and
   (B)   Limit the city’s regulatory interests to business licensing and land
use concerns as provided in this business regulation title and
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances. The provisions of this chapter shall be
construed to effectuate those purposes. This chapter does not limit in any way
the responsibilities of city police officers or city prosecutors under state
law.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.010) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. The same meaning as held in Utah Code.
   ALCOHOLIC ESTABLISHMENT. Any business that sells alcoholic beverages to
patrons for consumption on the premises as set forth in Chapter 156 of this
code of ordinances.
   BEER RETAILER. A retail business that sells beer pursuant to Utah Code.
   LICENSE ENFORCEMENT ACTION. The administrative process set forth in §
111.030 of this chapter.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. For purposes of this chapter, a special event permit
issued by the city.
   TEMPORARY LICENSE. A city business license issued to an alcohol
establishment that is valid for a six-month period corresponding with the
periods provided for temporary permits issued by the state. Such licenses may
include single event permit, special use permit or other temporary permits
administered by the state.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.020) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.003 BEER RETAILERS; OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any requirements under this chapter, beer retailers are
subject to the operational requirements set forth in Utah Code.
   (B)   For violations related to underage sale of beer, the enforcement
process set forth in Utah Code applies.
   (C)   For all other violations, the requirements of this chapter apply.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.030) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
LICENSE REGULATIONS
§ 111.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Alcohol establishments and off premises beer retailers must obtain a
business license subject to the general requirements set forth in §§
110.015 through
110.034 of this code of ordinances and the requirements included in this
chapter. Alcohol establishments which qualify for a temporary license issued by
the state may obtain a temporary license for the same term for which the state
license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.030) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.016 STATE-ISSUED LICENSE REQUIRED FOR ALCOHOL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No alcohol establishment may serve alcoholic beverages within the city
without the appropriate valid license or permit used by the state pursuant to
Utah Code.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.040) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.017 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS INCLUDING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Required. A city-issued special event permit is required for all
events which are required to obtain from the state a temporary permit under
Utah Code, allowing alcohol to be stored, sold, served and consumed for short-
term events.
   (B)   Application requirements. In addition to the application requirements
of a special event permit, the following information is required:
      (1)   The time, dates and location of the event;
      (2)   A description of the nature and purpose of the event;
      (3)   A description of the control measures to be imposed by the state
and where alcohol will be stored, served and sold; and
      (4)   A signed consent form stating that law enforcement and authorized
city representatives shall have the unrestricted right to enter and inspect the
premises during the event to ensure compliance with state law and city
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.050) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.018 ANNUAL LICENSE FEES AND BONDS.
   (A)   (1)   Alcohol establishments and beer retailers are subject to the
annual license fees set forth by the city.
      (2)   The city may, through resolution, separate alcohol establishments
into sub-categories based on the types of alcohol served and the type of
business conducted within the alcohol establishment.
   (B)   In addition to the fees required under the provisions of this chapter,
each applicant will be required to post a cash or corporate surety bond in the
amount set by resolution of the City Council, which is to remain in effect
during the entire license period. The bond is for the purpose of guaranteeing
compliance with all city laws and ordinances and shall be forfeited in the
event of the licensee’s or employee’s conviction of a felony, or the violation
by the licensee of any laws or ordinances relating to alcoholic beverages,
possession of controlled substances, gambling or keeping disorderly house under
the laws of the state, ordinances of the city or laws or ordinances or any
other jurisdiction within or without the state.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.060) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS
§ 111.030 APPLICABILITY.
   License enforcement actions, as defined in §
111.002 of this chapter, are applicable to alcohol establishments only. Beer
retailers are subject, when applicable, to the enforcement requirements set
forth in Utah Code, or the enforcement provisions set forth in §
110.032 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.070) (Ord. 16-10, passed 7-7-2016)
§ 111.031 GROUNDS.
   In addition to the grounds set forth in §
110.032 of this chapter, the following are grounds for a license enforcement
action:
   (A)   Failure to comply with the terms of a permit issued by the city under
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances; and
   (B)   Three or more serious or grave disciplinary sanctions, as defined by
the state, within a three- year period.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.080) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.032 HEARING BOARD; MEMBERSHIP; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Alcohol Enforcement Hearing Board hears license enforcement
actions and determines appropriate penalties, based on the guidelines provided
in §
111.031 of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council shall serve as the Alcohol Enforcement Hearing Board.
   (C)   The Community and Economic Development Department will provide staff
support to the Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.090) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.033 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   How initiated. Upon receipt of a complaint regarding an alcohol
establishment, the Community and Economic Development Department will review
the complaint with the City Attorney to determine whether sufficient grounds
and evidence exist to initiate a license enforcement action. The Community and
Economic Development Department or City Attorney may request city staff to
investigate further or obtain additional evidence before making a
determination.
   (B)   Notice upon determination to initiate a license enforcement action. If
a determination is made that sufficient grounds exist to proceed, the Community
and Economic Development Department will schedule a hearing before the Alcohol
Enforcement Hearing Board. Thirty days’ written notice must be provided to the
applicant or licensee. Notice may be served personally or by registered letter,
return receipt requested, at the licensed premises. Receipt by any adult
employee of the business constitutes an adequate service. The notice must
include a description of the alleged conduct underlying the complaint; a
description of the potential penalties; the date, time and place the hearing
will be conducted; and a statement that the licensee has the right to appear,
be represented by an attorney, call witnesses and present evidence.
   (C)   Hearings.
      (1)   Hearings will be conducted before the Alcohol Enforcement Hearing
Board.
      (2)   The applicant or licensee may be represented by an attorney, call
witnesses and present evidence.
      (3)   Strict adherence to the state rules of evidence is not required.
The Board may consider any relevant, non-privileged oral or documentary
evidence presented.
      (4)   After hearing the evidence presented, the Board will make a factual
determination, based on a preponderance of the evidence, whether the alleged
grounds for enforcement have been proven. A finding by at least two Board
members is sufficient to sustain a determination. The Board may request that
counsel for either party draft the findings of fact.
      (5)   If the Board determines that there is not sufficient evidence to
provide the alleged grounds for enforcement, then the matter will be dismissed.
      (6)   If the Board determines that sufficient evidence exists to prove
the grounds for enforcement, then it must determine the appropriate penalty
based on the penalty specified in §
111.999 of this chapter. The Board must issue a written order, which may be
drafted by counsel for either party, referencing its finding of facts, and
stating the penalty imposed.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.100) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.034 APPEALS.
   The applicant or licensee and the city may appeal any action of the Board to
the First District Court. For the purpose of the appeal, the record of the
hearing includes the Board’s written findings and order, any evidence presented
to the Board and the audio recording of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.120) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   The Board is authorized to suspend or revoke a license as provided under §
110.032 of this chapter. In addition, for violations of §
111.031(A) of this chapter, with respect to failure to comply with the terms of
a conditional use permit, the following mandatory minimum penalties apply with
respect to each condition for which a violation is found within a three-year
period commencing on the date of the first offense. At the end of this three-
year period, the tiered offense cycle starts over.
   (A)   Class I violations. Violations of conditions that are required
pursuant to permits issued under
Chapter 156  of this code of ordinances are Class I violations.
      (1)   First offense: $500;
      (2)   Second offense: $750;
      (3)   Third offense: $1,000; and
      (4)   Subsequent offense: two-day suspension.
   (B)   Class II violations. Violations of conditions added for a specific
permit pursuant to
Chapter 156  of this code of ordinances are Class II violations.
      (1)   First offense: $250;
      (2)   Second offense: $500;
      (3)   Third offense: $1,000; and
      (4)   Subsequent offense: one-day suspension.
   (C)   Multiple violations. For purposes only of the monetary penalties in
this section, violations found to have occurred on days prior to and up to five
days after the licensee has received notice of the hearing shall constitute a
single offense. Each day of violation proved to have occurred thereafter shall
constitute a separate offense. If proven at the hearing, penalties for multiple
violations may be imposed in a single hearing.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.110) (Ord. 23-07, passed 3-16-2023)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   Circuses/carnivals; fees
Cabarets and Nightclubs
   
112.015   Definitions
   
112.016   License required
   
112.017   Application; fee
   
112.018   Compliance with laws
   
112.019   Unlawful activities
   
112.020   Interior visibility
   
112.021   Lighting
   
112.022   Hours of operation
Public Dances
   
112.035   Definitions
   
112.036   License required
   
112.037   Exemption
   
112.038   License application; qualifications of applicant
   
112.039   Investigation; referral of application
   
112.040   License suspension, revocation
   
112.041   License not transferable
   
112.042   License to be displayed
   
112.043   License fee
   
112.044   Prohibited activities
   
112.045   Illumination; visibility
   
112.046   Hours
   
112.047   Minors
Mobile Food Vendors
   
112.060   Definition
   
112.061   License required; display
   
112.062   License fees
   
112.063   License period
   
112.064   Separate applications
   
112.065   Insurance
   
112.066   Health Department approval
   
112.067   Location
   
112.068   Standards and regulations
 
   
112.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 CIRCUSES/CARNIVALS; FEES.
   Fees for circuses/carnivals shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.090)
CABARETS AND NIGHTCLUBS
§ 112.015 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   CABARET or NIGHTCLUB means any restaurant or other business
establishment licensed for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages
which permits its patrons to dance or entertains its patrons with live
performers who sing, dance or play musical instruments.
   (B)   It shall not include an adult live entertainment business required to
be licensed as a sexually- oriented business under
Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.010)
§ 112.016 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate a cabaret or nightclub
without first obtaining a license.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.020) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.017 APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Submission. Applications shall be made to the Community Development
Department.
   (B)   Referral to Chief of Police. The application shall be referred to the
Chief of Police, who shall within ten days after receiving the application,
report to the Community Development Department whether the premises is in
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter, and whether the cabaret or
nightclub has been operated in compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Initial applications; referrals. Initial applications shall be
referred to the following departments and divisions:
      (1)   Fire Department, to determine compliance with all fire codes;
      (2)   Building Inspections Division, to determine compliance with all
building codes; and
      (3)   Planning Division, to determine compliance with all zoning
ordinances.
   (D)   Reporting violations; duty. The Fire Department, the Building
Inspections Division and the Planning Division shall have a continuing duty to
report to the Community Development Department any violations of the premises
which have not been corrected.
   (E)   Fee. The fee for a cabaret license or nightclub license shall be the
fee as determined by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.030)
§ 112.018 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   No license shall be issued for a cabaret or nightclub unless and until it
shall be found that the premises for which it is issued complies with and
conforms to all laws, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto and is a
safe and proper place for the purposes for which it shall be used pursuant to
such license.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.040)
§ 112.019 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to whom a license under this subchapter
has been issued to allow or permit, on the licensed premises, any act to be
committed on the premises that is in violation of the statutes of the state or
the ordinances of the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a cabaret or nightclub license
to allow any dancer, model, performer or any other person to appear on the
premises in violation of
Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)    It shall be unlawful for any dancer, model, or performer, or any
other person to appear on the premises of a cabaret or nightclub in violation
of
Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.050) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.020 INTERIOR VISIBILITY.
   A clear, unobstructed view of the entire interior of a cabaret or nightclub,
or such portions of a business establishment where dancing or entertainment is
allowed, permitted or provided, shall be maintained by the licensee at all
times. The required view must be visible from either the entrance or from
another location open to plain view. The licensee shall not erect or maintain
any enclosures within the interior which obstructs the view of all areas where
dancing or entertainment is allowed, permitted or provided, and no booth, blind
or stall shall be maintained unless all tables, chairs and occupants, if any
therein, are kept open to plain view.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.060) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.021 LIGHTING.
   All cabarets or nightclubs shall maintain a minimum of two candlepower light
measured at a level of five feet above the floor.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.070) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.022 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No cabaret or nightclub shall provide dancing or entertainment between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.080) Penalty, see §
112.999
PUBLIC DANCES
§ 112.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DURING THE CONDUCT OF A PUBLIC DANCE. The period of time commencing one hour
before actual dancing commences and ending one hour after the dance concludes,
including all periods of intermission or entertainment in between.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance to which admission can be obtained by paying a fee;
or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token in which a
charge is made for caring for clothing or other property at such dance; or by
the payment of a fee for music from a music record vending machine or music
from any number of musicians personally present and playing in the presence of
those in attendance.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.010)
§ 112.036 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, commence, carry on or conduct
any public dance in any hall or building within the city without first
obtaining a license.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.020) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.037 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of §
112.019 of this chapter shall apply to exclude the licensing of dances
sponsored by churches, schools, non-profit associations and the like, as
therein specified.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.030)
§ 112.038 LICENSE APPLICATION; QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   The application for a dance license shall be accompanied by the amount of
the license fee required by this subchapter. The application shall be upon a
form or forms furnished by the Department, signed by the applicant and
addressed to the Department. The application form shall require information
relative to the location of the dance premises, applicant’s age, citizenship,
moral character and reputation and felony or misdemeanor convictions, if any,
involving moral turpitude. If the applicant is a partnership, association or
corporation the same information shall be obtained with respect to each
partner, association, member or corporate officer and director, although the
application need only be signed by a single partner, member or officer. Each
individual licensee must be over the age of 21 years, of good moral character
and a citizen of the United States. No license shall be granted to any
applicant who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude. If the applicant is a partnership, association or corporation, each
partner, association member or corporate officer or director shall meet all of
the foregoing qualifications as if such applicant were an individual.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.040)
§ 112.039 INVESTIGATION; REFERRAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The city’s Police Department shall examine all applications and
investigate all applicants for licenses under this subchapter.
   (B)   Inspectors from the City Fire, Inspection and Community Development
Departments, and the county’s Board of Health, shall examine the premises
wherein any public dance is to be conducted to determine whether or not the
same complies with and conforms to all laws, ordinances and health regulations
of the city, county and the state applicable thereto.
   (C)   Following such examinations and investigations, the recommendations of
the Police, Inspection and Community Development Departments, and the county’s
Board of Health, shall be made in writing to the Community Development Director
or designee, who shall forward the information to the Department. The
Department shall consider such recommendations and determine the suitability of
granting a license. If the inspections by the city’s Fire and Inspection
Departments, and the county’s Board of Health, and investigations of applicants
by the Police Department determine the premises and applicants to be in
compliance with and conform to all laws, ordinances and health regulations of
the city, county and state, the Department shall issue the license. If such
inspections and investigations determine the premises and/or applicants not to
be in such compliance, the license shall not be issued.
   (D)   The Police Department shall be permitted access to all premises
licensed or under consideration to be licensed pursuant to this subchapter,
shall make periodic inspections thereof, and shall report its findings to the
Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.050) (Ord. 02-01, passed 1-10-2002)
§ 112.040 LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may,
after a hearing, be suspended or revoked for the violation by the licensee of
any provisions of this subchapter or any other applicable ordinance or law, or
if it shall be determined that the licensee is no longer a fit person to hold a
license under the standards set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   The City Council shall hear and determine all suspension and
revocation matters pursuant to the provisions of §
110.016 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.060)
§ 112.041 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall not be transferable.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.070)
§ 112.042 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall at all times be
displayed on or in the licensed premises in a place readily visible to the
public.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.080) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.043 LICENSE FEE.
   A license fee as computed in accordance with §
110.002(A) of this code of ordinances shall be paid to the city when the
application is submitted for approval. The dance license shall be effective for
a dance or dances from the date of approval until December 31 of that year.
Applicants must then reapply and be approved by the Department for a new
license.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.090)
§ 112.044 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this subchapter during the
conduct of a public dance:
      (1)   To permit any person to bring, possess or consume beer or other
alcoholic beverages of any kind in or upon the licensed premises;
      (2)   To permit any person to bring, possess, use or consume controlled
substances, as the same are defined under the state’s Controlled Substances
Act, being Title 58, Chapter 37, or its successor statute, in or upon the
licensed premises;
      (3)   To permit any intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly person to
enter, re-enter, be or remain in or upon the licensed premises;
      (4)   To prevent compliance to the smoking requirements of the Utah State
Code; and
      (5)   To permit the commission of any indecent, gross, violent or vulgar
act in or upon the licensed premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person during the conduct of a public
dance:
      (1)   To bring, possess or consume beer or other alcoholic beverages of
any kind in or upon the licensed premises;
      (2)   To bring, possess, use or consume controlled substances as the same
are defined in the state’s Controlled Substances Act, in or upon the licensed
premises; and
      (3)   To be intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly in or upon the licensed
premises.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.100) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.045 ILLUMINATION; VISIBILITY.
   (A)   The licensed premises, including any adjacent booth, blind, stall or
seating area shall be kept properly illuminated at all times during the conduct
of a public dance.
   (B)   Any such adjacent booth, blind, stall or seating area shall also be
visible and open to full view from the entrance to the main dance floor.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.110) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.046 HOURS.
   No dancing shall be permitted in or upon the licensed premises between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day, except New Year’s Day, when said
prohibition shall be between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.120) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.047 MINORS.
   Minors not accompanied by an adult and who are under the age of 16 years
shall not be allowed to attend any public dance.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.130) Penalty, see §
112.999
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
§ 112.060 DEFINITION.
   A MOBILE FOOD VENDOR is a business that serves food or non-alcoholic
beverages from a self-contained unit either motorized or in a trailer on
wheels, which conducts its operations on premises other than its own and shall
be readily moveable, without disassembling, for transport to another location.
The term MOBILE FOOD VENDORS shall not include mobile food cart vendors or ice
cream vendors. (See §§
116.001 through
116.011 of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 14.09.010) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.061 LICENSE REQUIRED; DISPLAY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or entity to
conduct or operate as a mobile food vendor without first securing a city
business license.
      (2)   A current city business license is required for all mobile food
vendors.
   (B)   A mobile food vendor shall obtain an annual or temporary city business
license.
   (C)   The licensee shall conspicuously display their business license at a
location visible to the public.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.020) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.062 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for licenses required by this subchapter shall be established in
accordance with §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances, and all matters relating to fee
payments, renewals and the like, shall be governed by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.030) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.063 LICENSE PERIOD.
   A mobile food vendor may obtain an annual or a temporary city business
license.
   (A)   Annual. An annual city business license is valid for 12 months from
the day of issuance and in accordance with §
110.023 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Temporary. A temporary city business license is valid for a single
event or a special event, which special event may include multiple days at
different times of the season or year.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.040) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.064 SEPARATE APPLICATIONS.
   Separate business license applications may be required for mobile food
vendors. Separate business license fees shall be required for each mobile food
vendor unit operating under one business license.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.050) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.065 INSURANCE.
   (A)   An applicant shall present to the city prior to the issuance of a
business license a copy of their insurance for each mobile food unit (truck or
trailer) in use which provides a $1,000,000 minimum coverage for injury to or
death of one person, and $1,000,000 for each accident and $2,000,000 aggregate
with the city named as the additional insured.
   (B)   Each policy shall require a notice of cancellation to the city 30 days
prior to termination.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.060) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.066 HEALTH DEPARTMENT APPROVAL.
   Each vendor must be approved by the Bear River Health Department and comply
with their requirements.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.070) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.067 LOCATION.
   (A)   Private property. A mobile food vendor licensed with the city may be
permitted to operate on a private property parking lot or an improved portion
of an occupied business property other than required landscape within the
commercial or industrial zoning districts; provided:
      (1)   Written consent is given by the private property owner;
      (2)   Parking shall be adequate to serve existing property use and the
proposed mobile food vendor; and
      (3)   Have access to a permanent bathroom facility during the occupied
business property hours of operation.
   (B)   Public property. A licensed mobile food vendor with the city may be
permitted on publicly-owned property through a city special event permit. The
location of the vendor is determined by the special event coordinator and not
allowed to be in the public right-of-way unless the public right-of-way is
closed to the public for the special event.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.080) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 112.068 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   The following standards shall be adhered to.
   (A)   A mobile food vendor unit, whether vehicle or trailer, shall be
properly registered and licensed for use.
   (B)   Placement of vending unit shall be on the private property, unless
approved as part of the city special event permit on public property, and
located at least ten feet from a public sidewalk or 20 feet from the street
curb if no sidewalk.
   (C)   Parking or placement of vending unit shall be located on an improved
portion of the site and not on any park strip or landscape area.
   (D)   The placement of the vending unit shall be located in a manner as not
to obstruct, disrupt or interfere with the vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow
into or out of a site and the internal parking lot circulation.
   (E)   Placement of vending unit shall not obstruct the clear view area as
described in §
156.353 of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   A vendor shall not operate within 100 feet of the entrance door of a
restaurant unless the said restaurant waives the distance requirement for the
vendor. The proximity requirement is measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the vending unit to the nearest entrance of the restaurant.
   (G)   Overnight parking is not allowed unless approved as part of a city
special event permit. The business activity of a mobile food vendor at any one
site is considered temporary in nature.
   (H)   Hours of operation are between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless
approved as part of a city special event permit.
   (I)   Food and beverages shall only be sold or offered for sale when the
vending unit is completely stopped and parked.
   (J)   Vehicles are not allowed to idle.
   (K)   The vending unit shall not operate as a drive through.
   (L)   Vending units shall be maintained, clean, and kept in good operating
condition.
   (M)   The vendor shall provide trash and recycling containers for use of
their customers. Containers shall be removed from the site when the vendor
leaves the site.
   (N)   All signs are limited to those that are physically attached to the
vending unit. Except for one menu sign that shall not exceed three feet by four
feet and shall be placed on a hard surface no more than ten feet from the
vending unit. The menu sign shall not be placed within the public right-of-way.
   (O)   The vending unit shall not cause noise, light or glare which adversely
impacts surrounding uses. Flashing, scintillating, blinking or traveling lights
are not allowed.
(Prior Code, § 14.09.090) (Ord. 15-18, passed 11-3-2016) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
110.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of §§
112.035 through
112.047 of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.07.140)
CHAPTER 113: VEHICLE-RELATED BUSINESSES
Section
Towing Services
   
113.001   Definitions
   
113.002   Duty to provide information
   
113.003   To be added to tow rotation list
   
113.004   Regulation of non-consensual towing and practices
   
113.005   Repossession of vehicles
TOWING SERVICES
§ 113.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   IMPOUND YARD. The same term as set forth by §§
156.605 through
156.610 of this code of ordinances used by a business with a valid business
license and in compliance with all state law and city ordinances.
   MOTOR CARRIER. A person engaged in or transacting the business of
transporting passengers, freight, merchandise or other property by a commercial
vehicle on a highway within the state and includes a tow truck business.
   OWNER. As pertaining to a vehicle means the same as that term is defined in
U.C.A. § 41-1a-102.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The owner or lessee of real property.
   TOW TRUCK MOTOR CARRIER. A motor carrier that is engaged in or transacting
business for tow truck services.
   TOW TRUCK OPERATOR. An individual that performs operations related to a tow
truck service as an employee or as an independent contractor on behalf of a tow
truck motor carrier.
   TOW TRUCK SERVICES. The functions “of”, “in” any ancillary operations
associated with recovering, removing and towing a vehicle and its load from a
highway or other place by means of a tow truck.
(Prior Code, § 14.10.010) (Ord. 20-10, passed 6-4-2020; Ord. 23-13, passed 7-6-
2023)
§ 113.002 DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.
   (A)   A person conducting towing operations shall furnish an itemized
statement of services performed, labor and special equipment used in completing
a tow of a vehicle, and the costs charged for each of the following:
      (1)   The person requesting the towing service;
      (2)   The owner of the vehicle towed;
      (3)   The duly authorized agent of either of the above; or
      (4)   The towing dispatch fee assessed for each tow processed through the
city’s approved dispatch vendor, for an amount approved by contract by the City
Council, as permitted by state law U.C.A. § 72-9-604(7).
   (B)   Such records shall be furnished by the tow company to any person
authorized by this section to receive such statement.
(Prior Code, § 14.10.020) (Ord. 20-10, passed 6-4-2020; Ord. 23-13, passed 7-6-
2023; 23-21, passed 9-21-2023)
§ 113.003 TO BE ADDED TO TOW ROTATION LIST.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall create and
administer a rotation list comprised of those towing companies who comply with
all the terms of this city code, applicable city administrative policy, and are
authorized to respond to calls for service by the Police Department.
      (2)   One slot on the rotation list shall be given to each compliant
company.
      (3)   To ensure fair distribution of calls for service, however,
companies with different names, but which utilize the same employees, trucks,
business offices or impound yards shall be treated as one company for purposes
of the rotation list, and shall only have one slot on the list.
   (B)   A company desiring to be placed on the city’s Police Department tow
rotation list shall provide the following to the city’s Police Department: a
signed (electronically) letter acknowledging acceptance of the related city
administrative policy.
   (C)   Once a company meets the requirements stated above and agrees to
comply with the standards established in the administrative policy, the company
will be placed on the city’s Police Department tow rotation list.
(Prior Code, § 14.10.030) (Ord. 20-10, passed 6-4-2020; Ord. 23-03, passed 1-
19-2023; Ord. 23-13, passed 7-6-2023)
§ 113.004 REGULATION OF NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING AND PRACTICES.
   (A)   Owners of private property may, to the extent authorized by this
section, tow away any unauthorized vehicle on their premises. An unauthorized
vehicle is any vehicle that is parked or stopped on private property in
violation of applicable parking rules, guidelines or regulations.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tow away a
vehicle on any authority other than by direct request of the owner of the
vehicle or the property owner from where the vehicle is towed, or their agent.
A police officer in the course of his or her official duties may also authorize
a tow. The towing of any vehicle in situations where the vehicle’s owner or
authorized agent, or a police officer is not present or requesting the tow,
shall be reported to the city’s Police Department dispatch center prior to
towing, using the current published non-emergency telephone number of the
city’s Police Department. The report shall include:
      (1)   The make and model of the vehicle, including the license number and
state, and vehicle identification number (VIN) of the vehicle being impounded
or towed;
      (2)   The name of the firm or corporation impounding or towing the
vehicle and the name of the tow truck operator;
      (3)   The location from where the vehicle was taken;
      (4)   The reason the vehicle was towed; and
      (5)   The location where the subject vehicle will be kept and the 24-hour
telephone number which an owner can call to arrange for release of the vehicle.
   (C)   Before towing a vehicle located on private property, a parking
enforcement or towing company shall:
      (1)   Receive from the property owner or his, her or their authorized
agent, who shall not be affiliated in any way with the parking enforcement or
tow company, a signed request for each tow of a particular vehicle; provided,
however, that, property owners who have a written contract with a parking
enforcement or tow company where the provisions of the contract are consistent
with the provisions of this section shall not be required to sign a request
before a vehicle is towed from their property:
         (a)   Written contracts for towing or parking services shall specify
when and under what conditions parked vehicles shall be subject to towing
(i.e., how long a vehicle must be parked in violation before it may be towed,
where parking is prohibited, if a warning must be given first and the like);
and
         (b)   Towing or parking enforcement companies who enter into written
contracts with property owners for towing services pursuant to the terms of
this section shall provide to the Police Department copies of the contracts
before towing the vehicle covered by the contract.
      (2)   Post in a prominent place at the business location where vehicles
are released from storage a copy of a schedule of fees. Upon request, a parking
enforcement or towing company shall show a current copy of its fee schedule to
a person whose vehicle is being towed; and
      (3)   Maintain personnel authorized to release any vehicle to its owner
24 hours each day.
   (D)   Property owners, managers or their agents shall not receive any
consideration whatsoever from any parking enforcement or towing company in
exchange for utilizing such company’s services to tow unauthorized vehicles
from the owner’s property or for entering into a services contract with a
parking enforcement or towing company.
(Prior Code, § 14.10.040) (Ord. 20-10, passed 6-4-2020; Ord. 23-03, passed 1-
19-2023; Ord. 23-13, passed 7-6-2023)
§ 113.005 REPOSSESSION OF VEHICLES.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to apply to the
lawful repossession of vehicles by persons or entities that have valid security
interests or liens on the vehicles being repossessed.
(Prior Code, § 14.10.050) (Ord. 20-10, passed 6-4-2020)
CHAPTER 114: LODGING AND RENTAL DWELLINGS
Section
Apartment Houses, Rental Dwelling Units and Mobile Home Parks
   
114.001   Definition
   
114.002   License required
   
114.003   License fees
   
114.004   Application for license
   
114.005   Restrictions for issuance of licenses
   
114.006   Investigations by city
   
114.007   Fire Marshal
   
114.008   Investigation by Community Development
   
114.009   Issuance of license
Motels, Hotels and Overnight Transient Lodgings
   
114.020   Definitions
   
114.021   Lodging permit
   
114.022   Minimum standards
   
114.023   Limitation of continuous and cumulative occupancy and use
   
114.024   Calls for service
   
114.025   Annual calls for service
   
114.026   Revocation of business license
   
114.027   Subsequent applications for licenses, endorsements; conditions of
approval
   
114.028   Appeals
 
   
114.999   Penalty
APARTMENT HOUSES, RENTAL DWELLING UNITS AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 114.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT, LOCAL OR RESIDENT. A person who resides in the state.
   APARTMENT HOUSE or APARTMENT. Any building so arranged, designed, built,
rented, loaned, let or hired out to be used or occupied as the home, residence
or dwelling unit of three or more families living independently of each other.
As used herein, the term APARTMENT HOUSE shall include three-family dwellings,
four-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings.
   DWELLINGS.
      (1)   DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by four families, the structure having only four dwelling units.
      (2)   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by more than four families, and having more than four dwelling units.
      (3)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
      (4)   DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by three families, the structure having only three dwelling units.
      (5)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by two families, the structure having only two dwelling units.
   MOBILE HOME.
      (1)   A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities.
      (2)   It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether
or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park which is
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
   OWNER. The person having ownership.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any individual dwelling unit that is rented, loaned,
let or hired out to be used or occupied as a home or residence.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.010)
§ 114.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association as
owner, lessee or agent thereof, to keep, conduct, operate or maintain for rent
or lease any single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, mobile home or
apartment house within the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, unless
said person, firm, corporation, association or partnership holds a current,
unrevoked business license under this subchapter. A license may be required in
accordance with U.C.A. § 10-8-85.5, or its successor law. Licenses shall be
good for 365 days from the day of issuance. Said licenses are not transferrable
between parties or structures and parties holding such licenses shall give
notice in writing within 48 hours to the Department after having transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal or equitable control of any premises licensed
under these provisions. Such notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a
request to cancel the business license and shall include the name(s), address
(es) and phone number(s) regarding parties succeeding to the ownership or
control of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.020) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.003 LICENSE FEES.
   The license fee for an apartment house, rental dwelling unit or mobile home
park business license shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.030)
§ 114.004 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Applications for an apartment house, rental dwelling unit or mobile
home park business license shall have a 14-day review period and final
determination as to the suitability of issuing a license shall be made by the
Department. Application for said license shall be made on forms provided by the
Department and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The location and address of said apartment house, rental dwelling
unit or mobile home park;
      (2)   The number of units located in said apartment house, rental
dwelling unit or mobile home park;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of each of the following:
the applicant; the owner of the fee title interest; the owners of any equitable
interest; the local operating agent; and the resident manager; also the
designation of a legal representative and agent, who must reside in the state,
for service of each corporate and out of state owner; and
      (4)   The signature of the owners of the premises, and the operator if
different, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Upon annual renewal of a license under this subchapter, the licensee
shall update any information contained in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) above
to specify any changes that have occurred during the license period.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.040)
§ 114.005 RESTRICTIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   No license shall be issued or renewed under this subchapter for a non-
resident applicant unless such applicant formally designates in writing with a
power of attorney in the name of his or her resident agent for receipt of
service for notice of violation of the provisions of this subchapter or any
other applicable ordinances, and for service of process pursuant to this
subchapter acknowledged by said agent. No license shall be issued or renewed
under this subchapter unless the applicant, owner and operator agree as a
condition precedent by signing the license application, to such inspections as
may be required pursuant to §
114.006 of this chapter to determine whether the apartment house, rental
dwelling unit or mobile home park is in compliance with applicable
requirements. The failure of the applicant and/or operator to consent to such
inspection shall be grounds for the denial and/or revocation of a business
license.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.050)
§ 114.006 INVESTIGATIONS BY CITY.
   The original application for a license under this subchapter and all
renewals thereof shall be referred for approval to the departments listed below
for investigation as to whether or not all laws, ordinances and regulations,
pertaining to life/fire safety, fire protection and prevention and applicable
codes have been and are being complied with.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.060)
§ 114.007 FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   The original application for a license under this subchapter, and
renewals thereof, shall be referred to the Fire Department for investigation as
to whether or not all laws, ordinances and regulations pertaining to life/fire
safety and fire protection and prevention have been and are being complied
with.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall report to the Department within seven days as
to the fitness of the apartment house, rental dwelling unit or mobile home park
regarding compliance with said laws and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.070)
§ 114.008 INVESTIGATION BY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   The original application for a license under this subchapter shall be
referred to the Community Development Department for investigation as to
whether or not the requirements of the land use ordinances and building codes
have been complied with. The Community Development Department shall report to
the Department within seven days as to the fitness of the apartment house,
rental dwelling unit or mobile home park regarding compliance with said codes.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.080)
§ 114.009 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Within seven days after receiving recommendations from the Fire and
Community Development Departments, the Department shall act upon the
application in respect to granting or denying the same, as it shall deem just
and proper.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.090)
MOTELS, HOTELS AND OVERNIGHT TRANSIENT LODGINGS
§ 114.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CALLS FOR SERVICE. Calls for the city’s Police Department or other law
enforcement agencies concerning a transient lodging facility in connection with
law enforcement services related to criminal activity, civil disputes or
violations of local, state or federal laws, which result in law enforcement
personnel being dispatched or directed to the transient lodging facility. CALLS
FOR SERVICE include incidents observed by police that a violation of the law
has occurred or is occurring at the transient lodging facility. Multiple calls
for one discrete event shall count as one CALL FOR SERVICE. CALLS FOR SERVICE
shall not include the following: calls initiated by the owner, manager or
employee of a transient lodging facility; medical calls unrelated to criminal
activity; calls originating from the transient lodging facility but relating to
off-premises disturbances; calls related to the enforcement of an existing
protective order or stalking injunction.
   OWNER. Any person with an ownership interest in or who is directing the
operation of a transient lodging facility.
   POLICE. Any authorized agent or officer of the city’s Police Department or
any other officer or agent of a local, state or federal law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction.
   TRANSIENT LODGING FACILITY. Any building or property, its associated
parking, landscaping and other ancillary facilities with more than ten rental
units, that provides lodging accommodations on a daily or other basis or used
or maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel,
hotel or any other place where sleeping, rooming, conference or exhibition
accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals.
One room offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be
considered as a single hotel or motel unit. In no event shall these terms be
construed to mean rooming houses, dormitories, apartment houses or other types
of permanent residential uses.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.010) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 114.021 LODGING PERMIT.
   (A)   Business license and lodging permit. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, entity or corporation to operate a transient lodging facility in
the city without first obtaining a valid business license in accordance with §§
110.015 through
110.034 of this chapter and a lodging permit in accordance with this
subchapter.
   (B)   Annual application. An application for a lodging permit shall be filed
annually with the Community and Economic Development Department by each
transient lodging facility. Application for a lodging permit shall be filed on
the forms provided by the city. Initial applications for a lodging permit by a
new transient lodging facility or such facilities that have not previously held
a lodging permit shall be filed concurrently with a business license
application or business license renewal application. Thereafter, annual
application shall follow the procedures outlined herein. The deadline for
submitting the application for the renewal of a lodging permit shall be 60 days
prior to the date of expiration of a current lodging permit, or if this date
falls on a weekend or holiday, on the next business day. All required
inspections shall be scheduled to be completed not less than 30 days prior to
the date of expiration of a current lodging permit. The lodging permit shall be
issued or denied within 60 days upon receipt of a completed application. In the
event a transient lodging facility is denied a lodging permit, the Community
and Economic Development Department shall provide written notice stating the
reason(s) for the denial.
   (C)   Permit. The lodging permit application must provide the following:
      (1)   The name, address and registered agent of the person, corporation
or other entity that owns or operates the transient lodging facility;
      (2)   The name and 24-hour telephone number for the representative of the
transient lodging facility that will be available to interact with the police
and/or emergency responders to the transient lodging facility;
      (3)   A copy of any citation, violation, notice, warning or other similar
correspondence issued to the transient lodging facility by any governmental
agency (state, federal or local) other than the city in the past 36 months
relating to any alleged dangerous or unlawful condition at the transient
lodging facility;
      (4)   A copy of the building plans for the transient lodging facility,
where available, in a form acceptable to the Chief Building Official and Fire
Chief (unless such plans are already on file with the city in an acceptable
format);
      (5)   Confirmation of the number of rooms/units within the transient
lodging facility;
      (6)   The current names and telephone numbers for any person employed as
a manager of the transient lodging facility; and
      (7)   Such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the City
Community and Economic Development Department.
   (D)   Misrepresentation. Any material misrepresentation in a lodging permit
application or failure to provide the required information are grounds for
denial.
   (E)   Authorization and consent.
      (1)   The submission of a lodging permit application hereunder shall
constitute the consent of the applicant, its owners and managers to an annual
inspection of the entire premises by any authorized personnel of the city in
accordance with this subchapter.
      (2)   An applicant or licensee’s refusal to grant access to the premises
for an inspection may constitute grounds for denial of a pending application or
renewal of a lodging permit.
   (F)   Scheduling inspections.
      (1)   Transient lodging facility licensees and lodging permit applicants
shall schedule written inspections with the Community and Economic Development
Department not less than 60 days prior to the date in which their then-current
business license or lodging permit expires, and shall provide written
notification of the pending room inspection to all persons who are then-
currently renting or who will be renting a room/unit at the transient lodging
facility on the scheduled date(s) of inspection.
      (2)   The transient lodging facility shall reasonably cooperate with the
city and its agents and employees, in gaining access to every room, including,
but not limited to, requiring tenants to change rooms to permit inspection of
every room at the earliest possible time.
   (G)   Violations revealed during inspection. In the event an inspection
reveals the violation of any applicable standard, ordinance, state or federal
law, the violation shall be documented in writing and submitted to the
transient lodging facility. The transient lodging facility shall be responsible
for correcting the violation(s) within the timeline specified by the city. If,
upon subsequent inspection, the violation has not been corrected, then the city
may deny a lodging permit, issue a citation to the transient lodging facility
for any violation or enter into a compliance agreement whereby the transient
lodging facility agrees to correct the violation and/or pay a specified fine to
the city in lieu of issuance of a citation.
   (H)   Franchise inspection. The Community and Economic Development
Department may accept inspections conducted by a third party pursuant to the
transient lodging facility’s franchise requirements in lieu of an annual
inspection performed by the city. However, acceptance of franchise inspections
is contingent upon the transient lodging facility making available its
inspection specifications and requirements, a copy of the inspection findings,
written certification that the inspection is performed at least annually and
that the franchise inspection complies with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (I)   License term. Business licenses and lodging permits shall be valid for
a period of one year commencing on the date of issuance. The holders of a
business license and lodging permit shall re-apply for additional periods of
one year.
   (J)   Legal expenses. In the event that the city is compelled to pursue
legal or administrative action based upon any actual or alleged violation and
the city prevails in such action, the city shall also be entitled to recover
the costs incurred by the city in providing personnel to investigate, process,
prosecute or testify at any hearing to such legal action, which cost shall be
consistent with the costs associated with the process of reinspection (cost
plus 5%), and the transient lodging facility shall be responsible for such
costs.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.020) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.022 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance with city ordinances. All transient lodging facilities in
the city shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances, including all
building codes as stated in City Code Title 5 and fire codes as stated in
U.C.A. Title 11, and Utah Administrative Code, Rule R392-502. An owner or
operator shall keep the premises of the transient lodging facility sanitary and
shall provide every practical facility essential for that purpose.
   (B)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful to rent or to offer to rent any room
that violates or fails to satisfy any of the foregoing requirements.
   (C)   Illegal activity.
      (1)   No owner, operator or property manager shall knowingly allow,
permit or fail to discover the occurrence of any illegal act in any room or on
the premises under such circumstances in which a reasonable person, exercising
ordinary care and diligence, would surmise that such activity is occurring.
      (2)   The failure to set forth the true identity of and correct hours of
occupancy by any guest shall be deemed to show knowledge on the part of the
owner, operator or property manager of such illegal purpose or use.
   (D)   Public health nuisance. A transient lodging facility that does not
conform to this subchapter is a public health nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.030) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.023 LIMITATION OF CONTINUOUS AND CUMULATIVE OCCUPANCY AND USE.
   (A)   Residency. The sleeping accommodations of a transient lodging facility
shall be only for the use of transient occupants and shall not be used or
occupied on any permanent basis, and no such occupant shall be deemed to be a
“resident” therein.
   (B)   Continuous occupancy. It shall be unlawful for a transient lodging
facility to let or otherwise permit a person other than an agent or employee of
the transient lodging facility to remain within a single room for more than 30
continuous days.
   (C)   Longer stays. A stay in excess of 30 continuous days may occur in the
following situations:
      (1)   Where there is a written contract or document between a transient
lodging facility and a business corporation, company, firm, individual or
governmental agency to house employees or individuals on valid work orders;
      (2)   Where there is a written contract between the transient lodging
facility and a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families
in crisis who are receiving temporary housing assistance from said
governmental, charitable or insurance agency; and
      (3)   The written contract, document and authorization noted above shall
be kept on file and must be available for inspection.
   (D)   Registration. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator and/or
property manager, to allow any guest to register under a different name in
order to avoid the continuous and cumulative occupancy requirements as set
forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.040) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.024 CALLS FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Calls for service for each transient lodging facility shall be
compiled by the city’s Police Department for a 12-month period concurrent with
the transient lodging facility’s lodging permit and business license.
   (B)   The city’s Police Department shall be responsible to maintain a record
of the annual calls for service for each transient lodging facility. An owner
may request, in writing, a copy of his, her or their respective calls for
service at the end of each license term and shall be provided the same within
30 days of said request. Upon notification of the number of calls for service a
transient lodging facility has received per unit for the licensing period, a
transient lodging facility shall have a period of 90 days to comply with the
requirements of their tier level necessary to maintain, receive and renew their
business license and lodging permit.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.050) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 114.025 ANNUAL CALLS FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Equal to or greater than one call, but less than one and one-half per
unit. Transient lodging facilities whose annual calls for service that are
equal to or greater than one call for service per unit are required to meet the
following additional conditions designed to deter crime to obtain a business
license and lodging permit to operate in the city.
      (1)   Every transient lodging facility operator, and the clerk at the
time of registration, must obtain and record the full names; dates of birth, of
all unit occupants over the age of 18; and the make, model and license number
of the vehicle being used by every unit occupant. Names and addresses of all
unit occupants over the age of 18 must be verified by obtaining a copy of a
valid driver’s license, passport or other form of government approved picture
identification. The records required by this section shall be kept available
for a period of not less than one year for inspection by any police or code
enforcement officer with a valid administrative subpoena and/or search warrant.
      (2)   At the request of the transient lodging facility, and in
cooperation with transient lodging facility management, the city’s Police
Department will provide training for the transient lodging facility staff
regarding the recognition of criminal behavior.
      (3)   At the request of the transient lodging facility, the city’s Police
Department will keep the transient lodging facility management apprised of
criminal activity that occurs on the property.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.060)
   (B)   Equal to or greater than one and one-half calls, but less than two per
unit. All transient lodging facilities whose annual calls for service are
greater than or equal to one and one-half calls for service per unit, but less
than two calls for service per unit are required to meet the following
additional conditions designed to deter crime to obtain a business license and
lodging permit to operate in the city:
      (1)   Conform to the requirements set forth in division (A) above; and
      (2)   Install and operate surveillance cameras (with recorder) in the
areas open to the public on the premises, including the transient lodging
facility’s lobby, parking lot and hallways. Such surveillance cameras should be
functional 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.070)
   (C)   Equal to or greater than two calls per unit. All transient lodging
facilities whose annual calls for service who are equal to or greater than two
calls per unit are required to meet the following additional conditions
designed to deter crime to obtain a business license and lodging permit to
operate in the city:
      (1)   Conform to the requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B)
above;
      (2)   Hold semi-annual crime prevention employee training sessions,
assisted by the city’s Police Department;
      (3)   Provide 24-hour front desk personnel;
      (4)   Enforce the following guest rules:
         (a)   No unit may be used for drunkenness, fighting, excessive noise
or breaches of the peace. Excessive noises are those noises that disturb the
tranquility of the neighborhood or that would be disturbing to a reasonable
person; and
         (b)   Alcohol may not be consumed in common areas, except for
designated banquet or reception rooms or areas.
      (5)   Maintain a daily key log. Each key that is found to be missing must
have its corresponding lock re-keyed prior to the unit being rented. Each
master key that is found to be missing will require the establishment to re-key
all corresponding locks;
      (6)   Issue parking passes to all vehicles allowed to park on the
premises with each pass marked with the issue date and expiration date;
      (7)   Remove all graffiti and repair all vandalism within seven days of
the occurrence;
      (8)   Permit a semi-annual inspection by a city building official to
ensure that guestrooms are maintained according to the Uniform Health Code and
Uniform Fire Code, which would include certifying that the hotel or motel has
installed in each unit a tamper-free smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
meeting National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) standards;
      (9)   Ensuring that all common areas, including parking lots, hallways
and lobby areas are illuminated;
      (10)   Have a licensed, armed, and uniformed security guard on the
premises every day from 6:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m.; and
      (11)   Submit to scheduled semi-annual audits by the city’s Police
Department to verify compliance with the above-referenced requirements.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.080)
(Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 114.026 REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   If the Chief of Police or other authorized city personnel find that any
transient lodging facility has violated or failed to comply with any provision
of this subchapter, the Chief of Police or other authorized city personnel will
make a written record of such findings and shall specify therein the
particulars of the alleged violations and will inform the Community and
Economic Development Department. Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police or
other authorized city personnel, the Community and Economic Development may
revoke or deny the renewal of the city business license or lodging permit for
that transient lodging facility. Revocation of the lodging permit or the denial
of a renewal of the transient lodging facility’s lodging permit under this
subchapter shall require revocation of the transient lodging facility’s city
general business license under §§
114.020 through
114.028 of this code of ordinances. The Community and Economic Development
Department will provide the transient lodging facility with written notice of
the decision to revoke a lodging permit or the denial of a renewal of a lodging
permit and notice of the right to appeal.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.090) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 114.027 SUBSEQUENT APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES, ENDORSEMENTS; CONDITIONS OF
APPROVAL.
   (A)   The conditions of approval of any subsequent application for a
business license or lodging permit to operate a transient lodging facility on
the same property following a period of revocation or denial of renewal of a
business license or lodging permit shall be based upon the transient lodging
facility’s history of annual calls for service prior to the revocation.
   (B)   No subsequent application for a business license or lodging permit to
operate a transient lodging facility on the same property following a period of
revocation or denial of renewal of a business license or lodging permit shall
be approved unless the applicant presents a corrective action plan to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and the Community
and Economic Development Department, to assure that the conditions and causes
of the prior revocation or denial of renewal have been or will be terminated.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.095) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 114.028 APPEALS.
   In accordance with §
110.032(F) of this chapter, the owner of a transient lodging facility shall
have the right to appeal by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of
the receipt of the notice of denial, suspension, revocation of a business
license or lodging permit, or the lodging facility’s placement in the tier
structure.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.100) (Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
§ 114.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision in §§
114.001 through
114.009 of this chapter, any person or party who violates any provision of §§
114.001 through
114.009 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, may be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, be
fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000 if the defendant is an individual, or
the greater amount of $2,000, in the event the defendant is a corporation,
association or partnership, or be both so imprisoned and fined.
(Prior Code, § 14.15.100)
   (C)   (1)   Remedies cumulative. The remedies provided for herein for
failure to comply with §§
114.020 through
114.028 of this chapter may be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy
at law or equity.
      (2)   Continuing annual calls for police service greater than or equal to
two calls per unit. It is a violation of §§
114.020 through
114.028 of this chapter, if after imposition of all of the requirements of §
114.025(C) of this chapter for a period of one year, the annual calls for
service to the transient lodging facility continue to be greater than or equal
to two per year. Violation of this division (C)(2) may result in the denial,
suspension or revocation of a business license or lodging permit.
      (3)   Nuisance abatement. The Community and Economic Development
Department may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices
and abate any condition which may constitute a nuisance or a violation of §§
114.020 through
114.028 of this chapter.
      (4)   Penalties. Any transient lodging facility that fails to comply with
any duty imposed under §§
114.020 through
114.028 of this chapter may face suspension, denial or revocation of a lodging
permit and/or business license.
(Prior Code, § 14.16.110)
(Ord. 20-20, passed 11-5-2020)
CHAPTER 115: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
115.001   Purpose and findings
   
115.002   Definitions
   
115.003   Classification
   
115.004   Exhibition of sexually-explicit films or videos
   
115.005   Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements
   
115.006   Applicability to existing businesses
   
115.007   Live public nudity
   
115.008   Obscenity and lewdness; statutory provisions
Licensing Regulations
   
115.020   License required
   
115.021   Issuance of license
   
115.022   Fees
   
115.023   Inspection
   
115.024   Expiration of license
   
115.025   Suspension
   
115.026   Revocation
   
115.027   Hearing; denial, revocation and suspension; appeal
   
115.028   Transfer of license
   
115.029   Hours of operation
 
   
115.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.001 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually-oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or
reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent, nor effect, of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene material.
   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult
uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Brigham City
Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap’s A.M. v. City of
Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S.
41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972);
O’Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Z.J.
Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); Dodger’s
Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson County, 98 F.3d 1262 (10th Cir. 1996); Connection
Distrib. Co. v. Reno, 154 F.3d 281 (6th Cir. 1998); Sundance Assocs. v. Reno,
139 F.3d 804 (10th Cir. 1998); American Library Association v. Reno, 33 F.3d 78
(D.C. Cir. 1994); Dodger’s Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson County, 32 F.3d 1436
(10th Cir. 1994); American Target Advertising, Inc. v. Giani, 199 F.3d 1241; MS
News Co. v. Casado, 721 F.2d 1281 (10th Cir. 1983); Cortese v. Black, No. 95-
1429, 1996 U.S. App. LEXIS 15311 (10th Cir., 6-25-1996); Salt Lake City v.
Wood, 1999 Utah App. 323, 991 P.2d 595 (Utah Ct. App. 1999); United States v.
Freedberg, 724 F.Supp. 851 (D. Utah 1989); and other cases; and on testimony to
Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S
5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and
around sexually-oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix,
Arizona – 1984; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas - 1997;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los
Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986;
Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - ;
and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue,
Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study
– 1994; Phoenix, Arizona – 1995-98; and also on findings from the paper
entitled “Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual
Violence”, by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for
Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from “Sexually-oriented
Businesses: An Insider’s View”, by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan
House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, 1-12-2000, and the Report of
the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually-Oriented
Businesses (6-6-1989, State of Minnesota), the City Council finds the
following.
      (1)   Sexually-oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the unlicensed
operators of the establishments, if any. Further, there is presently no
mechanism in the city to make the owners and operators of these establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
      (2)   Certain employees of unregulated sexually-oriented businesses
defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher
incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other
establishments.
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur
at unregulated sexually- oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live
sex shows.
      (4)   Offering and providing such unregulated space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually-oriented businesses or for the purpose of purchasing
or selling illicit drugs.
      (6)   Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually- oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis salmonella, campylobacter and shigella infections,
chlamydial, myoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis and
chancroid.
      (7)   According to research from the Kaiser Family Foundation, an
estimated 650,000 to 900,000 Americans are infected with HIV. The number of new
HIV infections occurring each year is now about 41,000. Men and women of all
races are most likely to be infected by sexual contact.
      (8)   Relevant statistics revealed that a total of 1,893 AIDS cases had
been reported in Utah through June 2000.
      (9)   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that as
many as one in three people with HIV do not know they are infected.
      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982
and 45,200 through November of 1990.
      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being
reported in 1990.
      (12)   The surgeon general of the United States, in his report of 10-22-
1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components and from an infected mother to her newborn.
      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
See, e.g., Findings of U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually- oriented businesses where persons view “adult”
oriented films.
      (16)   The findings noted in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(15) above raise
substantial governmental concerns.
      (17)   Sexually-oriented businesses have operational characteristics that
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually-oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore non-existent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually-oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually-oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually-oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually-
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and will prevent the
further secondary effects of dissemination of illegal obscenity, child
pornography and to minors, materials harmful to them.
      (22)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who
are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use has been convicted of
a sexually-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant
may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
      (24)   The barring of such individuals from employment in sexually-
oriented businesses for a specified period of years serves to prevent
distribution of illegal material, to prevent conduct which leads to the
transmission of sexually transmitted diseases and to preclude the establishment
of criminal enterprises within the city.
      (25)   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of
the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.010) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which has significant or substantial portion of its stock-in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant bottle club, theater,
concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment, regardless of
whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear semi-nude; or
      (2)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and
which regularly provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
which regularly advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign
visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television; and
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten
hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
for any form of consideration.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT. The city’s Community Development
Department.
   CONTROLLING INTEREST. The power, directly or indirectly, to direct the
operation, management or policies of a business or entity, or to vote 20% or
more of any class of voting securities of a business. The ownership, control or
power to vote 20% or more of any class of voting securities of a business shall
be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to be the power to direct the management,
operation or policies of the business.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the
phase refers to films WHICH ARE DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS
UPON THE EXHIBITION OR DESCRIPTION OF SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES OR SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS, the films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or description of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE and EMPLOYMENT. Any person who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually-oriented business, on a full-time, part-time or contract
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-
oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other
existing sexually-oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.
   HEARING OFFICER. The Mayor of the city or a designee of the Mayor.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually- oriented business license. In case
of an “employee”, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually-oriented
business employee license has been issued.
   NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers
less than that area of the human body defined herein as “semi-nude” or “state
of semi-nudity”.
   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED or OPERATOR. To cause to function or to put
or keep in a state of doing business. OPERATOR means any person on the premises
of a sexually-oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall
operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or
keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be OPERATING OR
CAUSING TO BE OPERATED a sexually-oriented business whether or not that person
is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business.
   PERSON. Individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial course of
conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial
portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business
of the sexually-oriented business.
   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. The showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of
the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This
definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard or similar wearing apparel
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO.
      (1)   Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of semi-
nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter
that a person appearing in a state of semi-nudity or semi-nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
         (a)   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
         (c)   In a structure:
            1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
            2.   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial establishment, that
as one of its principle business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or
consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or when one or more of
the persons is semi-nude. The definition of “sexually-oriented businesses”
shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel or adult entertainment
out-call service in the form of semi-nude dancing or exhibition, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, semi-nude model studio or sexual encounter
establishment.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY. The sale, rental or exhibition for
any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure or display of specific sexual activity.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals, anus, cleft of the buttocks or
the female breast.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity or illegal pornography; sale, distribution or display of harmful
material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution
of child pornography; lewdness; sexual battery; rape; indecent exposure;
indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a
sexually-oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or
distribution of a controlled substance; criminal attempt, conspiracy or
solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving the
same elements from any jurisdiction regardless of the exact title of the
offense; for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month
period.
      (2)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:
      (1)   Acts of:
         (a)   Masturbation;
         (b)   Human sexual intercourse;
         (c)   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast;
         (d)   Fellatio;
         (e)   Cunnilingus;
         (f)   Bestiality;
         (g)   Pederasty;
         (h)   Buggery; or
         (i)   Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male,
human female or beast.
      (2)   Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
         (a)   The genitals of a human;
         (b)   The pubic area of a human; and
         (c)   The breast or breasts of a human female.
      (3)   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments,
a mask or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed; and
      (4)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division (1) above.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. Any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
   VIEWING ROOM. The room, booth or area where a patron of sexually-oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette or
other video reproduction.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.020) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.003 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually-oriented businesses shall be classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Semi-nude model studios; and
   (H)   Sexual encounter establishments.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.030) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.004 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video
cassettes or other video reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the
display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall
comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all manager’s
stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors
installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all
portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms
shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The Community Development Department may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram
that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the Community
Development Department.
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.
      (5)   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or
open for business.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed
premises.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that not more than one person is present in a
viewing room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied
by another person.
      (8)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind exist between viewing
rooms. No person shall make an attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing rooms.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee who
discovers two or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person making
or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to
immediately escort such persons from the premises.
      (10)   It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee, who
discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately secure
such rooms, and prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the
wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the opening. Removal and
repairing of openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as
structurally substantial as the original wall construction.
      (11)   It shall be the duty of the operator, at least once each business
day, to inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind.
      (12)   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
         (a)   No loitering is permitted in viewing rooms;
         (b)   The occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person;
         (c)   Sexual activity on the premises is prohibited;
         (d)   The making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited;
         (e)   Violators will be required to leave the premises; and
         (f)   Violations of divisions (A)(2), (A)(3) and (A)(4) above are
unlawful.
      (13)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that floor
coverings in viewing rooms are non- porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting.
      (14)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that all wall
surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing rooms are constructed of or
permanently covered by non-porous easily cleanable material.
      (15)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that premises are
clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the operator complies with
the following cleaning procedures.
         (a)   The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at
least two cleanings per day, documented by appropriate logs.
         (b)   The operator shall provide an employee to check all areas for
garbage, trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas
with a disinfectant.
         (c)   All solid waste generated by the business shall be collected
from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal facility at
least once each week. Prior to collection solid waste shall be stored in a
manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and which will
not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
         (d)   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any room providing
patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include
floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras and windows and other
surfaces.
      (16)   (a)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every
area of the premises in which patrons are permitted, including the interior of
each viewing room, but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose.
         (b)   A manager’s station shall not exceed 40 square feet of floor
area. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view
required in this division (A)(16) must be by direct line of sight from the
manager’s station.
         (c)   It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that
any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in this division (A)(16) remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or
enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.140) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.005 LOITERING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually-oriented
business to:
         (a)   Initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external
boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually-oriented businesses are
located;
         (b)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property;
         (c)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once
every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and
monitors; and
         (d)   Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual
inspection or provide video monitoring to prohibit loitering.
      (2)   If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at
all times that the premises is open for business.
      (3)   The monitors shall be installed within a manager’s station.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.150) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.006 APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   Upon adoption, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities
of all sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented business employees
described herein, whether such businesses or activities were established or
commenced before, on or after the effective date of this chapter. All existing
sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented business employees are
hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment
for a period of 90 days following the effective date of this chapter. Within
said 90 days, all sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented business
employees must make application for a license pursuant to this chapter. Within
said 90 days, sexually-oriented businesses must make any necessary changes to
the interior configurations of the regulated business premises to conform to
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.170) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.007 LIVE PUBLIC NUDITY.
   It is unlawful for a sexually-oriented business to knowingly or recklessly
violate the following regulations or to knowingly or recklessly allow an
employee or any other person to violate the following regulations.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee or any
other person to knowingly, recklessly or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented
business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity
is expressive in nature.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly,
recklessly or intentionally in a sexually-oriented business appear in a semi-
nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be
at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet
above the elevation of the floor.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while semi-
nude in a sexually-oriented business, to knowingly, recklessly or intentionally
receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or customer or for any
patron or customer to knowingly, recklessly or intentionally pay or give any
gratuity directly to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a
sexually-oriented business.
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while semi-
nude, to knowingly, recklessly or intentionally touch a customer or the
clothing of a customer.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.180) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.008 OBSCENITY AND LEWDNESS; STATUTORY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter
which is contrary to applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting
obscenity.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow conduct or the showing or display of
any matter which is contrary to the provisions of U.C.A. §§ 76-9-702 and 76-9-
702.5, or its successor law; provided, however, that, for the purpose of
sexually-oriented businesses the definition of “private parts” shall be
construed to mean “nudity”, as defined in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.190) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005) Penalty, see §
115.999
LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 115.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented
business in the city without a valid sexually-oriented business license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be an “employee”, as defined in
this chapter, of a sexually-oriented business in the city without a valid
sexually-oriented business employee license.
   (C)   An applicant for a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-
oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the
Community Development Department a completed application made on a form
provided by the Community Development Department. The application shall be
signed by the applicant and notarized.
   (D)   (1)   An application shall be considered complete when it contains the
information required in divisions (D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(f) below as follows:
         (a)   The applicant’s full true name and any other names used in the
preceding five years;
         (b)   Current business address or another mailing address of the
applicant;
         (c)   Written proof of age, in the form of a copy of a birth
certificate or driver’s license or other picture identification document issued
by a governmental agency;
         (d)   If the application is for a sexually-oriented business license,
the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone
number (if one currently exists) of the proposed sexually-oriented business;
         (e)   If the application is for a sexually-oriented business license,
the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to
receive service of process; and
         (f)   A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted or has
pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each. The statement shall also disclose whether the
applicant has had a previous sexually-oriented business or sexually-oriented
business employee license under this chapter or other sexually-oriented
business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked
within the past two years, including the name and location of the sexually-
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the
applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
stockholder with a controlling interest in a corporation that is licensed under
this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for which the
permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation.
      (2)   The information provided pursuant to divisions (D)(1)(a) through
(D)(1)(f) above shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the Community Development Department within ten working
days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally
submitted false or incomplete.
   (E)   An application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are
required to comply with portions of this chapter relating to the physical
design of facilities or premises shall submit a diagram meeting the
requirements of that section.
   (F)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an
individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an
individual, each officer, director, general partner or other person who will
participate directly in decisions relating to management and control of the
business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant
must be qualified under §
115.021 of this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
   (G)   A license or permit required by this chapter is in addition to any
other licenses or permits required by the city, county or state to engage in
the business or occupation. Persons engaged in the operation of a sexually-
oriented business or in employment in a sexually-oriented business shall comply
with all other applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances and
statutes, including zoning ordinances, as may be required.
   (H)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the
Community Development Department on a confidential basis; except that, such
information may be disclosed only to law enforcement agencies in connection
with a law enforcement or public safety function, or as may be required by
governing law or court order. The information provided by a sexually-oriented
business license applicant in connection with the application for a license
under this chapter shall be maintained by the Community Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.040) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.021 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Within 40 days of the initial filing date of the completed application
under §
115.020(C) of this chapter, the Community Development Department shall issue a
license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny
the application. The Community Development Department shall approve the
issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found by a
preponderance of evidence to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide information as required by §
115.020 of this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
as defined in this chapter, or has been shown to have committed a violation of
§§
115.007,
115.023(A) and
115.026 of this chapter within the previous year; and
      (5)   In the case of a sexually-oriented business license application,
the premises is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements
of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually-oriented
business employee license, the Community Development Department shall issue a
temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon
the final decision of the city to deny or grant the license. Within 40 days of
the initial filing date of the receipt of a completed application, the
Community Development Department shall either issue a license or issue a
written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The Community
Development Department shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or
more of the following is found by a preponderance of evidence to be true:
      (1)   The applicant is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has failed to provide information as required by §
115.020 of this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
      (3)   The license application fee required by this section has not been
paid; and
      (4)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
as defined in this chapter, or has been shown to have committed a violation of
§§
115.023(A) or 115.26 of this chapter within the previous year.
   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to
the licensee(s), the expiration date and, if the license is for a sexually-
oriented business, the address of the sexually-oriented business. The sexually-
oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any
time. A sexually-oriented business employee shall keep the employee’s license
on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or
performing and shall produce such license for inspection upon request by a law
enforcement officer or other city official performing functions connected with
the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.050) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.022 FEES.
   The initial license and annual renewal fees for a sexually-oriented business
license or a sexually- oriented business employee license shall be set by the
City Council at an amount determined by the Council as sufficient to pay the
cost of administering this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.060) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.023 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Sexually-oriented business operators and sexually-oriented business
employees shall permit officers or agents of the city who are performing
functions connected with the enforcement of this chapter to inspect the
portions of the sexually-oriented business premises where patrons are
permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, from time
to time while the sexually-oriented business is occupied by patrons or open for
business. A licensee’s knowing or intentional refusal to permit such an
inspection shall constitute a violation of this section.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.070) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.024 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the
date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be
renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in §§
115.020 and
115.022 of this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least 90
days before the expiration date and, when made less than 90 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.080) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.025 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually-
oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it is
determined that the sexually-oriented business licensee has knowingly or
recklessly violated this chapter or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an
employee to violate this chapter.
   (B)   The city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually-
oriented employee license if it is determined that the employee has knowingly
or recklessly violated this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.090) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.026 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually-oriented
business license or a sexually- oriented business employee license if a cause
of suspension in §
115.025 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The city shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually-oriented
business license or, in the case of an employee, a sexually-oriented business
employee license, if the officer determines by a preponderance of evidence
that:
      (1)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly given false or misleading
information in the application for the license;
      (2)   The sexually-oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly
allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or
in the case of an employee, the sexually-oriented business employee licensee
has knowingly or recklessly engaged in the possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises. It shall be a defense to revocation
proceedings under this division (B)(2) that such possession, use or sale
occurred pursuant to a valid medical prescription;
      (3)   The sexually-oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly
allowed prostitution on the premises or, in the case of an employee, the
sexually-oriented business employee licensee has engaged in prostitution on any
licensed premises;
      (4)   The sexually-oriented business licensee knowingly or recklessly
operated the sexually- oriented business during a period of time when the
license was suspended or, in the case of an employee, the sexually-oriented
business employee licensee has been employed as a sexually-oriented business
employee at a time when the employee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   The sexually-oriented business licensee committed an act in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2257, or successor law, in or on the premises, or in
the case of an employee, the sexually-oriented business employee licensee
committed an act in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2257, or successor law, in or on
the premises; and
      (6)   The sexually-oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly
allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises or, in the
case of an employee, the sexually-oriented business employee licensee has
engaged in any specified sexual activity in or on any licensed premises.
   (C)   The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, and for this entire chapter, an act
by any employee that constitutes grounds for revocation of that employee’s
license shall also be imputed to the sexually- oriented business for purposes
of revocation proceedings if the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance
of evidence that an officer, director or general partner, or an employee who
managed, supervised or controlled, or participated directly in decisions
relating to management or control of the operation of the business, knowingly
or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises.
   (E)   (1)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in §
115.027 of this chapter, the Hearing Officer revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-
oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee license for
one year from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the
conditions of §
115.027(B) of this chapter are met, a provisional license will be granted
pursuant to that section.
      (2)   If, subsequent to a revocation based solely on division (B)(1)
above, the Community Development Department finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. If the license was revoked under divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4),
(B)(5) or (B)(6) above, an applicant may not be granted another license until
at least one year has elapsed.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.100) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.027 HEARING; DENIAL, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION; APPEAL.
   (A)   If the Community Development Department determines that facts exist
for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter, the city
shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the city’s
intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor,
by personal delivery or by certified mail.
      (1)   The notification shall be directed to the most current business
address or other mailing address on file with the Community Development
Department for the respondent. Within ten working days of receipt of such
notice, the respondent may provide to the Community Development Department a
written response that shall include a statement of reasons why the respondent
believes the license should not be denied, suspended or revoked.
      (2)   Within five days of the receipt of respondent’s written response,
the Community Development Department shall notify respondent in writing of the
hearing date on respondent’s denial, suspension or revocation proceeding.
Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent’s written response, the
city’s Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have
the opportunity to present all of respondent’s arguments and to be represented
by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-
examine any of the city’s witnesses. The hearing shall take no longer than two
days, unless extended to meet the requirements of due process and proper
administration of justice. The Hearing Officer shall issue a written opinion
within five days after the hearing. If a court action challenging the city’s
decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a
transcript of the hearing within ten days after the issuance of the Hearing
Officer’s written opinion.
      (3)   If a written response from respondent is not received by the
Community Development Department within the time stated in division (A)(1)
above, or if after a hearing, the Hearing Officer concludes that grounds as
specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension or revocation of the
license, then such denial, suspension or revocation shall become final five
days after the Hearing Officer sends, by certified mail, written notice to the
respondent that the license has been denied, suspended or revoked. Such notice
shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the Hearing Officer finds
that no grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license, then
within five days after the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall immediately
withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license and shall notify the
respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. The Community
Development Department shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to
the applicant.
   (B)   An applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a
license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall
have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.110) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.028 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually- oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the sexually-oriented
business license application.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.120) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
§ 115.029 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually-oriented business shall open to do business before 10:00 a.m. or
remain open after 11:00 p.m.; provided that, a sexually-oriented business which
has obtained a license to sell alcoholic beverages from the state may remain
open to sell alcoholic beverages under the terms of that license, but may not
conduct sexually-oriented entertainment activity after 11:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.130) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who knowingly or recklessly violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not to exceed $2,500. Each day the
violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be fined as such.
   (B)   The City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute criminal or civil
proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute,
restrain or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction,
shall be brought in the name of the city; provided, however, that, nothing in
this section and no action taken thereunder, shall be held to exclude such
criminal proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of the city code,
or any of the laws or ordinances in force in the city or to exempt anyone
violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be
incurred.
(Prior Code, § 14.18.160) (Ord. 98-16, passed 4-23-1998; Ord. 05-04, passed 2-
3-2005)
CHAPTER 116: SOLICITATIONS AND SALES
Section
Seasonal and Temporary Licenses
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   License required, display
   
116.003   License fees
   
116.004   License period
   
116.005   Agricultural vendors
   
116.006   Christmas tree sales
   
116.007   Firework stands
   
116.008   Ice cream vendors
   
116.009   Mobile food cart vendors
   
116.010   Snow cone vendors
   
116.011   Temporary merchants
Advertisements
   
116.025   Posting with permission
   
116.026   Tearing down or defacing
   
116.027   Awnings, advertisements, signs located in public right-of-way
Auctions and Auctioneers
   
116.040   License
   
116.041   License application
   
116.042   License fee
   
116.043   Exemptions
   
116.044   False bidding; auctioneer or officer to be present
   
116.045   Conduct generally
   
116.046   Fraud
   
116.047   Duties of auctioneer
   
116.048   Representations as to quality; records required
   
116.049   Transfer of license prohibited
   
116.050   Revocation
Home Occupations
   
116.065   Definition
   
116.066   License required; display
   
116.067   Procedure
   
116.068   Inspections
   
116.069   Zoning requirements
Pawnbrokers
   
116.080   Definitions
   
116.081   License required; license fee
   
116.082   Display of license and ordinance
   
116.083   Bond required
   
116.084   Disclosure provisions
Solicitors
   
116.095   Definition
   
116.096   License required
   
116.097   Exemptions
   
116.098   License duration, revocation
   
116.099   Warrants search
   
116.100   Photo identification cards
   
116.101   License fee
Swap Meets and Flea Markets
   
116.115   License required
   
116.116   Fees
   
116.117   Qualifications for licensees
 
   
116.999   Penalty
SEASONAL AND TEMPORARY LICENSES
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions set forth in §
110.002 of this code of ordinances, the following words and phrases used in
this subchapter shall have the meaning herein prescribed.
   AGRICULTURAL VENDOR. A person engaged in the sale of fruits and/or
vegetables from stands, motor vehicles, roadsides or through door-to-door
solicitation.
   ARTISAN VENDOR. A vendor of artistic works, crafts and other goods,
especially goods made by hand.
   ICE CREAM VENDOR. Any person traveling by ice cream vendor vehicle, from
place to place, or from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting
ice cream, frozen confectionaries or similar goods and wares, offering or
exposing the same for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle or other vehicle of
conveyance.
   ICE CREAM VENDOR VEHICLE. Any wagon, motor vehicle or any type of conveyance
used by an ice cream vendor to transport, offer or expose for sale of ice cream
or similar goods or wares for sale.
   MARKET SPONSOR. A person, persons or business entity of any kind which
obtains a special event permit for operation of a seasonal outdoor or semi-
enclosed public market.
   MOBILE FOOD CART VENDOR. A vendor that uses a movable cart-type stand to
sell, offers for sale, or offers to give away food or non-alcoholic beverage. A
MOBILE FOOD CART VENDOR is not a mobile food vendor. (See §§
112.060 through
112.068 of this code of ordinances.)
   PERSON. An individual, a co-partnership, firm, corporation or association.
   PRODUCE VENDOR. A vendor of fresh, raw, whole, unprocessed and unprepared
food items directly to the final consumer in compliance with rules established
by the state.
   RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS. Any organization which can provide
written approval from the Internal Revenue Service that the organization has
been granted tax exempt status under I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), being 26 U.S.C. § 501
(c)(3) or their successors.
   SALES EVENT. An event where two or more temporary merchants, display any
goods, wares or services at a location in the city for the purpose of sale or
soliciting orders to be filled in the future, for financial gain or profit.
   SEASONAL BUSINESS. A temporary business based on specific seasonal periods
such as Christmas trees, fireworks, snow cone sales, locally grown agricultural
produce, seasonal outdoor or semi-enclosed public markets and other similar
uses.
   SEASONAL OUTDOOR OR SEMI-ENCLOSED PUBLIC MARKET.
      (1)   A seasonal business which occupies space in an organized market
occupying physical public or private space, in which multiple vendors operate
under a single special event permit issued to and overseen by a market sponsor.
Vendors may include produce vendors, artisan vendors, food vendors (including
mobile food vendors) and other types of temporary merchants selling physical
goods.\
      (2)   SEASONAL OUTDOOR OR SEMI-ENCLOSED PUBLIC MARKETS shall not include
auctions and auctioneers, solicitors, pawnbrokers, private security or
detective services, swap meets, flea markets or other types of vendors selling
intangible services.
   SNOW CONE SHACK.
      (1)   A structure not larger than 50 square feet and a height no greater
than 12 feet, placed on an approved location as described in §
116.010 of this chapter.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a SNOW CONE SHACK shall not be
a mobile unit on wheels, but rather a structure that is placed on the ground at
its approved location during the seasonal period for which it is licensed.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for:
      (1)   An event planned to take place on public property where the general
public is invited;
      (2)   An event that involves the blocking of public streets or sidewalks;
      (3)   An event where city assistance is requested; or
      (4)   An event that is considered a mass gathering under the Utah
Administrative Code.
   TEMPORARY MERCHANT.
      (1)   Any person whether a resident of the city or not, who within the
limits of the city:
         (a)   Engages in a temporary business of selling and/or delivering
goods, wares or services, or who conducts meetings open to the general public
where franchises, distributorships, contracts or business opportunities are
offered to the public; or
         (b)   Sells, offers or exhibits for sale any goods, wares or services,
franchises, distributorships, contracts or business opportunities, during the
course of or any time within six months after a lecture or public meeting
pertaining to such goods, wares, services, franchises, business opportunities,
contracts or distributorships.
      (2)   The foregoing notwithstanding, a TEMPORARY MERCHANT, for the
purposes of this definition, shall not include the following:
         (a)   A person who shall occupy any business establishment for the
purpose of conducting a permanent business therein; provided, however, that, no
person shall be relieved from the provisions of this subchapter by reason of a
temporary association with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or
by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with, as part
of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer;
         (b)   Any sales of merchandise damaged by smoke or fire, or of
bankrupt concerns, where such stock has been acquired from a merchant or
merchants of the city regularly licensed and engaged in business; provided,
however, no such stock or merchandise shall be augmented by new goods;
         (c)   A person who sells his or her own property which was not
acquired for resale, barter or exchange, and who does not conduct such sales
more than twice during any calendar year;
         (d)   Art exhibits, where participating artists sell their original
works, and which do not contain any sale(s) of art work purchased or taken on
consignment and held for resale, providing such art exhibits are sponsored by a
local responsible organization;
         (e)   Religious or charitable organizations as defined in this
section; and
         (f)   Sales of goods, wares or services at a convention, meeting or
exposition which is not open to, nor advertised to, the general public, to the
extent such sales are made to registered members of the sponsoring
organization, provided the sponsoring organization or its designated agent
delivers to the city license supervisor, at least 15 days in advance of such
convention, meeting or exposition, a statement of the organization’s
qualification for this exemption and a statement of the common interest or
category of those who will be attending such convention, meeting or exposition;
and providing all persons selling or purchasing goods, wares or services at
such convention, meeting or exposition shall wear or display in a conspicuous
manner a tag stating the name of the sponsoring organization.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.010) (Ord. 16-08, passed 6-16-2016; Ord. 06-18, passed 11-
3-2016)
§ 116.002 LICENSE REQUIRED, DISPLAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct a
seasonal or temporary business, except as exempted in this subchapter, without
first securing a license for such business. The licensee shall conspicuously
display such license in his or her place of business so that the same is
plainly visible to the public.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.020) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.003 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for licenses required by this subchapter shall be established in
accordance with §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances, and all matters relating to fee
payments, renewals and the like, shall be governed by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.030)
§ 116.004 LICENSE PERIOD.
   The period or duration of a seasonal or temporary business license, as
described herein.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.040)
§ 116.005 AGRICULTURAL VENDORS.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business
of agricultural vendor, except as exempted in this subchapter, without first
securing a license for such business. The licensee shall conspicuously display
such license in his or her place of business so that the same is plainly
visible to the public.
   (B)   License period. The license period for an agricultural vendor is based
on the seasonal period for the harvest of the fruit or vegetable product.
Fruits or vegetables may be sold during the production period and for a
reasonable period of time thereafter to be determined at the time of licensing
depending upon the produce, but not to exceed 90 days after the conclusion of
the production period.
   (C)   Exemptions. Agricultural vendors who sell only fruits and vegetables
produced and sold from their own homes or property are exempt from licensing or
the payment of license fees under this subchapter.
   (D)   Inspections. The Department reserves the right to inspect any premises
or location utilized for carrying on the business of agricultural vendor to
assure compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Locations. An agricultural vendor must sell their products from a
commercial or industrial business parking lot or from their home or property as
described in division (C) above.
   (F)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for an agricultural vendor to
supply an exempted location with produce grown at non-exempted locations or to
sell any merchandise other than fruits and vegetables at an exempted location.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.050) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.006 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of selling trees commonly called “Christmas trees”, in the city without first
obtaining a license.
   (B)   Written consent to cut trees required. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell at any time or to offer for sale in the city any Christmas tree
cut or procured from or within the public domain of the United States, or of
the State of Utah or from any private lands within or without the State of
Utah, without written authority having been first obtained from the United
States, said State of Utah or from the owner of such private lands, as the case
may be, to cut and remove such trees.
   (C)   Unlawful to possess or sell untagged trees. It shall be unlawful for
any person to have in his or her possession for sale, or to sell or offer for
sale in the city, trees from the sources described in division (B) above,
unless the same shall have been officially tagged with a tag furnished or
approved either by the United States Forest Service or the Department of
Forestry of the state.
   (D)   Application for license. Any person desiring a license to sell and
dispose of such trees within the city shall make application to the Department.
Such application shall specifically state and set forth the source of title to
the trees to be sold and whether said trees, or any of them, were cut or
procured within any public domain of the United States, the State of Utah, or
from any private lands, either within or without the State of Utah. Applicants
shall be required in connection with such application to furnish the Department
with evidence of ownership of such trees and/or authority to cut and procure
the same from the public domain or from private lands.
   (E)   Issuing of license and license period. Upon satisfactory showing made
by the applicant that he or she has a bona fide title to said trees and that
the same were not obtained illegally or in violation of any laws of the United
States, or of the State of Utah, or any law, rule or regulation of the state or
county from which such trees have been obtained, and that the applicant has
authority to cut and procure the same from either the public domain or from
private land, the Department shall grant to such applicant a license upon the
payment of a fee which shall be determined by resolution. Such license shall be
valid for a period of 60 days from November 1 of each year.
   (F)   Location. Christmas tree sales must be located on a commercial or
industrial business parking lot and not on or within the landscape area of said
business site.
   (G)   Clean-up deposit. A cleanup deposit as set by resolution of the City
Council shall be required of the licensee to assure the removal of unsold trees
and related debris remaining on the premises to the conclusion of the license
period. Said deposit shall be refunded to the licensee; provided, the premises
are left clean and free of unsold trees and related debris as determined by
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.060) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.007 FIREWORK STANDS.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or engage in
the selling of fireworks without first securing a city business license.
Firework stands are governed and regulated by Utah Code.
   (B)   Inspection. Each firework stand is required to be inspected according
to Utah Code.
   (C)   Location. Firework sales must be conducted within a licensed
commercial building or within a firework stand located on a commercial or
industrial business parking lot and not on or within the landscape area of said
business site.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.070) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.008 ICE CREAM VENDORS.
   (A)   License requirements. A license required by this subchapter shall not
be issued to any person or entity until all of the following have been
completed:
      (1)   The applicant must pay the license fee;
      (2)   The applicant must present proof of insurance as provided for in
division (D) below;
      (3)   The applicant must provide the city with a list of potential
drivers together with proof of age, driver’s license and photo ID as provided
for in division (E) below; and
      (4)   The applicant must provide the city with proof that each street
vending vehicle to be used pursuant to the requested license is equipped as
required by division (F) below.
   (B)   License duration.
      (1)   An ice cream vendor license shall be valid for the calendar year in
which it is issued, or part thereof remaining.
      (2)   No ice cream vendor license shall be renewable year to year.
      (3)   A new license, meeting all of the criteria by this subchapter, must
be obtained each year.
   (C)   License revocation.
      (1)   A license required by this subchapter may be revoked at any time by
action of the City Council for cause pursuant to hearing procedures set forth
in §
110.033 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Upon the city’s discovery that the ice cream vendor is in violation
of any provision of this subchapter, the city may terminate the ice cream
vendor’s license pursuant to hearing procedures provided for in §
110.033 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Insurance. The applicant shall present to the city a copy of their
insurance for each street vending vehicle in use which provides a $1,000,000
minimum coverage for injury to or death of one person, and $1,000,000 for one
accident, and property damage liability insurance with limits of $1,000,000 for
each accident and $2,000,000 aggregate with the city named as the additional
insured. Each policy shall require a notice of cancellation to the city 30 days
prior to termination.
   (E)   Driver certification. Each ice cream vendor business applying for a
license under this subchapter shall submit a list of drivers who will operate
an ice cream vending vehicle in the city. All drivers on that list shall:
      (1)   Possess a valid Utah driver’s license;
      (2)   Be 18 years of age or older;
      (3)   Provide the Police Department a criminal history report; and
      (4)   Obtain a photo identification card, a copy of which shall be filed
by the Department with the license application and the original shall be
carried by the licensee whenever he or she is performing the business of an ice
cream vendor.
   (F)   Equipment required for ice cream vending vehicles. The following
equipment shall be required on any ice cream vending vehicle in the city:
      (1)   A swing arm caution sign reading “SLOW Children Crossing” that can
be extended horizontally from the left side of the vehicle;
      (2)   A convex mirror mounted on the front of the ice cream vending
vehicle so that the driver, in his or her normal seated position, can see the
area in front of the truck obscured by the hood; and
      (3)   An amber beacon light placed on the top of the ice cream vending
vehicle which is visible to oncoming traffic and operable when the ice cream
vending vehicle is in the process of offering the product for sale.
   (G)   Ice cream vending restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply
to any ice cream vendor within the city limits.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to stop for the purposes of selling without
the swing arm stop sign in its extended position.
      (2)   An ice cream vendor driver shall not vend on streets where the
speed limit exceeds 25 mph.
      (3)   An ice cream vendor shall vend only when the ice cream vending
vehicle is lawfully parked.
      (4)   An ice cream vendor shall vend only from the curb or edge of the
roadway.
      (5)   An ice cream vendor shall not vend to any person standing in the
roadway.
      (6)   An ice cream vendor shall not back the ice cream vending vehicle to
make or attempt a sale.
      (7)   An ice cream vendor shall not permit any unauthorized person to
ride on or in the vending vehicle.
   (H)   Prohibited conduct. The following restrictions shall apply to any ice
cream vending vehicle within the city limits.
      (1)   No ice cream vending vehicle may be stopped or parked:
         (a)   On a sidewalk;
         (b)   Within 50 feet of an intersection;
         (c)   On or in a crosswalk;
         (d)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb;
         (e)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (f)   In front of or within five feet of a public or private driveway;
         (g)   Within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop or yield sign or
traffic-control signal; and
         (h)   Alongside or opposite a curb area which has been constructed to
provide accessibility to the sidewalk.
      (2)   No person authorized to engage in business of vending under this
subchapter shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Unduly obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow;
         (b)   Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs;
         (c)   Stop, stand or park any vehicle, pushcart or any other
conveyance upon any street for the purpose of selling during the hours when
stopping, standing and parking have been prohibited by signs or curb markings;
         (d)   Leave any ice cream vending vehicle unattended at any time, or
store, park or leave such ice cream vending vehicle in a public space
overnight;
         (e)   Operate any sound amplifier system contrary to the provisions of
Chapter 132 of this code of ordinances;
         (f)   Conduct business on private residential property;
         (g)   Conduct business on private commercial property without first
having obtained a temporary business license under this business regulation
title for the specific business location; and
         (h)   Conduct business on public property, except for dedicated
streets.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.080) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.009 MOBILE FOOD CART VENDORS.
   (A)   Authorized vendors. A mobile cart vendor may only be allowed at
community wide events, such as Peach Days, Heritage Art Festival and other
approved special events through the proper special event licensing process. For
the purposes of this section, a MOBILE FOOD CART VENDOR is not:
      (1)   A licensed food service or catering business contracted for a
business event, such as a grand opening, special sales or promotion where there
is no charge to the patronage public;
      (2)   A licensed food service or catering business contracted by a
business to provide services strictly to their employees, whether for charge or
no charge;
      (3)   An extension of an existing food and/or beverage business where
food or non-alcoholic beverages are brought outside of their business building
and located on the same premises for an event, promotion or customer
appreciation, whether for charge or no charge;
      (4)   A non-food and/or non-beverage business that provides on premise
food or non-alcoholic beverages for an event, promotion or customer
appreciation, whether for charge or no charge;
      (5)   An ice cream vendor; and
      (6)   A mobile food vendor.
   (B)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate as
a mobile cart vendor without first securing a city business license.
   (C)   Inspection. Each vendor is required to be inspected for the special
event.
   (D)   Health Department approval. Each mobile food cart vendor shall be
approved by the Bear River Health Department.
   (E)   Location. The location of the vendor is determined by the special
event coordinator.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.090) (Ord. 16-18, passed 11-3-2016) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.010 SNOW CONE VENDORS.
   (A)   Information required. A license required by this subchapter shall not
be issued to any person until the following have been provided and completed:
      (1)   Application;
      (2)   Payment of the license fee;
      (3)   Proposed location of snow cone shack. A map or site plan of the
location must include sufficient information to verify its location with
critical site feature: show and include the following:
         (a)   Location within parking lot;
         (b)   If applicable, indicate the total number of parking stalls that
will be used;
         (c)   Proximity to streets, sidewalk, and nearest drive approach; and
         (d)   Location of parking stalls and drive aisles.
      (4)   Written permission by owner or business of property at the proposed
location. The written permission must include the name of the person, the
person’s title and contact information.
      (5)   A footprint of the structure with the width and length dimensions;
and
      (6)   A picture or elevation of the structure. Include the overall
height.
   (B)   License period. The license period shall consist of a maximum of 180
consecutive days during a 12-month period.
   (C)   Health Department approval. The Bear River Health Department shall
inspect the facility and provide proof of approval to the city.
   (D)   Electrical connection. Each snow cone shack shall be connected to an
approved electrical source. A building permit is required for metered
connections.
   (E)   Employee restroom.
      (1)   A restroom shall be provided for all employees on premises, either
within the snow cone shack or within the primary business on which the snow
cone shack is located.
      (2)   The property or business owner must provide written consent for the
use of their restroom facility during the duration of the license period. Hours
of operation may be limited based on access to a restroom.
   (F)   Location. Snow cone shacks must be located on a commercial or
industrial business parking lot and not on or within the landscape area of said
business site. The following shall be addressed prior to issuance of the
license:
      (1)   Vehicular and pedestrian safety: shall comply with
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   Drive aisles and thorough ways: the drive aisles and thorough ways
for vehicular traffic within the parking lot shall not be impeded by the
location of the snow cone shack; and
      (3)   Sidewalks and streets: a snow cone shack must be set back at least
five feet from a public sidewalk or ten feet from the curb of the street if no
public sidewalk is present for safety purposes.
   (G)   Waste and storage.
      (1)   Used water must be properly disposed of per regulations of the Bear
River Health Department.
      (2)   During hours of operation, a garbage can must be placed near the
snow cone shack and be properly emptied and maintained on a regular basis.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of products for the business
operation, including trailers and carts.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.100) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.011 TEMPORARY MERCHANTS.
   (A)   Information required. A temporary merchant must submit to the license
office, at least one working day prior to a sales event, the following
information:
      (1)   Application;
      (2)   Location of the sales event;
      (3)   Dates of commencement and termination of the sales event; and
      (4)   Written permission by owner or business of property at the proposed
location. The written permission must include the name of the person, the
person’s title and contact information.
   (B)   License period. The license period for a temporary merchant shall be
for a period not to exceed ten consecutive days in length and may not occur
more than once each calendar quarter at the same location. Location for the
purpose of this section shall mean the same parcel of land as described by a
parcel’s address.
   (C)   Location. Temporary merchants must be located on a commercial or
industrial business parking lot and not on or within the landscape area of said
business site.
   (D)   Identity of merchants; hearing and determination.
      (1)   In case an applicant shall claim to be a permanent merchant and is
required to take out a license upon the ground that the applicant is a
temporary merchant, the Department shall so notify the applicant in writing;
and in case the applicant shall deny in writing that they are a temporary
merchant within the terms of its definition in §
116.001 of this chapter, or its successor, the Department shall submit to the
City Administrator the denial of the applicant; whereupon the City
Administrator shall notify such applicant in writing that on a day and at a
time and place therein mentioned the City Administrator shall take up for
hearing the question as to whether the applicant is or is not a temporary
merchant, at which time and place the applicant may appear to be heard.
      (2)   At the time and place named in the notice, the City Administrator
shall take up the matter and shall determine the question upon the facts
presented, and shall enter an order according to the City Administrator’s
judgment upon the facts so presented. If it shall be determined that the
applicant is a temporary merchant, the applicant shall pay the license fee
according to the fee resolution.
   (E)   Each sale without a license; separate offense. The sale of each
article by a temporary merchant, a temporary merchant sponsor or a participant,
without a license therefore, shall be a separate offence under and a separate
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.110) Penalty, see §
116.999
ADVERTISEMENTS
§ 116.025 POSTING WITH PERMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city
to print, paint, write, mark or in any way post up any notice, card,
advertisement or other device upon any wall, fence, tree, post, building,
bridge, sidewalk, street or other property, or cause the same to be done,
without permission of the owner or agent thereof or the Mayor, if upon public
property or the streets and sidewalks of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.010) (Ord. 22-11, passed 6-16-2022) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.026 TEARING DOWN OR DEFACING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to tear down
or deface any ordinance, bill, notice, advertisement or other paper of a
business or legitimate character, lawfully posted within the limits of the
city, at any time before the object of such notice has been accomplished.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.020) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.027 AWNINGS, ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS LOCATED IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF- WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any sign,
signpost, signboard, wood or metal awning, permanent advertisement, arch or any
other structure above, over, in or around any part of any street or sidewalk
within the public right-of-way in the city without first obtaining permission
to do so from the Community and Economic Development Director or designee.
Application for such permission shall be in writing and shall contain the name
of the person for whose benefit the same is made, the period of time for which
such permit is so desired, the place where such structure is to be erected or
constructed, the dimensions thereof, the material of which the same is to be
composed and the manner of construction. The application shall be accompanied
by a blueprint or drawing or tracing of such proposed sign or other structure.
An applicant (aggrieved party) whose application for a structure has been
denied shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Community and
Economic Development Director or designee in accordance with §
156.056 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected on Main Street between First North Street and
Second South Street and on Forest Street or First South Street between First
West Street and First East Street supported by a pole or standard erected
outside of the property line; provided that, nothing in this division (B) shall
make necessary the removal of any sign or structure now in existence so long as
it otherwise meets the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Sandwich boards and other signs of similar construction are
prohibited.
   (D)   Additional signs shall not be added to any sign, pole or standard
without permission from the Council, or if located in a redevelopment project
area, by the Redevelopment Agency, as provided above, having first been
obtained.
   (E)   All signs must be erected under the supervision of the superintendent
of streets and sidewalks. No cement abutment to the support of any sign shall
be erected above the ground level on any street or sidewalk. All signs must be
properly painted and maintained in a safe condition and a city official shall
be appointed to make the provisions of this division (E).
   (F)   Awnings or canopies shall conform to the provisions of the Uniform
Building Code and, if incorporating signage, shall be bound by the maximum
cumulative sign area as noted within the sign ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.030) Penalty, see §
116.999
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
§ 116.040 LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell at public
auction in the city any merchandise or to keep, conduct or operate an auction
house, or a transient auction house in the city for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale any inventory of stock or merchandise, without first
obtaining a license.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.010) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.041 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for such license shall contain the following:
   (A)   The name of the applicant, his or her residence and the address of the
proposed place of sale;
   (B)   Detailed statements or representations proposed to be made or
advertised regarding the goods to be sold;
   (C)   The length of time for which the license is desired;
   (D)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has previously engaged
in a like or similar business, designating the place and time where the same
was conducted; and
   (E)   A true and correct detailed inventory listing the articles proposed to
be sold by auction and giving any identifying numbers or marks which may be
upon the articles to be sold, indicating opposite the description of each
article whether the same is new or used and listing each of the articles
described in said inventory with a number; provided, however, that no articles
need to be listed in the inventory which have a reasonably anticipated retail
value of $5 or less.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.020)
§ 116.042 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for licenses required for auctioneers pursuant to this subchapter
shall be established in accordance with the license fees set forth in §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances. The fee thus established will be for
each auction period.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.030)
§ 116.043 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any auction held for
charitable or benevolent purposes or as a part of a church fair, festival or
bazaar.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.040)
§ 116.044 FALSE BIDDING; AUCTIONEER OR OFFICER TO BE PRESENT.
   No person shall act at any sale by auction as a by-bidder or booster to bid
in behalf of the auctioneer or owner, or to run up the price of the article to
be sold, or to make any false bid. The licensee, or if the licensee is a
corporation then one of its officers, shall remain in continuous attendance at
each auction held to assure compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.050) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.045 CONDUCT GENERALLY.
   Auctioneers and their assistants are forbidden to conduct their sales in
such a manner as to cause people to gather in crowds on the sidewalks so as to
obstruct the same; nor shall they use immoral or indecent language in crying
their sales; not make or cause to be made noisy acclamations such as the
ringing of bells, blowing of whistles or otherwise, through the streets in
advertising their sales, and no bellman or crier, drum, fife or other musical
instrument or noise making means of attracting attention of the passerby,
except the customary auctioneer’s flags, shall be employed or suffered to be
used at or near any place of auction whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.060) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.046 FRAUD.
   It shall be unlawful for an auctioneer or his of her assistants when selling
or offering for sale at public auction any goods, wares or merchandise under
the provisions of this subchapter, while describing said goods, wares or
merchandise with respect to character, quality, kind or value or otherwise, to
make any fraudulent, misleading, untruthful or unwarranted statements tending
in any way to mislead bidders, or to substitute one article for another.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.070) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.047 DUTIES OF AUCTIONEER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all licensed auctioneers or auction houses to
receive all articles which may be offered them for sale at auction and give
receipts therefor.
   (B)   At the close of any sale, which must be made as the owner directs, the
auctioneer shall deliver a fair account of such sale and pay the amount
received for the articles to the person entitled thereto.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.080)
§ 116.048 REPRESENTATIONS AS TO QUALITY; RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All sales and all persons participating in sales must truly and
correctly represent at all times to the public attending such auction the facts
with respect to quality of items for sale.
   (B)   The licensee shall keep a complete record of all sales in excess of $5
made at auction, showing the name and address of each purchaser, a description
of each article sold and the date of each such sale. The record shall, at all
times, be open to inspection by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.090) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.049 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   The license granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
transferable, nor shall the same be loaned or used by any person other than the
one who has been licensed.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.100)
§ 116.050 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter may be revoked by the City
Council whenever it shall have been made to appear to its satisfaction upon a
proper hearing as provided in §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances, that the licensee has violated any of
the terms or provisions of this subchapter or of the licensee’s bond.
   (B)   Upon revocation of the license, the licensee shall cease to operate
thereunder and the unearned portion of the license fee and the bond shall be
forfeited to the city.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.110)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 116.065 DEFINITION.
   In addition to the definitions set forth in §
110.002 of this code of ordinances, the following words and phrases used in
this subchapter shall have the meaning herein prescribed.
   HOME OCCUPATIONS. Any business activity entered into for profit and
conducted or operated from or in residential premises within the city. HOME
OCCUPATIONS shall not be construed to include those activities exempted from
business licensing requirements.
(Prior Code, § 14.08.010) (Ord. 01-27, passed 7-19-2001)
§ 116.066 LICENSE REQUIRED: DISPLAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a home occupation
without first securing a license therefor.
   (B)   The licensee shall conspicuously display such license in his or her
place of business so that the same is plainly visible to the public.
(Prior Code, § 14.08.020) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.067 PROCEDURE.
   Applicants shall receive, fill out, and file with the Department, a business
license application as required under the provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances. The provisions set forth in said
Chapter 110 shall be controlling as to all matters relating to the requirements
for and issuance of a license, license fees, exemptions, renewals and the like.
(Prior Code, § 14.08.030)
§ 116.068 INSPECTIONS.
   The Department reserves the right to inspect any premises licensed for home
occupation which present a potential danger to the public health, morals or
welfare but does not require all such premises to be inspected.
(Prior Code, § 14.08.040)
§ 116.069 ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   Home occupations shall comply with all zoning requirements as set forth in
the city’s Zoning Code, and a conditional use permit shall be obtained from the
planning commission before a license can be issued.
(Prior Code, § 14.08.050)
PAWNBROKERS
§ 116.080 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms used in this subchapter shall have the meaning set forth in the Utah
Code, unless otherwise specified below.
(Prior Code, § 14.11.010)
§ 116.081 LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
a pawnbroker in the city without having previously obtained a license to
operate as a pawnbroker in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Such person shall make application for a license to the Department
in such form as the Department shall require.
   (B)   (1)   The license fee for a pawnbroker shall be determined in
accordance with §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Fee payments as well as renewal billings shall be governed by §§
110.022(B) and
110.023 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.11.020) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.082 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND ORDINANCE.
   Licenses shall be displayed prominently in the pawnbroker’s place of
business together with a copy of all ordinances pertaining to the conduct or
transactions of the pawnbroker’s business in such manner that they can be
easily seen and perused by all who do business with such pawnbroker.
(Prior Code, § 14.11.030)
§ 116.083 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before any license is issued to a pawnbroker under the provisions of this
subchapter, the applicant therefor shall execute and deliver to the city a bond
in the principal amount as set by resolution of the City Council executed by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in the state and conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the licensee of all requirements under this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.11.040)
§ 116.084 DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS.
   All pawnbrokers shall comply with Utah Code addressing pawnshops.
(Prior Code, § 14.11.050)
SOLICITORS
§ 116.095 DEFINITION.
   In addition to the definitions set forth in §
110.002 of this code of ordinances, the following words and phrases used in
this subchapter shall have the meaning herein prescribed.
   SOLICITOR.
      (1)   Any person selling, offering for sale or taking orders for
merchandise, or conducting any activity for which the person receives
consideration or remuneration, door-to-door within the city.
      (2)   Merchandise shall include goods, food, wares, photographs,
subscriptions to any kind of publications, tickets, coupons or receipts
representing value.
      (3)   The term SOLICITOR includes, but is not limited to, photographers,
sellers of magazines, cosmetics, home care products and the like, and any other
person engaged in direct sales, whether to residences or businesses, but
specifically excludes newspaper carriers, candidates for public office, or
persons conducting activities on behalf of religious organizations.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.010)
§ 116.096 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of a solicitor
without first securing a license therefor, unless otherwise exempted as
provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.020) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.097 EXEMPTIONS.
   Persons already licensed pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances, but who also engage in soliciting
activities, are exempt from further licensing under this subchapter, provided
they obtain photo identification cards and pay associated fees adopted by
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.030)
§ 116.098 LICENSE DURATION, REVOCATION.
   A license required by this subchapter shall be for the calendar year and may
be revoked at any time by action of the City Council for cause pursuant to
hearing procedures set forth in §
110.032 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.040)
§ 116.099 WARRANTS SEARCH.
   Each individual applying for a solicitors identification card is required to
submit to a criminal warrant search.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.050)
§ 116.100 PHOTO IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   The city shall furnish one photo identification card for each
applicant and/or employee. A copy of the card shall be filed by the Department
with the license application and the card shall be carried by the licensee.
   (B)   Each applicant and/or employee shall:
      (1)   Submit to the taking of two photographs by the Department;
      (2)   Sign his or her name to the identification cards; and
      (3)   Pay the cost of the photo identification card when issued, as
defined in the currently adopted Government Records Access and Management Act,
being U.C.A. Title 63G, Chapter 2, Part 1, or its successor statute, fee
schedule.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.060) (Ord. 04-31, passed 11-4-2004)
§ 116.101 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for licenses required by this subchapter shall be established in
accordance with §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances, and all matters relating to fee
payments, renewals and the like shall be governed as provided in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances. There shall be no proration of the
license fee.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.070)
SWAP MEETS AND FLEA MARKETS
§ 116.115 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this subchapter for any
person, firm, corporation, charity or other entity to hold or participate as a
vendor at a swap meet without first having obtained a license therefor as is
herein provided.
   (B)   Criminal history reports for applicants and all employees shall be
submitted to the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Licensees shall comply with the Swap Meets and Flea Markets Act of the
Utah Code, being U.C.A. Title 13, Chapter 32, or its successor statute.
(Prior Code, § 14.17.010) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.116 FEES.
   The fee for any licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be as set
forth in §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.17.020)
§ 116.117 QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSEES.
   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be denied, suspended or
revoked where the applicant:
   (A)   Is not 18 years or older;
   (B)   Is not found to be of good moral character;
   (C)   Is presently charged with a felony in violation of any law relating to
burglary, theft, robbery, receiving stolen property or any law involving moral
turpitude;
   (D)   Is presently being charged with a misdemeanor in violation of any law
or ordinance relating to theft, receiving stolen property or any law or
ordinance involving moral turpitude;
   (E)   Has a current outstanding warrant;
   (F)   Is a partnership, any member of which lacks any of the qualifications
of this section; or
   (G)   Is a corporation or other entity in which an officer or director lacks
any of the qualifications of this section.
(Prior Code, § 14.17.030)
§ 116.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of §§
116.001 through
116.011 of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.120)
   (C)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
116.025 through
116.027 of this chapter shall be classified as a Class C misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.040)
   (D)   Violation of the provisions of §§
116.040 through
116.050 of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
110.999 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.120)
   (E)   Violation of the provisions of §§
116.065 through
116.069 of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.08.060)
   (F)    Violation of the provisions of §§
116.095 through
116.101 is a Class B misdemeanor. Except that, a violation of the provision of
§
116.100 is an infraction.
(Prior Code, § 14.14.080)
   (G)   In addition to other penalties provided by law, any person, firm,
corporation, charity or other entity violating any of the provisions of §§
116.115 through
116.117 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. No swap meet
licensee or swap meet seller shall be deemed to have complied with the
provisions of §§
116.115 through
116.117 of this chapter if:
      (1)   He or she fails to properly provide the information required by §§
116.115 through
116.117 of this chapter; or
      (2)   He or she gives false information as to his or her identity or as
to any other information required by §§
116.115 through
116.117 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.17.040)
(Ord. 24-07, passed 4-4-2024)
CHAPTER 117: PRIVATE SECURITY AND DETECTIVES
Section
   
117.001   License required
   
117.002   License procedures
   
117.003   License duration, revocation
   
117.004   Persons disqualified from licensing
   
117.005   Information concerning applicant required
   
117.006   Bond required
   
117.007   License fee
   
117.008   Badges; uniforms resembling city police
   
117.009   Vehicles resembling city police
   
117.010   Firearms, sirens, lights
   
117.011   Misrepresenting fact of licensing
   
117.012   License not transferable
   
117.013   Exemptions
 
   
117.999   Penalty
§ 117.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a private
detective, security officer or investigator, or to provide watchperson, guard
or private patrol services for a fee or a reward unless such person first
obtains a license from the city as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.010) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.002 LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   Any person desiring to engage in a business regulated by this chapter shall
make application to the Department for such license. Each applicant at the time
of filing his or her application, and each prospective employee of a licensee
herein, shall appear in person before the city’s Chief of Police who shall
inquire of him or her as to his or her experience and qualifications and other
basic requirements as herein provided to engage in such business. Each person
is required to provide his, her or their personal criminal history report. The
Chief of Police shall then file his or her written findings and recommendations
with the Department. The Department shall either issue or deny such license or
allow said employment based upon the recommendations of the Chief of Police and
pursuant to §§
110.032 of this code of ordinances and §
117.004 of this chapter, and upon the payment of the required fee.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.020) (Ord. 02-01, passed 1-10-2002)
§ 117.003 LICENSE DURATION, REVOCATION.
   A license required by this chapter shall be for the calendar year and may be
revoked at any time for cause pursuant to hearing procedures set forth in §
110.032 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.030)
§ 117.004 PERSONS DISQUALIFIED FROM LICENSING.
   (A)   No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any person, nor
shall any person be employed by a licensee licensed under this chapter who is
not a citizen of the United States; who is under the age of 21 years of age;
who has been convicted of a felony by the courts of this or any other state or
of the United States or who has been convicted anywhere of any act or acts
which, if done in the state, would constitute an assault, theft, larceny,
unlawful entry, extortion, buying or receiving stolen property, unlawfully
using or possessing or carrying weapons or burglar’s tools or escaping from
lawful custody, or of a crime or crimes involving moral turpitude. Nor shall
any person who makes any false statement in his or her application for a
license required by this chapter be deemed a qualified person for such license.
   (B)   Information concerning the above matters shall be delivered to the
Department by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.040) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.005 INFORMATION CONCERNING APPLICANT REQUIRED.
   The applications required by this chapter shall set forth name, age,
experience and address of the applicants. If the applicant is a partnership,
such information shall be given regarding each member of the partnership, the
person to be in active charge of such partnership and all employees. If the
applicant is a corporation, information shall be given concerning each officer,
director, local employees and the person to be in active charge of such
corporation.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.050)
§ 117.006 BOND REQUIRED.
   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a corporate surety
bond in the amount as set by resolution of the City Council, executed by a
surety company authorized to do business in the state and conditional upon the
person applying for the license complying with all of the laws and ordinances
regulating the business of the type set forth in this chapter and all lawful
requirements made by the City Council and paying all damages occasioned to any
person by reason of any statement, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit of the
licensed person, his or her agents or employees, or which may result from any
other violation of law or ordinance in carrying on the licensed business. Bond
which is posted must remain in effect 30 days after business has closed.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.060)
§ 117.007 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for licenses required by this chapter shall be established in
accordance with §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances, and all matters relating to fee
payments, renewals and the like, shall be governed as provided in Chapter 110
of this code of ordinances. There shall be no proration of the license fee.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.070)
§ 117.008 BADGES; UNIFORMS RESEMBLING CITY POLICE.
   A licensee or employees of a licensee shall not wear a uniform or display a
badge that is in any way similar to the uniform or badge worn and displayed by
the city police or any other official law enforcement agency acting within the
state. The decision of the Chief of Police as to any similarity shall be final
and failure to comply with the decision of the Chief of Police shall be grounds
for revocation of the license.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.080)
§ 117.009 VEHICLES RESEMBLING CITY POLICE.
   (A)   A licensee or employees of a licensee shall not operate a motor
vehicle in the performance of his or her business with a label, decal or
business name that is in any way similar to the label, decal or name appearing
on the motor vehicles of the city’s Police Department or any other official law
enforcement agency acting within the state.
   (B)   The decision of the Chief of Police as to any such similarity shall be
final and failure to comply with the decision of the Chief of Police shall be
grounds for revocation of the license.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.090)
§ 117.010 FIREARMS, SIRENS, LIGHTS.
   A licensee must comply with all state and federal laws governing concealed
weapons and open weapon carry. No permits shall be issued for a siren or
warning lights resembling those used by law enforcement or public safety
emergency response vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.100) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.011 MISREPRESENTING FACT OF LICENSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to represent to any other person that he
or she is duly licensed to carry on the type of business set forth in this
chapter when, in fact, he or she is not so licensed or employed.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.110) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.012 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.120)
§ 117.013 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring a license by any
watchperson or person regularly employed as a watchperson by a firm or
corporation or any person investigating credit records or insurance claims.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.130)
§ 117.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.12.140)
CHAPTER 118: GARBAGE AND WASTE COLLECTORS
Section
   
118.001   Definitions
   
118.002   License required
   
118.003   Licensing of collectors of garbage and waste materials
   
118.004   License fee
 
   
118.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
Waste Collection and Disposal, see §§
93.015 through
93.033
§ 118.001 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions set forth in §
110.002 of this code of ordinances, the following words and phrases used in
this chapter shall have the meanings herein prescribed.
   GARBAGE. Kitchen and table refuse, leavings and offal, and also every
accumulation of described waste of animal and vegetable waste and other matter
that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in the storage of
meats, fish, fowls, birds, fruits and vegetables.
   WASTE MATTER. Crockery, bottles, tin cans, trimmings from lawns and gardens,
pasteboard boxes, rags, paper, cold ashes, sawdust, shavings and package
materials, but excluding boards and pieces of lumber, car bodies and parts and
major household appliances.
(Prior Code, § 14.13.010)
§ 118.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Solid Waste Department of
the city, to collect, remove or dispose of garbage or waste material for hire
within the city without having previously obtained a license to operate as a
collector of garbage or waste material.
(Prior Code, § 14.13.020) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.003 LICENSING OF COLLECTORS OF GARBAGE AND WASTE MATERIALS.
   Any person who desires to engage in the business of collection of garbage
and waste materials as defined in this chapter may so do upon the following
conditions: such person shall obtain a license from the Department to collect
garbage or waste materials within the city.
(Prior Code, § 14.13.030)
§ 118.004 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for licenses required by this chapter shall be established in
accordance with §
110.022(A) of this code of ordinances, and all matters relating to fee
payments, renewals and the like, shall be governed as provided in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 14.13.040)
§ 118.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.13.050)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND DECENCY
      
132.   NOISE
      
133.   SMOKING, VAPING IN PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 130: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
130.001   Utah Criminal and Traffic Code adopted
   
130.002   Criminal responsibility for direct commission of offense or for
conduct of another
 
   
130.999   Penalty
§ 130.001 UTAH CRIMINAL AND TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED.
   The Utah Criminal and Traffic Code, 2023 Edition, and subsequent additions,
as compiled, prepared and published as a code in book form by the state’s
Department of Public Safety and as said uniform code may be subsequently
amended by legislative act, executive order or otherwise, is hereby approved
and adopted as the Criminal and Traffic Codes for the municipality, except as
such codes may be altered or modified by the ordinances of the municipality.
One copy of any subsequent editions shall be filed for use and examination by
the public in the office of the Municipal Recorder upon receipt by the city
and, upon such filing, said subsequent editions shall, thereupon, become
effective and shall thereafter be the Criminal and Traffic Codes for the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.01.010)
§ 130.002 CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR DIRECT COMMISSION OF OFFENSE OR FOR
CONDUCT OF ANOTHER.
   Every person, acting with the mental state required for the commission of an
offense who directly commits the offense, who solicits, requests, commands,
encourages or intentionally aids another person to engage in conduct which
constitutes an offense shall be criminally liable as a part for such conduct.
(Prior Code, § 16.01.040)
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any provision of
the code hereby adopted shall be guilty of an offense classified as provided in
said code; provided that, in the event said code does not provide the
appropriate classification, the same shall be determined by reference to the
revised ordinances of the city. In the event neither of said codes provide for
the classification of such an offense, then any person violating, causing or
permitting violation of any provision of the code adopted hereby shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any such violator, upon conviction, unless
otherwise provided in said codes, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000, for a Class B misdemeanor and not more than $750 for a Class C
misdemeanor and infraction, or by a jail sentence not to exceed six months, or
by both a fine and jail sentence; provided that, minimum sentences and all
other sanctions consistent with the aforementioned guidelines and contained in
said 2023 Code Edition, and subsequent editions, are incorporated here in this
section by reference.
(Prior Code, § 16.01.020)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND DECENCY
Section
   
131.001   Discharge of firearms, air guns, bows and arrows and the like
   
131.002   Curfew for minors
   
131.003   Truancy for compulsory school age minors
   
131.004   Interfering with school operation
   
131.005   Abandoned and unlicensed motor vehicles
   
131.006   Operation of remote-controlled aircraft
   
131.007   Illegal to possess or consume alcoholic beverages in certain public
places
   
131.008   Fireworks; public display, when permitted; permit
 
   
131.999   Penalty
§ 131.001 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, AIR GUNS, BOWS AND ARROWS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm within the corporate
limits of the city, except:
      (1)   Officers of the law in the performance of their duty;
      (2)   Any citizen when lawfully defending their person or a third party;
      (3)   At a proper place authorized by the Chief of Police; and/or
      (4)   Discharge of a shotgun west of 1200 West (Watery Lane) when
discharge can be accomplished without placing property or person at peril, and
the discharge is not within 600 feet of a house, dwelling or any other
building, or any structure in which a domestic animal is kept or fed, including
a barn, poultry yard, corral, feeding pen or stockyard, unless written
permission is obtained from the owner or person in charge of the property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun, sparrow
gun, flipper, sling shot, bows and arrows or other similar contrivance within
the corporate limits of the city, except to persons engaged in target shooting
or other recreational shooting at authorized times and places which
authorization must first be received in writing and signed by the city’s Chief
of Police or other authorized persons as may be designated by the City Council.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any kind of dangerous
weapon or firearm:
      (1)   From an automobile or other vehicle; and/or
      (2)   From, upon or across any highway.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.010) (Ord. 07-04, passed 3-15-2007) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.002 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor under 14 years of age to remain or loiter
on any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city between
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. immediately following.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor under 18 years of age to remain or loiter
on any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city between
12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. immediately following.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having legal
care and custody of any minor dealt with respectively in divisions (A) and (B)
above to allow or permit any such minor to remain or loiter on any of the
sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city within the times
provided in divisions (A) and (B) above, except as provided in division (D)
below.
   (D)   The provisions of divisions (A), (B) and (C) above shall not apply
where the minors dealt with respectively in divisions (A) and (B) above are:
      (1)   Married;
      (2)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of such minor;
      (3)   Returning home from, going to or being in attendance at any
religious or school function, civic, school or church, organized dance,
theater, sports event or other such associational activity; provided, however,
that, going to or from such activity shall be by a direct route and within a
reasonable time of the commencement or termination of such event;
      (4)   Engaged in a legitimate emergency errand;
      (5)   Engaged in legitimate employment and can produce evidence of such
employment; or
      (6)   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal travel, while traveling to,
from or through the city on an interstate trip.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.020) (Ord. 97-16, passed 7-31-1997) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.003 TRUANCY FOR COMPULSORY SCHOOL AGE MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ASSIGNED SCHOOL LOCATION. The location where a student would be assigned,
registered or released to attend during compulsory school time when the class
or activity is in session, and the student is under the control or supervision
of school authorizes or other recognized supervision. Further defined as the
authorized presence, for a reasonable time or direct authorized passage to and
from an area where the student would be involved in dealing with school or
personal business.
      AUTHORIZATION. A permission slip given by a school authority to excuse a
student from being in the usual assigned school location in accordance with
school policy, or a note from the parent or guardian giving permission for the
student to be absent from class. The permission slip must be in the immediate
possession of the student whenever not at the expected school location.
      COMPULSORY SCHOOL AGE MINOR. A person between six and 18 years of age
that is not exempted and must be attending a public or regularly established
private school during the school year of the district in which the minor
resides pursuant to the state’s compulsory education requirements.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   Person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
      OPEN CAMPUS. When a compulsory school age minor is allowed by school
officials to leave school for lunch purposes.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operation, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, the
common areas of schools, hospitals, office and commercial buildings, public
transit buses and property and apartment houses.
      REMAIN. To:
         (a)   Linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
      TRUANCY HOURS. Those hours in which a compulsory school age youth should
be attending school in the district or jurisdiction in which the student
attends school.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A compulsory school age minor commits an offense if he or she
remains in any public place, is not in his or her assigned location at school,
or is on the premises of any establishment within the corporate limits of the
city during truancy hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits, aides, encourages or allows a compulsory school age minor,
or minor, to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during truancy hours, or if a parent or guardian of a minor
fails within 14 days to comply with the instructions to contact school
authorities upon receipt of notification by certified letter from the city,
that his or her child has received a truancy citation.
      (3)   Any person commits an offense if he or she engages in any conduct
for the purpose of, or resulting in, inducing any compulsory school age minor
to leave or be absent from said compulsory school age minor’s assigned school
location during truancy hours.
   (C)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above that the
compulsory school age minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         (b)   Involved in an emergency;
         (c)   Following school policy regarding open campus for lunch, off
campus school-approved classes and activities, or any other legitimate school
sanctioned off-campus function, and has on his or her person legal
authorization of permission by the school or his or her parent or guardian; or
         (d)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with state law.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above that the
parent or guardian of a compulsory school age minor has met in cooperation with
the proper school authorities within 14 days of notification in response to
each certified letter from the city notifying them that their child has
received a truancy citation.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above that the
owner, operator or employee of an establishment, or owner of a private
residence, promptly notified the Police Department that a compulsory school age
minor was present on his, her or their premises during truancy hours and
refused to leave.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, an
identified police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reasons for
being in the public place.
      (2)   The city will notify the parent or guardian of a compulsory school
age minor by certified letter when a truancy citation is issued to said minor.
The letter will request that the parent and truant student meet in cooperation
with school officials to address their shared truancy concerns. Copies of the
letter will be given to the school principal and the school resource officer.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.030) (Ord. 99-32, passed 11-29-1999) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.004 INTERFERING WITH SCHOOL OPERATION.
   Any person who comes into any school building or upon any school ground, or
street, sidewalk or public way adjacent to any school building or ground and
who presence or acts interfere with the peaceful conduct of the activities of
any school or disrupt the school or its pupils or school activities, and who
remains there, or who re-enters or comes upon the place within 72 hours, after
being asked to leave by the chief administrative official of that school or his
or her representative or agent is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.040) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.005 ABANDONED AND UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to abandon a vehicle upon any
private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person
in lawful possession or control of the real property.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a vehicle shall be presumed to be
abandoned if it is left unattended on private property for a period in excess
of 24 hours.
      (3)   Abandoned vehicle(s) situated on a person’s private property and
not owned by him or her may be removed upon the property owner’s request
provided proper city licensing has been granted to the towing company. The
costs for removal of the vehicle shall be the responsibility of the motor
vehicle owner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit scrap, metal,
junk, wrecked, abandoned or unlicensed vehicles or vehicle parts to remain on
any real property or premises, unless in connection with a lawfully situated
and licensed business.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have more than two unregistered
vehicles on a parcel at any time. Any abandoned or unlicensed vehicles must be
stored behind a legally constructed barrier from the view from street or
adjoining properties.
   (D)   Vehicles used for agricultural purposes are excluded.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.050) (Ord. 07-19, passed 11-1-2007) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.006 OPERATION OF REMOTE-CONTROLLED AIRCRAFT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to fly any remote-controlled aircraft within the
corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   REMOTE-CONTROLLED AIRCRAFT means any powered, fixed wing craft which
flies and which is controlled by radio signals.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.060) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.007 ILLEGAL TO POSSESS OR CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN PUBLIC
PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic
beverage in any public park or public school or at any city-owned building open
to the public unless said premises are properly licensed therefor and the
consumption is in accordance with the laws and regulations regarding said
licensure and the terms and conditions of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.070) (Ord. 19-04, passed 2-7-2019) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.008 FIREWORKS; PUBLIC DISPLAY, WHEN PERMITTED; PERMIT.
   (A)   The city may, upon application in writing, upon the posting of a
suitable bond, grant a permit for the public display of fireworks by the city,
religious, fraternal or civic organizations, fair associations, amusement parks
or other organizations or groups of individuals, approved by the City Council
and the City Council is authorized, by resolution, to grant such permission
when such display is to be handled by a competent operator, to be approved by
the Chiefs of Police and Fire Departments. Such display shall be of such a
character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the Chiefs
of the Police and Fire Departments, after proper inspection, shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. After such permit
shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks
for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.080)
   (B)   All such applications for permits shall set forth the date, the hour
and place of making such display, and the place of storing fireworks prior to
the display, and further, the name or names of the person, persons, firm
partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals making the
display; and the name of the person or persons, in charge of the igniting,
firing, setting off, exploding or causing to be exploded such fireworks. The
location of the storage place shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of
the Fire Department. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.090)
   (C)   The City Council may require a bond deemed adequate by the Council
from the licensee in a sum not less than $500 conditioned for the payment of
all damages, which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property,
by reason of the display so as aforesaid licensed, and arising from any acts of
the licensee, his or her agents or employees. Such bond shall run to the city
and shall be for the use and benefit of any person injured or the owner of any
property damaged, who is authorized to maintain an action thereon, or his or
her heirs, executors, administrator, successors or assigns.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.100)
   (D)   Nothing in this act shall be construed to interfere with the
manufacture, storage or transportation of fireworks by any manufacturer,
wholesaler, dealer or jobber selling at wholesale without the state or to
municipalities, counties, religious, fraternal or civic organizations, fair
associations, amusement parks, or other organizations or groups of individuals
within the state authorized to possess and use fireworks under this act; or the
sale or use of any fireworks or blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for
signal purposes in athletic sports, or by railroads for signal purposes, or for
use by the militia; or construed to prohibit the manufacture of aviation and
railroad light flares.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.110)
Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of §
131.001 of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.010)
   (B)   Violation of §
131.003 of this chapter is an infraction. A person who violates a provision of
§
131.003 of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of
a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each
offense of a minor, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of $35 and/or
service hours. A third offense requires mandatory court appearance. Each
offense of an adult, parent or guardian, upon conviction, is punishable by a
fine not less than $35 or not to exceed $500. A third offense by an adult is
subject to the provisions of state law.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.030)
   (C)   Violation of any provision of §
131.005 of this chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to
the penalties provided for such offenses. A court shall also issue such orders
as may be appropriate to enjoin, restrain and cease such violations. In
addition to all other penalize, a part in violation shall be subject to all
costs of enforcement, including attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.050)
   (D)   Violation of §
131.006 of this chapter is an infraction.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.060)
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
131.007 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500. Each
occurrence when such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.070)
   (F)   Any person violating the provisions of §
131.008 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.120)
(Ord. 99-32, passed 11-29-1999; Ord. 07-04, passed 3-15-2007; Ord. 07-19,
passed 11-1-2007; Ord. 19-04, passed 2-7-2019)
CHAPTER 132: NOISE
Section
   
132.001   Prohibited acts generally
   
132.002   Prohibited acts specifically
   
132.003   Exceptions
   
132.004   Application for special permit
 
   
132.999   Penalty
§ 132.001 PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusual loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.010) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.002 PROHIBITED ACTS SPECIFICALLY.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing or
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   (A)   Horns, signaling devices and the like. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, except as a
danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. The use of any horn, whistle or
other device operated by engine exhaust;
   (B)   Radios, phonographs and the like. The using, operating or permitting
to be played, used or operated in residential areas any television, radio
receiving set, musical instrument phonograph or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than
is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the
room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who
are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet from the
building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section;
   (C)   Loud speakers, amplifiers and other sound devices for advertising. The
using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound upon the
public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure without or in violation of
a permit issued pursuant to §
132.004 of this chapter;
   (D)   Yelling, shouting and the like. Yelling, shouting, whistling or
otherwise creating noise on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence;
   (E)   Dogs. The keeping of any dog which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity;
   (F)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom;
   (G)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
other vehicle, which due to lack of repair or improper loading creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
   (H)   Loading and unloading of vehicles. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers;
   (I)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building shall be
prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., local prevailing
time, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with permit from the city;
   (J)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals, parks. The creation of any
excessive noise adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or in any park, which
unreasonably disturbs the users thereof;
   (K)   Pile drivers, hammers and the like. The operation between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any equipment, or other appliance, the use of which
is usually attended by loud or unusual noise;
   (L)   Power lawn mowers. The operation of any power mower, cultivator or
like or related device (except snowblowers) in an area zoned residential
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and
   (M)   Motor vehicle noise. The operation of any vehicle having more than two
axles, upon any residential street or in any area zoned residential between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. with the exception of city equipment or
equipment used for snow removal.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.020) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.003 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level
regulations:
   (A)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves;
   (B)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency;
   (C)   Noises resulting from emergency work, as defined in §
132.002 of this chapter;
   (D)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the
city in accordance with §
132.004 of this chapter; and
   (E)   Any aircraft or railroad equipment operated in conformity with, or
pursuant to state statute, federal law, federal regulations and traffic control
instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted state or federal
regulations. Any aircraft operating under technical difficulties, in any kind
of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control or being operated
pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under federal air
regulations shall also be exempt.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.030)
§ 132.004 APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated
in this chapter on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the City Council
or duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the Council hereunder
shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall
specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
   (B)   The City Council or duly authorized representative may grant a relief
as applied for if it or they find:
      (1)   Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify
the activity or operation to comply with this chapter; or
      (2)   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this chapter;
and
      (3)   That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
   (C)   The City Council, in granting such a special permit, may prescribe any
conditions or requirements they deem necessary to minimize adverse effects upon
the community of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.040)
§ 132.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction. Each occurrence when such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.050)
   (B)   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions hereof or which
causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or
which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area
shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to
abatement as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.060)
CHAPTER 133: SMOKING, VAPING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Section
   
133.001   Definitions
   
133.002   Prohibitions
   
133.003   Exceptions
   
133.004   Posting of signs
 
   
133.999   Penalty
§ 133.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY PARK. City-owned parks and recreational areas, including city-owned
spectator and concession areas, playgrounds, public squares, cemeteries,
athletic fields, zoos and walking and biking trails, excluding city-owned golf
courses.
   E-CIGARETTE. Any electronic oral device that provides a vapor of nicotine or
other substance and which simulates smoking through its use or through
inhalation of the vapor through the device; and includes an oral device that is
composed of a heating element, battery or electronic circuit and marketed,
manufactured, distributed or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe or any
other product name or descriptor, if the function of the product meets the
definition of an electronic oral device.
   MASS GATHERING. An outdoor assembly of 50 or more people on city-owned
property that reasonably can be expected to continue for at least one hour.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. Possession, carrying or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, e-
cigarette or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or
the lighting, emitting or exhaling of smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of
any kind, or of any other lighted smoking equipment, including e-cigarettes.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.010)
§ 133.002 PROHIBITIONS.
   Smoking is hereby prohibited:
   (A)   In city parks;
   (B)   Within 25 feet of bus stops; and
   (C)   Within 50 feet of mass gatherings.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.020) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.003 EXCEPTIONS.
   The restrictions of this chapter are subject to any applicable state or
federal exemptions.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.030)
§ 133.004 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   “No smoking or vaping” signs or the internal “no smoking” symbol (consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every
city park.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.040)
§ 133.999 PENALTY.
   A violation of §
133.002 of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed
$100, but not by imprisonment. Police officers shall have the discretion to
issue a “warning” if the deem it is in the best interests of the city for the
first offense.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.020)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
152.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
153.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
154.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
150.001   Adoption of additional codes
   
150.002   Duties of Community Development
   
150.003   Community Development to assign house number; duty to affix
   
150.004   Assigned and recorded house number must be used
   
150.005   Rules governing assignment of house or street numbers
   
150.006   Permit required
   
150.007   Work exempt from permit
   
150.008   Schedule of fees
   
150.009   Commencing work without permit
   
150.010   Inspections
   
150.011   Persons who may engage in building and construction acts
 
   
150.999   Penalty
§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF ADDITIONAL CODES.
   Additional codes adopted by the state, under the state’s Construction Code
Adoption Act, being U.C.A. Title 15A, Chapter 2, or its successor statute, and
the state’s Construction Code, shall also be considered code in the
municipality, including all appendixes and amendments.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.020)
§ 150.002 DUTIES OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   It shall be the duty of Community Development to see that all new buildings,
remodels or demolition of any buildings, are carried out in the manner provided
in the Building Code of the city and to perform such other and further duties
as may be prescribed from time to time by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.030)
§ 150.003 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TO ASSIGN HOUSE NUMBER; DUTY TO AFFIX.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any number on any house
or building in the city without applying to Community Development to have the
proper number assigned to such house or building.
   (B)   Community Development shall keep a record of all numbers assigned and
shall assign numbers in accordance with the record. Within 30 days after being
notified by Community Development, it shall be unlawful for any person to
refuse, fail or neglect to place a conspicuous number, easily seen and
deciphered from the sidewalk, on any house which is owned or controlled by him
or her within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.040) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 ASSIGNED AND RECORDED HOUSE NUMBER MUST BE USED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or continue any
number on any house or building in the city other than the number assigned
thereto and which appears of record in Community Development.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.050) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.005 RULES GOVERNING ASSIGNMENT OF HOUSE OR STREET NUMBERS.
   House or street numbers shall be assigned by the following rules.
   (A)   One hundred numbers or a necessary part thereof shall be allotted to
each block.
   (B)   One number shall be assigned consecutively and alternately, as to odd
and even, to each sixteen and one-half lineal feet of frontage.
   (C)   At any intersection of Forest and Main Streets shall be the beginning
of an initial point. Running north, east, south and west from the initial
point, the even numbers shall apply to the right-hand side and the odd numbers
shall apply to the left-hand side of the streets and alleys.
   (D)   Running east, the number one shall begin at the east side of Main
Street, on the left side thereof.
   (E)   Running west, the number one shall begin at the south side of Forest
Street, on the left side thereof.
   (F)   Running south, the number one shall begin at the south side of Forest
Street, on the left side thereof.
   (G)   Running north, the number one shall begin on the north side of Forest
Street, on the left side thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.060)
§ 150.006 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated, or cause any such work to be done, shall first make application for
permit to Community Development.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.070)
§ 150.007 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.
   Exemptions from permit requirements of the building codes shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of the building code or ordinances of the city.
Work exempt from a permit shall be as listed in the administration section of
the building codes aforementioned and adopted.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.080)
§ 150.008 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   Fees shall be as set forth by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.090)
§ 150.009 COMMENCING WORK WITHOUT PERMIT.
   Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a fee established by resolution in addition to the required fees.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.100)
§ 150.010 INSPECTIONS.
   Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by Community Development and such construction or work shall remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a
result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation
of the provisions of the building codes or other ordinances of the city.
Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel provisions of this
code or other ordinances of the city shall not be valid. It shall be the duty
of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes. Neither the Building Official, nor the city, shall be
liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material
required to allow inspection.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.110)
§ 150.011 PERSONS WHO MAY ENGAGE IN BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of building
and construction within the corporate limits of the city unless duly licensed
by the state through the Department of Professional Licensing, as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.130) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be classified as a Class C misdemeanor.
Any person who violates a provision of the building codes or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of the building codes, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 5.01.120)
CHAPTER 151: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
151.001   Definitions
   
151.002   Findings and declaration of policy
   
151.003   Regulations; authority of supervisor to establish and the like
   
151.004   Filing administrative orders with Recorder; effective date;
distribution
   
151.005   Registration of existing swimming pools
   
151.006   Construction permit
   
151.007   Failure to follow approved plans
   
151.008   Permit required to operate public swimming pool; application;
issuance or refusal; posting
   
151.009   Right of entry at swimming pools; records and samples
   
151.010   Duration of permit to operate public swimming pool; suspension and
revocation
 
   
151.999   Penalty
§ 151.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. The Community Development Department of the city.
   FAMILY SWIMMING POOL. A swimming pool used and intended to be used solely by
the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his or her family and by friends
invited to use it without payment of any fee or consideration.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Bear River Health Department.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. Every swimming pool other than a family swimming pool.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any artificial or semi-artificial container, whether indoors
or outdoors, and whether above or below the surface of the ground, or both,
used or intended to be used to contain a body of water for swimming by any
person, together with all permanent structures, equipment, appliances and other
facilities used or intended for use in and about the operation, maintenance and
use of such pool.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.010)
§ 151.002 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The Council finds and declares that the use of any swimming pools by a
substantial number of people is a factor in the transmission of disease and in
the occurrence of accidents causing bodily injury or death to human beings
unless such pools are constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with
proper minimum standards of engineering and sanitation. It is the policy and
intent of the city to protect the public health and safety by requiring that
all swimming pools in the city, insofar as possible, shall meet proper minimum
standards of safety and sanitation designed and adapted to minimize the
possibility of accidental injury and the transmission of disease through the
medium of such pools or the common use thereof. The Council further finds and
declares that these objectives can be achieved only through regulation and
control of the design, construction, maintenance and operation of such pools.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.020)
§ 151.003 REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY OF SUPERVISOR TO ESTABLISH AND THE LIKE.
   The Director of the Community Development Department is authorized,
empowered and directed to establish, promulgate, amend and rescind such general
regulations and such minimum standards for the design, construction,
maintenance, operation and use of swimming pools in the city as he or she shall
find to be necessary, proper or convenient for the protection of the public
health and safety and the accomplishment of the purposes and objectives
declared in §
151.002 of this chapter. In establishing such regulations and minimum
standards, the Director may conduct such investigations and hearings as he or
she may deem desirable and rely on any information which he or she may deem
reliable.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.030)
§ 151.004 FILING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS WITH RECORDER; EFFECTIVE DATE;
DISTRIBUTION.
   Administrative orders establishing, promulgating, amending or rescinding
such regulations shall be filed with the City Recorder and submitted to the
Council at its next regular meeting. Such regulations shall become effective
upon the approval of the Council, or if neither approved, nor disapproved, by
the Council, within 30 days after the same shall have been submitted to the
Council as aforesaid. The Director shall cause such regulations to be
reproduced in sufficient quantities for distribution to interested persons and
shall fix a reasonable price at which such regulations shall be sold to the
public.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.040)
§ 151.005 REGISTRATION OF EXISTING SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Every public swimming pool in the city shall be registered with the
Health Department upon forms which shall be provided by the Department. The
operator of each such pool and the owner and the occupant of the lands upon
which the same is situated shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
registration thereof.
   (B)   The registration forms shall specify the names of the owner and the
occupant of the lands whereon the same is situated and the name of the operator
thereof and the location of the pool and shall describe in brief and general
terms the nature of the pool and the nature of the use and intended use thereof
and the extent to which persons other than the owner or operator and his or her
immediate family are or will be permitted to use the same.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.050)
§ 151.006 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Before any work is begun on the construction, alteration, enlargement,
remodeling or improvement of a swimming pool, a permit therefore shall be
obtained from Community Development.
   (B)   (1)   Application for such permits shall be made in writing and shall
be signed by the owner thereof or his authorized representative. The owner and
any contractor for the performance of any such work are jointly and severally
responsible for procuring such permit before beginning work.
      (2)   The application shall specify the name of the owner and of each
contractor who will perform work on the project, shall specify the location of
the pool and in general terms the nature of the contemplated use of the pool.
It shall be accompanied by plans and specifications for such pool and with
pertinent explanatory data.
      (3)   A copy of the application and the plans and specifications and
explanatory data shall be promptly reviewed by Community Development and, if
applicable, the Health Department. The Health Department shall promptly advise
Community Development in writing of its approval or disapproval thereof and, if
the same are disapproved, it shall indicate briefly the reason for such
disapproval.
       (4)   Community Development shall also review such plans and
specifications and if it appears that the same comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations and if the same are approved by the Health
Department as complying with ordinances and regulations relating to health,
sanitation and safety, the permit shall be issued. Otherwise, the permit shall
be refused and the applicant advised of the reason therefor.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.060)
§ 151.007 FAILURE TO FOLLOW APPROVED PLANS.
   It is unlawful to construct, alter, remodel or enlarge any swimming pool in
any manner which varies in any substantial or material particular from the
plans and specifications approved by Community Development for which a permit
has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.070) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.008 PERMIT REQUIRED TO OPERATE PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL; APPLICATION;
ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL; POSTING.
   It is unlawful to use or operate any public swimming pool in the city
without a permit to do so issued by the Health Department and in full force and
effect.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.080) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.009 RIGHT OF ENTRY AT SWIMMING POOLS; RECORDS AND SAMPLES.
   The authorized representatives of the Health Department and Community
Development shall have the right at all reasonable times to enter upon and
inspect all swimming pools for continued compliance with all applicable
ordinances, regulations and minimum standards. The city may require the owner
or operator from time to time to keep such records and to submit such samples
as it may find necessary or convenient to determine such compliance.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.090)
§ 151.010 DURATION OF PERMIT TO OPERATE PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL; SUSPENSION AND
REVOCATION.
   A permit for the operation of a public swimming pool shall be effective
until suspended or revoked. The pool shall not be operated as a public pool,
except upon new application and the granting of a new operating permit.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.100)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter or of any regulations promulgated hereunder is
a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.120)
CHAPTER 152: TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Declaration of findings and intent
   
152.002   Scope
   
152.003   Excluded activity
   
152.004   Definitions
   
152.005   Franchise required
   
152.006   Compensation and other payments
   
152.007   Franchise applications
   
152.008   Construction and technical requirements
   
152.009   Relocation of the system
   
152.010   System maintenance
   
152.011   Trimming of trees
   
152.012   Franchise and license non-transferable
   
152.013   Oversight and regulation
   
152.014   Rights of city
   
152.015   Obligation to notify
   
152.016   Conflicts; severability; new developments; notices
   
152.017   Federal, state and city jurisdiction
Small Wireless Facilities
   
152.030   Purpose
   
152.031   Definitions
   
152.032   Application types and content
   
152.033   Establishment of general standards
   
152.034   Small wireless facilities permit process
   
152.035   Small wireless facility permit requirements
   
152.036   Small wireless facility permit terms
   
152.037   Denial or revocation of a small wireless facility permit
   
152.038   City inspection of a small wireless facility, utility pole or
wireless support structure
   
152.039   Abandonment of a small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless
support structure
   
152.040   Removal of a small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless
support structure
   
152.041   Appeals
   
152.042   Insurance
   
152.043   Indemnification and defense of city
   
152.044   Fees and costs
   
152.045   Federal regulatory requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   Findings regarding rights-of-way. The city finds that the rights-of-
way within the city:
      (1)   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in
the business and social life of the city;
      (2)   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
      (3)   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other
public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for
profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-
being of the city and its citizens; and
      (4)   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities’ construction, placement,
relocation and maintenance in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Findings regarding compensation. The city finds that the right to
occupy portions of the rights-of-way for limited times for the business of
providing telecommunications services is a valuable use of a unique public
resource that has been acquired and is maintained at great expense to the city
and its taxpayers and, therefore, the taxpayers of the city should receive fair
and reasonable compensation for use of the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Findings regarding local concern. The city finds that while
telecommunication systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve rights-of-way, municipal franchising and vital
business and community service, which are of local concern.
   (D)   Findings regarding promotion of telecommunications services. The city
finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote
the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscrimination
basis, responsive to community and public interest and to assure availability
for municipal, educational and community services.
   (E)   Findings regarding franchise standards. The city finds that it is in
the interests of the public to franchise and to establish standards for
franchising providers in a manner that:
      (1)   Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively
neutral and non- discriminatory basis as provided herein;
      (2)   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use valuable public property to serve the public;
      (3)   Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm that
may flow from such commercial use of rights-of-way;
      (4)   Protects the police powers and rights-of-way management authority
of the city, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
      (5)   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use
of the city infrastructure;
      (6)   Protects the public’s investment in improvements in the rights-of-
way;
      (7)   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“Act”) (Pub. Law No. 104-
104); and
      (8)   Complies with U.C.A. §§ 10-1-401 et seq. and U.C.A. § 72-7-102(4).
   (F)   Power to manage rights-of-way. The city adopts this subchapter
pursuant to its power to manage the rights-of-way, pursuant to common law, the
Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable
compensation for the use of rights-of-way by providers as expressly set forth
by § 253 of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.010) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998; Ord. 14-13, passed 11-
6-2014)
§ 152.002 SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall provide the basic local framework for providers
of telecommunications services and systems that require the use of the rights-
of-way, including providers of both the system and service, those providers of
the system only and those providers who do not build the system, but who only
provide services.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply to all future providers and to all
providers in the city prior to the effective date of this subchapter, whether
operating with or without a franchise as set forth in §
152.017(B) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.020) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.003 EXCLUDED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Cable television. This subchapter shall not apply to cable television
operators otherwise regulated by pre-existing franchise agreements with the
city.
   (B)   Wireless services. This subchapter shall not apply to personal
wireless service facilities, except in the public right-of-way or public
utility easement.
   (C)   Provisions applicable to excluded providers. Providers excused by
other law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be
required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this
subchapter through the exercise of the city’s police power and not preempted by
other law shall be applicable.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.030) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.004 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the
single number include the plural number, words in the plural number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
“shall” and “will” are mandatory, and “may” is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION. The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates
a desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights-of-way of all, or a
part, of the city. An APPLICATION includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights-of-way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
   CITY. Brigham City, Utah.
   COMPLETION DATE. The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the city.
   CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST. Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of CONTROL
OR A CONTROLLING INTEREST shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than 25% if any provider (which person or group of persons is hereinafter
referred to as CONTROLLING PERSON). CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST, as used
herein, may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
   FRANCHISE. The rights and obligation extended by the city to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights-of-way
within the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include:
      (1)   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the
ordinances and laws of the city; and
      (2)   Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations on rights-of-way or public property including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits
or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the rights-of-way.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of the chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth,
subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will
be exercised.
   GROSS REVENUE. Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of U.C.A. Title 11, Chapter 26, as amended.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights-of-way.
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM. The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams or any other medium, and any associated
converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing open video services to or from
subscribers or locations within the city.
   OPERATOR. Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system
and directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
   ORDINANCE or TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE. This subchapter concerning the
granting of franchises in and by the city for the construction, ownership,
operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust or any other legal entity, but not the city.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES. Has the same meaning as provided in §
704 of the Act (47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PCS services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights-of-way.
   PROVIDER. An operator, infrastructure provider, resaler or system lessee.
   PSC. The Public Service Commission or any successor thereto.
   RESALER. Any person that provides local exchange service over a system for
which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the
underlying system used for the transmission.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surfaces of and the space above and below any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or
hereafter existing as such within the city.
   SIGNAL. Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or
laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or
digital format.
   SYSTEM LESSEE. Any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a
system to provide services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user’s choosing (e.g., data, video, voice,
sound or any other information), without change in the form or content of the
information sent and received.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM. All conduits, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic or other devices,
equipment, wire and appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider, located
in the rights-of-way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully
digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced
telecommunications services. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS or SYSTEMS also
includes an open video system.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE(S) or SERVICES. Any telecommunications service
provided by a provider within the city that the provider is authorized to
provide under federal, state and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided within the city, except
that these terms do not include “cable service”, as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, being Pub. L. No. 104-104, or its successor
statutes. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEMS also includes an open video
system.
   WIRE. Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.040) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.005 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Non-exclusive franchise. The city is empowered and authorized to issue
non-exclusive franchises governing the installation, construction, operation,
use and maintenance of systems in the city’s rights-of-way, in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the city and provider.
   (B)   Every provider must obtain. Except to the extent exempted by federal
or state law, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to constructing a
telecommunications system or providing telecommunications services, and every
provider must obtain a franchise before constructing an open video system or
providing open video services via an open video system and shall be subject to
the customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable
television companies. The fact that particular telecommunications systems may
be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise
for other purposes. By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator
of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and should it intend to
provide telecommunications services over the same system, must also obtain a
telecommunications franchise.
   (C)   Nature of grant. A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights-of-way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights-of-
way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited
period stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned or
subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the
property of others, including the city’s property. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so
long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
   (D)   Current providers.
      (1)   Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any provider
acting without a franchise on the effective date of this subchapter shall
request issuance of a franchise from the city within 90 days of the effective
date of this subchapter.
      (2)   If such request is made, the provider may continue providing
service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or
if negotiations cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider shall comply
with the provisions of §
152.009 of this chapter.
   (E)   Nature of franchise. The franchise granted by the city under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be a non-exclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, operate, repair, maintain, remove and replace its
system on, over and under the rights-of-way in order to provide services, in
compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances.
   (F)   Regulatory approval needed. Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the city upon the written request of the city
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   (G)   Term. No franchise issued pursuant to this subchapter shall have a
term of less than five years or greater than 15 years. Each franchise shall be
granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.050) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.006 COMPENSATION AND OTHER PAYMENTS.
   As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise granted pursuant to
this subchapter, a provider shall have the following obligations.
   (A)   Application fee. In order to offset the cost to the city to review an
application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the city, at the time of application, $500 as
a non-refundable application fee. An application fee shall also be paid when an
amendment to an application is filed with the city.
   (B)   Excavation permits. The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in §
153.049 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Right-of-way fees. The right-of-way fee, if any, shall be set forth in
the franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a right-of-way fee shall
commence on the completion date.
   (D)   Timing. Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
right-of-way fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within 45 days of the close
of each calendar month.
   (E)   Fee statement and certification. Unless a franchise agreement provides
otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the
manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its
accuracy.
   (F)   Future costs. A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at
the direction of the city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and expenses
that the city incurs for the services of third parties (including but not
limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal or
provider-initiated re-negotiation, transfer, amendment or other modification of
this subchapter or a franchise; provided, however, that, the parties shall
agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. Any costs
associated with any work to be done by the Power and Public Works Department to
provide space on city-owned poles shall be borne by the provider.
   (G)   Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the city on the use of the city
property as a result of a provider’s use or occupation of the rights-of-way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (H)   Interest on late payments. In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent state taxes.
   (I)   No accord and satisfaction. No acceptance by the city of any fee shall
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
   (J)   Not in lieu of other taxes or fees. The fee payment is not a payment
in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment, except as specifically provided in
this subchapter, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the city-owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   (K)   Continuing obligation and holdover. In the event a provider continues
to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such
operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this
subchapter and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation
and other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation;
provided that, any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a
renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation
after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
   (L)   Costs of publication. A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.060) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998; Ord. 14-13, passed 11-
6-2014)
§ 152.007 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Franchise application. To obtain a franchise to construct, own,
operate, maintain or provide services through any system within the city, to
obtain a renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter, or to
obtain the city approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in §
152.012(A)(2) of this chapter, granted pursuant to this subchapter, an
application must be filed with the city on the form attached to the ordinance
codified herein as “Exhibit A”, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
   (B)   Application criteria. In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to the ordinance, the city may, but shall not be limited to,
request or consider the following:
      (1)   Obtaining an order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity;
      (2)   Certification of the provider’s financial ability to compensate the
city for provider’s intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights-of-way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider;
      (3)   Provider’s agreements to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter; and
      (4)   Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter
into a pole attachment agreement with the city.
   (C)   Franchise determination. The city, in its discretion, shall determine
the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations
relevant to the use of the rights-of-way, without competitive bidding.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.070) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.008 CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements. No provider shall receive a franchise unless it
agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this section governing
construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any
other requirements or procedures specified by the city or the franchise,
including requirements regarding co-location and cost sharing. A provider shall
obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation ordinance, before
commencing any work in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Quality. All work involved in the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a
safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality.
If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted
authority by federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part
of the system, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute
signals over or within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or
welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   (C)   Licenses and permits.
      (1)   A provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently
obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of
approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate, maintain, upgrade or
repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary approvals from
persons and/or the city to use private property, easements, poles and conduits.
      (2)   A provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or
authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation permits, pole
attachment agreements and the like, prior to the commencement of the activity
for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.080) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.009 RELOCATION OF THE SYSTEM.
   (A)   New grades or lines. If the grades or lines of any rights-of-way are
changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of §§
153.045 through
153.061 of this chapter.
   (B)   City authority to move system. The city may, at any time, in case of
fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or
under the rights-of-way of the city, in which event the city shall not be
liable therefor to a provider. The city shall notify a provider in writing
prior to, if practical, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case
later than the next business day following any action taken under this section.
Notice shall be given as provided in §
152.016(D) of this chapter.
   (C)   Provider required to temporarily move system. A provider shall, upon
prior reasonable written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to
move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the
circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of
said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person other
than the city for any such movement of its systems.
   (D)   Rights-of-way change; obligation to move system. When the city is
changing a right-of-way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the right-of-way, without cost to the city, to
the extent provided in §§
153.045 through
153.061 of this chapter. This obligation exists whether or not the provider has
obtained an excavation permit.
   (E)   Protect structures. In connection with the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the
city. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the city to alter
any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other
municipal structure on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city required
because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be made by the
city or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees that it shall
be liable for the costs incurred by the city to replace or repair and restore
to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the city,
any municipal structure or any other rights-of-way of the city involved in the
construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system
that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on
behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
   (F)   No obstruction. In connection with the construction, operation,
maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not
unreasonably obstruct the rights-of-way of fixed guide way systems, railways,
passenger travel or other traffic to, from or within the city without the prior
consent of the appropriate authorities.
   (G)   Safety precautions. A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable federal, state and local requirements including, but not
limited to, the National Electric Safety Code.
   (H)   Repair. After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in
the sole determination of the city, an eminent danger exists, any rights-of-way
within the city which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
operation, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be
repaired by the provider of its system may be repaired by the city at the
provider’s expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work
was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall submit to such a provider an
itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the rights-of-way
intruded upon. The provider shall, within 30 days after receipt of the
statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.090) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.010 SYSTEM MAINTENANCE.
   A provider shall:
   (A)   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a non-dangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise;
   (B)   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with adopted codes
and all applicable other federal, state and local laws or regulations; and
   (C)   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the city of the system and its effect on the rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.100) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.011 TRIMMING OF TREES.
   A provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all
applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, and
subject to §
153.003 of this code of ordinances, upon and hanging over rights-of-way so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its system.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.110) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.012 FRANCHISE AND LICENSE NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Notification of sale.
      (1)   PSC approval.
         (a)   When a provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease,
assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or
involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it
or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the PSC,
the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the city of the
nature of the transaction and, if applicable, request a transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity.
         (b)   A request for a transfer shall include a certification that the
successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original
provider’s franchise agreement.
      (2)   Transfer of franchise. Upon receipt of a request to transfer a
franchise, the city designee, as provided in §
152.014(A)(1) of this chapter, may send notice approving the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. Such approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. If the city has reason to believe that the successor entity may not
comply with this subchapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an
application for the transfer. The application shall comply with §
152.005 of this chapter.
   (B)   If PSC approval is no longer required. If the PSC no longer exists, or
if its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions
described in division (A) above, then the following events shall be deemed to
be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance
with division (A) above:
      (1)   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
provider’s assets to another person;
      (2)   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more
of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to
create a new controlling interest in a provider;
      (3)   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership
or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling
interest in such a provider; or
      (4)   The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the
management or operation of such provider or its system.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.120) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.013 OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION.
   (A)   Insurance, indemnity and security. Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise and
shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the city as set forth in the
franchise.
   (B)   Oversight. The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the city at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of
limitations.
   (C)   Maintain records. A provider shall at all times maintain:
      (1)   On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records
and “as-built” hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
city’s existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights-of-way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights-of-
way where work will be undertaken. As used herein, AS-BUILT MAPS include file
construction prints. Maps shall be drawn to scale. As-built maps, including the
compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within 30
days of completion of work or within 30 days after completion of modification
and repairs. As-built maps are not required of the provider who is the
incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing system to the extent they do
not exist.
      (2)   Throughout the term, a provider shall maintain complete and
accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership and operations
of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows the city at
all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the franchise.
      (3)   Should the city reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the state and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section.
   (D)   Confidentiality. If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be treated as a
protected record within the meaning of the state’s Government Records Access
and Management Act (“GRAMA”), being Title 63G, Chapter 2, Part 1, or its
successor statute, making it available only to those who must have access to
perform their duties on behalf of the city; provided that, a provider notifies
the city of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems to be
confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be
the sole responsibility of the provider.
   (E)   Provider’s expense. All reports and records required under this
subchapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter or a franchise.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.130) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.014 RIGHTS OF CITY.
   (A)   Enforcement and remedies.
      (1)   Enforcement; city designee. The city is responsible for enforcing
and administering this subchapter, and the city or its designee, as appointed
by the Mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any
franchise agreement.
      (2)   Enforcement provision. Any franchise granted pursuant to this
subchapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation
and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, defining events of default,
procedures for accessing the Bond/Security Fund and rights of termination or
revocation.
   (B)   Force majeure. In the event a provider’s performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this subchapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider’s control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events
not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of
God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides and fired.
   (C)   Extended operations and continuity of services.
      (1)   Continuation after expiration. Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter, the city shall have
discretion to permit or require a provider to continue to operate its system or
provide services for an extended period of time not to exceed six months from
the date of such expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate
its system under the terms and conditions of this subchapter and the franchise
granted pursuant to this subchapter.
      (2)   Continuation by incumbent local exchange carrier. If the provider
is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
   (D)   Removal or abandonment of franchise property.
      (1)   Abandoned system. In the event that the use of any portion of the
system is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, and 30 days after
no response to written notice from the city to the last known address of
provider; any system has been installed in the rights-of-way without complying
with the requirements of this subchapter or franchise; or the provisions of §
152.005 of this chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider,
except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed
to have abandoned such system.
      (2)   Removal of abandoned system. The city, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this subchapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time
the abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards,
any affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles, or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights-of-way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
subchapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
      (3)   Transfer of abandoned system to city. Upon abandonment of any
system in place, a provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city
a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the
city the ownership of the abandoned system.
      (4)   Removal of above ground system. At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this subchapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the city shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all above-ground portions of a system from the rights-of-way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days. If the
provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required to
remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good faith.
      (5)   Leaving underground system. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth in this subchapter, a provider may abandon any underground
system in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the
rights-of-way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or
other person. A provider shall not damage a system or otherwise make or render
the system unusable by the city or any other provider prior to abandoning the
system.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.140) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.015 OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY.
   (A)   Publicizing work. Before entering onto any private property, a
provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the property owners in
advance, and describe the work to be performed.
   (B)   Notification prior to commencement of work in the right-of-way.
Providers shall notify the City Engineer at least 48 hours before commencing
work in any right-of-way of the city. All work shall comply with the city’s
Public Works Department Technical Specifications and Standards.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.150) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.016 CONFLICTS; SEVERABILITY; NEW DEVELOPMENTS; NOTICES.
   (A)   Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
subchapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this
subchapter shall control.
   (B)   Severability. If any provision of this subchapter is held by any
federal, state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as
conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and
all appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the subchapter provisions
in question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct and independent part of this subchapter, and such holding shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the
event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full
force and effect and shall again be binding on the city and the provider;
provided that, the city shall give the provider 30 days, or a longer period of
time as may be reasonably required for a provider to comply with such a
rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring compliance
with such provision.
   (C)   New developments. It shall be the policy of the city to liberally
amend this subchapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable
the provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently or economically serve itself or the public.
   (D)   Notices. All notices from a provider to the city required under this
subchapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter shall
be directed to the officer as designated by the Mayor. A provider shall provide
in any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to
receive notices from the city. A provider shall immediately notify the city of
any change to its name, address or telephone number.
   (E)   Exercise of police power. To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.160) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 152.017 FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Construction. This subchapter shall be construed in a manner
consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes.
   (B)   Applicability. This subchapter shall apply to all franchises granted
or renewed after the effective date of this subchapter. This subchapter shall
further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to
all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date of this subchapter
and to a provider providing services, without a franchise, prior to the
effective date of this subchapter.
   (C)   Other applicable ordinances. A provider’s rights are subject to the
police power of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to its
police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the city zoning
and other land use requirements.
   (D)   City failure to enforce. A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter by reason of any failure of the
city to enforce prompt compliance.
   (E)   Construed according to state law. This subchapter and any franchise
granted pursuant to this subchapter shall be construed and enforced in
accordance with the substantive laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.170) (Ord. 98-37, passed 8-20-1998)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 152.030 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide specific regulations for
the co-location of small wireless facilities and installation, replacement and
modification of utility poles and wireless support structures for co-locating
small wireless facilities by wireless service providers in the right-of-way.
The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to and shall not be
interpreted to authorize or prohibit or to have the effect of authorizing or
prohibiting the provision of wireless services or authorizing any other
communications service, nor shall the provisions of this subchapter be applied
in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of
functionally equivalent wireless services. To the extent that any provision or
provisions of this subchapter are inconsistent or in conflict with any other
provision of the city code or any ordinance of the city, the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed to control. This subchapter does not apply to any
facilities that are not wireless facilities, including, but not limited to,
wireline backhaul facilities.
   (B)   Prior to the installation, maintenance or operation of any facilities
other than wireless facilities, including, but not limited, wireless backhaul
facilities, a wireless service provide shall obtain a telecommunications
franchise or other authorization required by applicable law. The grating of a
small wireless facility permit pursuant to this subchapter is not a grant of a
telecommunications franchise or other such authorization.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.010) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signal used in the provision of a wireless service.
   APPLICABLE CODES. The International Building Code, the International Fire
Code, the National Electrical Code, the International Plumbing Code and the
International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended under U.C.A. Title 16A,
State Construction and Fire Codes Act.
   APPLICABLE LAW. All applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, rules,
regulations, orders and ordinances, as the same be amended or adopted from time
to time.
   APPLICANT. Any wireless service provider submitting an application under
this subchapter.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city:
      (1)   For a permit to co-late one or more small wireless facilities; or
      (2)   To approve the installation, modification or replacement of a
utility pole associated with a small wireless facility.
   AUTHORITY POLE. A utility pole owned, managed or operated by or on behalf of
the city, the state, a state agency, a county, a municipality, a town, a metro-
township, a subdivision of any entity hereunder or a special district or entity
established to provide a single public service within a specific geographic
area, including, without limitation, a public utility district or an irrigation
district.
   AUTHORITY WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A wireless support structure owned,
managed or operated by or on behalf of the city, the state, a state agency, a
county, a municipality, a town, a metro-township, a subdivision of any entity
hereunder or a special district or entity established to provide a single
public service within a specific geographic area, including, without
limitation, a public utility district or an irrigation district.
   CITY. The City of Brigham City, Utah.
   COLLOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace a small
wireless facility:
      (1)   On a utility pole or wireless support structure; or
      (2)   For ground-mounted equipment, adjacent to a utility pole or
wireless support structure.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.
      (1)   A cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6);
      (2)   A telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53);
      (3)   An information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); or
      (4)   A wireless service.
   DAYS. Counted in calendar days unless otherwise specified. When the day, or
the last day, for taking any action or paying any fee falls on Saturday, Sunday
or a federal holiday, the action may be taken or the fee paid, on the next
succeeding day upon which the city offices are open for business.
   DECORATIVE POLE. An authority pole:
      (1)   That is specifically designed and placed for an aesthetic purpose;
and
      (2)   (a)   On which a nondiscriminatory rule of code prohibits an
appurtenance or attachment, other than:
            1.   A small wireless facility;
            2.   A specialty designed informational or directional sign; or
            3.   A temporary holiday or special event attachment.
         (b)   On which no appurtenance or attachment has been placed, other
than:
            1.   A small wireless facility;
            2.   A specialty designed informational or directional sign; or
            3.   A temporary holiday or special event attachment.
   DEPARTMENT. The city’s Public Power Department.
   DESIGN DISTRICT. An area:
      (1)   That is zoned or otherwise designated by this city code; and
      (2)   For which the city maintains and enforces unique design and
aesthetic standards on a uniform and non-discriminatory basis.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time, non-recurring charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A group of buildings, properties or sites that are:
      (1)   In accordance with 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C:
         (a)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places; or
         (b)   Formally determined eligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places by the Keeper of the National Register.
      (2)   In a historic district or area created under U.C.A. § 10-9a-503.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A type of small wireless facility:
      (1)   That, not including any antenna, is no larger in dimension than 24
inches in length, 15 inches in width and 12 inches in height;
      (2)   On which any exterior antenna is no longer than 11 inches; and
      (3)   That only provides Wi-Fi service.
   NON-DISCRIMINATORY. Treating similarly situated entities the same absent a
reasonable, and competitively neutral basis, for different treatment.
   PERMITTEE. A person that has been granted a small wireless facility permit
by the Department.
   PERSON. Any individual, group, company, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, corporation, society, syndicate, club, business or
governmental entity. PERSON shall not include the city.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE. A telecommunications service consistent with 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i).
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.
      (1)   The area on, below or above a public:
         (a)   Roadway;
         (b)   Highway;
         (c)   Street;
         (d)   Sidewalk;
         (e)   Alley; or
         (f)   Property similar to property listed above.
      (2)   RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include:
         (a)   The area on, below or above a federal interstate highway; or
         (b)   A fixed guideway, as defined in U.C.A. § 59-12-102.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A type of wireless facility:
      (1)   On which each wireless service provider’s antenna could fit within
an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and
      (2)   For which all wireless equipment associated with the wireless
facility, whether ground- mounted or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than
28 cubic feet in volume, not including any:
         (a)   Electric meter;
         (b)   Concealing element;
         (c)   Telecommunications demarcation box;
         (d)   Grounding equipment;
         (e)   Power transfer switch;
         (f)   Cut-off switch;
         (g)   Vertical cable run for the connection of power or other service;
         (h)   Wireless service provider antenna;
         (i)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a particular collocation, unless the cable is a
wireline backhaul facility.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT. A right-of-way permit authorizing the
collocation of one or more small wireless facilities or approving the
installation, modification or replacement of a utility pole associated with a
small wireless facility.
   SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION.
      (1)   A proposed modification or replacement to an existing wireless
support structure that will substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure under the substantial change standard established in
47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(7); or
      (2)   A proposed modification in excess of the site dimensions specified
in 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C, § III.B.
   TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE. By virtue of engineering or spectrum usage, the
proposed placement for a small wireless facility, or its design or site
location can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the
small wireless facility.
   UTILITY POLE.
      (1)   A pole or similar structure that:
         (a)   Is in a right-of-way; and
         (b)   Is or may be used, in whole or in part, for:
            1.   Wireline communications;
            2.   Electric distribution;
            3.   Lighting;
            4.   Traffic control;
            5.   Signage;
            6.   A similar function to a function described above; or
            7.   The collocation of a small wireless facility.
      (2)   UTILITY POLE does not include:
         (a)   A wireless support structure;
         (b)   A structure that supports electric transmission lines; or
         (c)   A municipally-owned structure that supports electric lines used
for the provision of municipal electric service.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communication
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications;
         (b)   Regardless of the technological configuration, a radio
transceiver, an antenna, a coaxial or fiber-optic cable, a regular or backup
power supply or comparable equipment; and
         (c)   A small wireless facility.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or an improvement on, under or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   A coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is:
            1.   Between wireless structures or utility poles;
            2.   Not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a
particular antenna; or
            3.   A wireline backhaul facility.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER.
      (1)   A person that builds or installs a wireless communication
transmission equipment, a wireless facility, or a wireless support structure.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER includes a person authorized to provide a
telecommunications service in the state.
      (2)   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER does not include a wireless
service provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed spectrum whether
at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a wireless
facility, including personal wireless services. WIRELESS SERVICE includes the
use of Wi-Fi.
   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless service.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.
      (1)   An existing or proposed structure that is:
         (a)   In a right-of-way; and
         (b)   Designed to support or capable of supporting a wireless
facility, including a:
            1.   Monopole;
            2.   Tower, either guyed or self-supporting;
            3.   Billboard; or
            4.   Building.
      (2)   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a:
         (a)   Structure designed solely for the collocation of a small
wireless facility;
         (b)   Utility pole;
         (c)   Municipally-owned structure that supports electric lines used
for the provision of municipal electric service; or
         (d)   Structure owned by an energy services interlocal entity, as
described in U.C.A. § 11-13-203(4), that uses electric lines that are used for
the provision of electrical service.
   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used to transport communications by
wire from wireless facility to a communications network.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. A tangible or electronic record of a communication or
representation. WRITTEN or IN WRITING includes a communication or
representation that is handwritten, typewritten, printed, photostated,
photographed or electronic.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.020) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.032 APPLICATION TYPES AND CONTENT.
   (A)   Application form. The Director shall develop and make publicly
available a form application. To the extent possible, the Director shall allow
for applications to be consolidated pursuant to this section. A complete
application must be submitted for each small wireless facility permit desired.
   (B)   Consolidated applications. A wireless service provider may apply for
up to 25 small wireless facility permits in a consolidated application,
provided each applied for small wireless facility is substantially the same
type of small wireless facility and is proposed for collocation on
substantially the same type of utility pole or wireless support structure, or
provided each applied for utility pole is substantially similar and within an
identically zoned district. An applicant may not consolidate applications for
the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing utility poles with
applications for the installation, modification or replacement of a utility
pole. an application for the installation, modification or replacement of a
wireless support structure may not be consolidated in any manner. the
department shall review a consolidated application as allowed by this
subchapter. If necessary, the applied for small wireless facility permits in a
consolidated application may be approved or denied individually. Any small
wireless facility permits denied in a consolidated application shall be subject
to a single appeal.
   (C)   Information not required. The Department shall not require an
applicant to provide any information that has previously been provided to the
Department by the applicant in an application, if the applicant provides
specific reference to the previous application containing the information
sought by the Department; and is not reasonably necessary to review an
application for compliance with generally applicable and reasonable health,
safety and welfare regulations, and to demonstrate compliance with applicable
Federal Communications Commission regulations governing audio frequency
exposure or other information required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.030) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.033 ESTABLISHMENT OF GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   General standards. The Director shall establish and maintain a set of
standards for collocating small wireless facilities in the right-of-way
applicable to all permittees under this subchapter. The general standards shall
include, but not be limited to, information to be required in an application,
design standards, construction standards, aesthetic standards, an application
form, permitting conditions, insurance and rates and fees. The general
standards shall be published and made publicly available no later than 4-14-
2019.
   (B)   Design standards.
      (1)   (a)   Any design standards established by the Director shall be:
            1.   Reasonable and non-discriminatory; and
            2.   Include additional installation and construction details that
do not conflict with this subchapter, including a requirement that:
               a.   An industry standard pole load analysis be completed by a
mutually agreed upon engineering firm and at the applicant’s expense and
submitted to the Department, indicating that the utility pole or wireless
support structure to which the small wireless facility is to be attached will
safely support the load; and
               b.   Small wireless facility equipment on new and existing
utility poles and wireless support structures be placed higher than eight feet
above ground level.
         (b)   The Director shall additionally include the following in any
design standards established under this subchapter.
      (2)   A new, modified or replaced utility pole or wireless support
structure that has a collocated small wireless facility and that is installed
in the right-of-way may not exceed 50 feet above ground level.
      (3)   An antenna or a small wireless facility may not extend more than
ten feet above the top of a utility pole existing on or before 9-1-2018.
      (4)   If necessary, to collocate a small wireless facility, a wireless
service provider may replace a decorative pole, if the replacement pole
reasonably conforms to the design aesthetic of the displaced decorative pole.
      (5)   A wireless service provider shall comply with the city’s
requirements to underground any facilities, including, without limitation,
compliance with §
155.274 of this code of ordinances.
      (6)   All small wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and
utility poles collocated or installed in a design district or historic district
shall comply with any design or concealment measurements required by the city.
   (C)   Construction standards. Any construction standards established by the
Director shall include at least the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   Compliance with applicable law and applicable codes. To the extent
this requirement is not preempted or otherwise legally unenforceable, a
permittee shall comply with all applicable law and applicable industry
standards.
      (2)   Prevent interference. A permittee shall collocate and continuously
operate an authorized small wireless facility and install, modify or replace an
authorized utility pole or wireless support structure to prevent interference
with other facilities in the right-of-way and their operation thereof. With
appropriate permissions from the Department, a permittee shall, as is necessary
for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of an authorized small
wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure, maintain trees
as prescribed by the standards promulgated by the Department.
      (3)   Other rights not affected. A permittee shall not construe a
contract, permit, correspondence, or other communication from the city as
affecting a right, privilege or duty previously conferred or imposed by the
Department to or on another person.
      (4)   Restoration.
         (a)   A permittee shall provide for restoration of the affected right-
of-way and surrounding areas, including the pavement and its foundation, to
substantially the same condition that existed before the permittee’s
activities. If a permittee fails to adequately restore the right-of-way within
a reasonable time after written notice, the Department may:
            1.   Make the required repair; and
            2.   Charge the permittee the reasonable, documented, actual cost
for the repair.
         (b)   If damage caused by a permittee causes an urgent safety hazard,
no written notice is required to be given to the permittee. A permittee that
disturbs uncultivated sod in the excavation or obstruction of the right-of-way
shall plant grasses that are native to the state and, wherever practicable,
that are of the local eco-type, as part of the restoration required under this
section, unless the owner of the real property over which the right-of-way
traverses objects. In restoring the right-of-way, the permittee shall consult
with the state’s Division of Wildlife Resources regarding the species of native
grasses that conform to the requirements of this division (C)(4).
      (5)   Relocation. Upon request by the city, a permittee shall relocate
any authorized small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support
structure in accordance with the city code.
      (6)   Permittee’s liability. A permittee is solely responsible for the
risk and expense of collocation of the permittee’s small wireless facility and
installation, modification or replacement of the permittee’s utility pole or
wireless support structure. The city neither warrants, nor represents, that any
area within the city’s right-of-way is suitable for such collocation or
installation, modification or replacement. A permittee shall accept the city’s
right-of-way “as is” and “where is” and assumes all risks related to any use.
The city is not liable for damage to small wireless facilities due to an event
of damage to a utility pole or wireless support structure in the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.040) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.034 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   When available.
      (1)   An application shall be eligible for review if the application
conforms to the general standards adopted by the Director. A small wireless
facility permit issued pursuant to an application processed hereunder shall
authorize:
         (a)   Collocation or modification, including replacement, of a small
wireless facility; or
         (b)   Installation, modification or replacement of a utility pole or
wireless support structure in addition to collocation of a small wireless
facility on the utility pole or wireless support structure.
      (2)   The Department shall not issue a small wireless facility permit
authorizing the installation, modification or replacement of a utility pole or
wireless support structure if the small wireless facility permit does not also
authorize an applicant’s requested collocation of a small wireless facility on
the utility pole or wireless support structure.
   (B)   Review process. An application submitted pursuant to this section
shall be reviewed as follows:
      (1)   Submission of application. Applicant shall submit a complete
application accompanied by any corresponding application fee to the Department.
An applicant may not file within a 30-day period more than one consolidated
application or multiple applications that collectively seek permits for a
combined total of more than 25 small wireless facilities and utility poles.
      (2)   Application review period. The Department must, within 60 days
after the date a complete application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility or a consolidated application is submitted to the Department, issue or
deny a small wireless facility permit pursuant to the application. The
Department must, within 90 days after the date a complete application for a
new, modified or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure is
submitted to the Department, issue or deny a small wireless facility permit
pursuant to the application. Failure by the Department to approve or deny a
small wireless facility permit pursuant to an application within the applicable
review period will result in the small wireless facility permit being granted.
The Department may, at its discretion, extend the applicable review period for
a single additional period of ten business days; provided, the Department
notifies the applicant before the day on which the applicable review period
would terminate.
      (3)   Completeness determination. The Department shall review an
application for completeness following submittal. The Department must provide a
written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within ten days of receipt of
the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or
information. Information delineated in the notice is limited to documents or
information publicly required as of the date of application and reasonably
related to the Department’s determination whether the proposed equipment falls
within the definition of a small wireless facility and whether the proposed
deployment satisfies all health, safety and welfare regulations applicable to
the small wireless facility permit request. If an applicant fails to respond to
the Department’s notice of incompleteness within 90 days, the application shall
be deemed expired and no permit shall be issued. Upon an applicant’s submittal
of additional documents or information in response to a notice of
incompleteness, the Department has ten days to notify the applicant in writing
of any information requested in the initial notice of incompleteness that is
still missing. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify
documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of
incompleteness.
      (4)   Tolling of review period. If an application is incomplete, and the
Department has provided a written notice of incompleteness, then the applicable
review period shall be reset, pending the time between when a notice is mailed
and the submittal of information in compliance with the notice(s). Subsequent
notices shall toll the applicable review period. An applicant and the
Department can mutually agree in writing to toll the applicable review period
at any time.
      (5)   Moratorium prohibited. The Department shall not, either expressly
or de facto, institute a moratorium on the filing, receiving or processing of
an application, or issuing a permit or another approval, if any, for the
collocation of a small wireless facility or the installation, modification or
replacement of a utility pole to support a small wireless facility.
      (6)   Non-discriminatory processing of applications. The Department shall
ensure that any application processed under this subchapter is performed on a
non-discriminatory basis.
      (7)   Permit not required.
         (a)   The Department may not require a permittee to submit an
application, obtain a permit or pay a rate for:
            1.   Routine maintenance;
            2.   The replacement of a small wireless facility with a small
wireless facility that is substantially similar to or smaller in size; or
            3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of a micro wireless facility that is strung on a cable between
existing utility poles, in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
         (b)   A permittee seeking to perform any of the above activities must
provide written notice to the Department at least 30 days prior to performance
of the activity.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.050) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.035 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements of approval. In processing and approving a small
wireless facility permit, the Department shall require compliance with:
      (1)   Generally applicable and reasonable health, safety and welfare
regulations consistent with the city’s right-of-way management;
      (2)   Reasonable accommodations for a decorative utility pole, wireless
support structure or sign;
      (3)   Any reasonable restocking, replacement or relocation requirements
when a new utility pole or wireless support structure is placed in the right-
of-way;
      (4)   Construction of the proposed small wireless facility within six
months from the date the small wireless facility permit is issued;
      (5)   Obtaining authorization for the use of the right-of-way for the
construction of wireline backhaul facilities or any other wired facilities; and
      (6)   Compliance with all applicable law.
   (B)   Examples of generally applicable and reasonable health, safety and
welfare regulations. Generally applicable and reasonable health, safety and
welfare regulations for purposes of this section include, without limitation,
the following:
      (1)   A structural engineering analysis by a state-registered
professional engineer certifying that a utility pole or wireless support
structure can reasonably support the proposed small wireless facility
considering the conditions of the street, the anticipated hazards from traffic
to be encountered at the proposed location, and any wind, snow, ice or other
conditions that may be reasonably anticipated at the proposed location;
      (2)   A determination by the Department that, based upon reasonable
engineering judgment, a proposed small wireless facility is of excessive size
or weight or would otherwise subject a utility pole or wireless support
structure to an unacceptable level of stress;
      (3)   A determination by the Department that, based upon reasonable
engineering judgment, a proposed small wireless facility would cause undue harm
to the reliability or integrity of the city’s electric infrastructure or would
likely violate generally applicable electrical or engineering principles;
      (4)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility presents an unreasonable safety hazard as specifically and reasonably
identified by the Department;
      (5)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility impairs the city’s ability to operate or maintain the right-of-way; or
      (6)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility cannot be placed due to insufficient capacity or if such placement is
in violation of the National Electric Safety Code or other applicable law, and
the city infrastructure cannot be reasonably modified or enlarged at the
expense of the applicant.
   (C)   Authorized use. An approval of a small wireless facility permit under
this section authorizes the collocation of a small wireless facility, in a
right-of-way or on a wireless support structure in a right-of-way, to provide
wireless services, or the installation, modification or replacement of a
utility pole associated with a small wireless facility in a right- of-way, and
shall not be construed to confer authorization to:
      (1)   Provide any service other than wireless services;
      (2)   Construct, install, maintain or operate any small wireless facility
or utility pole in a right-of-way other than the approved small wireless
facility or utility pole; or
      (3)   Install, place, maintain or operate a wireline backhaul facility in
the right-of way.
   (D)   Excavation permit required. Any person desiring to perform excavation
in a right-of-way within the city for purposes of collocating a small wireless
facility or installing, modifying or replacing a utility pole or wireless
support structure shall, consistent with §§
153.045 through
153.061 of this code of ordinances, obtain a permit from the city prior to
conducting any excavation activities.
   (E)   Exclusive arrangements prohibited. The city shall not enter into any
form of exclusive arrangement with any person for use of a right-of-way for the
collocation of a small wireless facility or the installation, operation,
marketing, modification, maintenance or replacement of a utility pole.
   (F)   Unauthorized use prohibited. No person shall collocate a small
wireless facility in the right-of-way or install, modify or replace a utility
pole or wireless support structure without first obtaining a small wireless
facility permit from the Department.
      (1)   (a)   If an unauthorized small wireless facility is discovered in
the right-of-way, the Department shall provide written notice to the owner of
the unauthorized small wireless facility within three days of discovery of the
unauthorized small wireless facility.
         (b)   If an owner of an unauthorized small wireless facility cannot be
reasonably identified, the Department need not provide any written notice.
      (2)   If the owner of an unauthorized small wireless facility can be
reasonably identified, the Department may remove the unauthorized small
wireless facility without incurring liability to the owner of the small
wireless facility and at the owner’s sole expense no sooner than three days
after providing notice of the Department’s discovery of the unauthorized small
wireless facility to the owner.
      (3)   If the owner of an unauthorized small wireless facility cannot be
reasonably identified, the Department may remove the unauthorized small
wireless facility without incurring liability to the owner of the small
wireless facility and at the owner’s sole expense.
   (G)   Placement. In approving a small wireless facility permit, the
Department shall not require the placement of a small wireless facility on any
utility pole or wireless support structure other than the utility pole or
wireless support structure proposed in the application and may not require
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
      (1)   The Department shall not limit the placement of small wireless
facilities, either by minimum separation distances between small wireless
facilities or maximum height limitations; except that, each utility pole
installed in the right-of-way shall comply with any height requirements of this
subchapter for new or replacement poles in the right-of-way, subject to local
zoning regulations, and may be subject to separation requirements in relation
to other utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (G)(1) above, a replacement utility pole
that replaces an existing utility pole having a height greater than or equal to
50 feet above ground level may be placed at the height of the existing utility
pole, unless the Department agrees to a greater height, subject to local zoning
regulations.
   (H)   Relocation. Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter or other
applicable law to the contrary, the Department may require a permittee to
relocate or adjust a small wireless facility in a right-of-way in a timely
manner and at the permittee’s cost.
   (I)   Deposit required. Each permittee shall submit and maintain with the
Department a bond, cash deposit or other security acceptable to the Department
securing the faithful performance of the obligations of the permittee and its
agents under any and all small wireless facility permits issued to the
permittee under this subchapter. This deposit shall be in the sum of $10,000 in
favor of the “Public Power Department, Brigham City, Utah”. If, in accordance
with this subchapter, the Department deducts any amounts from such a deposit,
the permittee must restore the full amount of the deposit prior to the
Department’s issuance of any subsequent small wireless facility permit. The
Department shall return the deposit to the permittee should the permittee cease
to operate any small wireless facilities in the right-of-way.
   (J)   Written notice required. In approving a small wireless facility
permit, the Department shall provide written notice to the applicant of its
approval and any requirements thereof. A small wireless facility permit shall
not be issued prior to the complete payment of all applicable fees.
   (K)   Notice or assignment required. A permittee upon or within ten calendar
days after transfer, assignment, conveyance or sublet of an attachment that
changes the permit and/or billing entity or ownership responsibilities shall
provide written notification to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.060) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.036 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT TERMS.
   (A)   Term. A small wireless facility permit shall have a term of ten years
commencing on the date the small wireless facility permit is issued.
   (B)   Renewal permitted. A permittee seeking to renew a small wireless
facility permit may, not later than six months prior to the expiration of the
small wireless facility permit, file an application for renewal with the
Department. The Department shall review a renewal application consistent with
this subchapter, as amended. To be eligible for renewal, the permittee must be
in compliance with its permit and this subchapter. A permittee may submit a
consolidated application for the renewal of multiple small wireless facility
permits.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.070) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.037 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit denial.
      (1)   The Department may deny any application only if the applicant does
not comply with all provisions of this subchapter to the extent consistent with
law, or if the Department determines that approval of any resulting small
wireless facility permit would:
         (a)   Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic-control
equipment;
         (b)   Materially interfere with a sight line or a clear zone for
transportation or pedestrians;
         (c)   Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., or a similar federal or
state standard regarding pedestrian access or movement;
         (d)   Be in violation of applicable law or other legal obligations;
         (e)   Create a public health or safety hazard;
         (f)   Obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety of the
right-of-way; or
         (g)   Obstruct, damage or interfere with another utility facility in a
right-of-way or a utility’s use of the utility’s facility in a right-of-way.
      (2)   If the Department denies an application, the Department shall
document the basis for the denial, including any specific law on which the
denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the
day on which the Department denies the application.
   (B)   Opportunity to resubmit denied application. Within 30 days after the
day on which the Department denies an application, the applicant may, without
paying any additional application fee, cure any deficiency the Department
identifies in the applicant’s application and resubmit the application. If an
applicant resubmits an application, the Department shall approve or deny a
permit pursuant to the application within 30 days after the day on which the
Department receives the revised application. A review of an application revised
in accordance with this division (B) is limited to the deficiencies documented
as the basis for denial unless the applicant has modified a portion of the
application not documented by the Department in its basis for denial to which
the applicant is responding.
   (C)   Permit revocation. The Department may revoke a small wireless facility
permit, with or without refund, in the event of a substantial breach of the
terms and requirements of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any
material condition of the small wireless facility permit. A substantial breach
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A material violation by act or omission of a provision of a small
wireless facility permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of a small
wireless facility permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   A material misrepresentation of fact in an application;
      (4)   A failure to complete collocation of a small wireless facility or
installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole or wireless
support structure within 270 days of the date a small wireless facility permit
authorizing such activity is granted, unless the Department and the permittee
agree to extent the 270-day period or there is a lack of commercial power or
communications transport infrastructure to the installation site;
      (5)   A failure to correct, in a timely manner, collocation of a small
wireless facility that does not conform to applicable standards, conditions or
codes, upon inspection and notification by the Department of the faulty
condition;
      (6)   A permittee fails to make timely payments of any fees as required
under §
152.044 of this chapter, or any other fee due to the city, and does not correct
such failure within 20 days after receipt of written notice by the Department
of such failure; or
      (7)   A permittee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, is adjudged bankrupt or all or part of its small wireless facilities are
sold under an instrument to secure a debt and is not redeemed by the permittee
within 60 days.
   (D)   Prohibited denial or revocation. The Department shall not unreasonably
withhold issuance of or unreasonably revoke a small wireless facility permit.
   (E)   Written notice required. Any denial or revocation of a small wireless
facility permit shall be made in writing and shall document the basis for the
denial. The Department shall notify the applicant or permittee the day of a
decision to deny or revoke a small wireless facility permit. An applicant may
cure any deficiencies identified by the Department and resubmit the denied
application within 30 days of the denial without paying an additional
application fee. The authority shall approve or deny the revised application
within 30 days. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.080) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.038 CITY INSPECTION OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, UTILITY POLE OR
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Inspection permitted. The Department may inspect, at any time, a
permittee’s collocation of a small wireless facility or installation,
modification or replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure.
The Department shall determine during an inspection whether the permittee’s
small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure is in
accordance with the requirements of the permittee’s applicable small wireless
facility permit and other applicable law and applicable codes.
   (B)   Suspension of activities. During an inspection, if the Department
determines that a permittee has violated any material term of the permittee’s
small wireless facility permit or this subchapter, the Department may suspend
the permittee’s small wireless facility permit. The Department shall provide
written notice of any suspension to a permittee within three days of
discovering the permittee’s alleged violation of their small wireless facility
permit. A suspension under this division (B) is effective until a permittee
corrects the alleged violation, at the permittee’s sole expense. A permittee
may appeal any suspension issued under this division (B) to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.090) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.039 ABANDONMENT OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, UTILITY POLE OR WIRELESS
SUPPORT STRUCTURE.
   Where a small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure
is not properly maintained or has not been used for the primary purpose of
providing wireless services for 12 consecutive months, the Department may
designate the small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support
structure as abandoned. The Department shall provide written notice to a
permittee within ten days of the permittee’s small wireless facility, utility
pole or wireless support structure being designated as abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.100) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.040 REMOVAL OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, UTILITY POLE OR WIRELESS
SUPPORT STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Removal permitted. The Department may remove or require a permittee to
remove any small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure
if:
      (1)   The term of a small wireless facility permit authorizing the small
wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure expires;
      (2)   A small wireless facility permit authorizing the small wireless
facility, utility pole or wireless support structure is revoked; or
      (3)   The small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support
structure is designated as abandoned.
   (B)   Permittee notice.
      (1)   Prior to removal by the Department, the Department shall provide
written notice to the permittee requiring the permittee to remove its small
wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure.
      (2)   If, within 90 days of receipt of such written notice, the permittee
fails to remove its small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support
structure, the Department may remove the small wireless facility, utility pole
or wireless support structure and assess the cost of removal to the permittee
or take fee simple ownership of the small wireless facility, utility pole or
wireless support structure.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.110) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.041 APPEALS.
   A court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction to determine all
disputes arising under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.120) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.042 INSURANCE.
   A permittee shall comply with the insurance requirements contained in the
general standards.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.130) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.043 INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE OF CITY.
   (A)   Indemnification of city. As a condition of issuance of a small
wireless facility permit, each permittee agrees on its behalf and on behalf of
its agents, successors or assigns, to indemnify, defend, protect and hold
harmless the city from and against any and all claims of any kind arising
against the city as a result of the issuance of the small wireless facility
permit including, but not limited to, a claim allegedly arising directly or
indirectly from the following:
      (1)   Any act, omission or negligence of a permittee or its agents,
successors or assigns while engaged in the permitting, construction,
installation or maintenance of any small wireless facility or utility pole or
wireless support structure authorized by a small wireless facility permit, or
while in or about the right-of-way that is subject to the small wireless
facility permit for any reason connected in any way whatsoever with the
performance of the work authorized by the small wireless facility permit, or
allegedly resulting directly or indirectly from the permitting, construction,
installation or maintenance of any small wireless facility, utility pole or
wireless support structure authorized under the small wireless facility permit;
      (2)   Any accident, damage, death or injury to any of a permittee’s
contractors or subcontractors, or any officers, agents or employees of either
of them, while engaged in the performance of the construction, installation or
maintenance of any small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support
structure authorized by a small wireless facility permit, or while in or about
the right-of-way that is subject to the small wireless facility permit, for any
reason connected with the performance of the work authorized by the small
wireless facility permit, including from exposure to radio frequency emissions;
      (3)   Any accident, damage, death or injury to any person or accident,
damage or injury to any real or personal property in, upon or in any way
allegedly connected with the construction, installation or maintenance of any
small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure authorized
by a small wireless facility permit, or while in or about the right-of-way that
is subject to the small wireless facility permit, from any causes or claims
arising at any time, including any causes or claims arising from exposure to
radio frequency emissions; and
      (4)   Any release or discharge, or threatened release or discharge, of
any hazardous material caused or allowed by a permittee or its agents about,
in, on or under the right-of-way.
   (B)   Defense of city. Each permittee agrees that, upon the request of the
Department, the permittee, at no cost or expense to the city, shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the city against any claims as set forth in this
section, regardless of the alleged negligence of the city or any other party,
except only for claims resulting directly from the sole negligence or willful
misconduct of the city. Each permittee acknowledges and agrees that it has an
immediate and independent obligation to defend the city from any claims that
actually or potentially fall within the indemnity provision, even if the
allegations are or may be groundless, false or fraudulent, which obligation
arises at the time such claim is tendered to the permittee or its agent by the
city and always continues thereafter. Each permittee further agrees that the
city shall have a cause of action for indemnity against the permittee for any
costs the city may be required to pay as a result of defending or satisfying
any claims that arise from or in connection with a small wireless facility
permit, except only for claims resulting directly from the sole negligence or
willful misconduct of the city. Each permittee further agrees that the
indemnification obligations assumed under a small wireless facility permit
shall survive its expiration or completion of installation of any small
wireless facility authorized by the small wireless facility permit.
   (C)   Additional requirements. The Department may specify in a small
wireless facility permit such additional indemnification requirements as are
necessary to protect the city from risks of liability associated with the
permittee’s construction, installation and maintenance of a small wireless
facility, utility pole or wireless support structure.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.140) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.044 FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   Application fees. The Department shall charge an application fee for
the review of an application, a consolidated application and an application for
renewal of a small wireless facility permit. The purpose of these fees is to
enable the Department to recover its costs related to reviewing the application
provided these costs are not recovered by existing fees, rates, licenses or
taxes paid by an applicant. An application fee shall not include travel
expenses incurred by a third party in review of an application; or payment or
reimbursement of a third-party rate or fee charged on a contingency basis or a
result-based arrangement. These application fees shall be listed in the city’s
fee schedule. The fee for a consolidated application shall be no less than the
fee for an application multiplied by the number of small wireless facility
permits requested in the consolidated application.
      (1)   An application fee for the collocation of a small wireless facility
on an existing or replacement utility pole shall not exceed the lesser of the
cost of granting a building permit for similar types of commercial development
or construction within the city or $100.
      (2)   An application fee for the installation, modification or
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure associated with a
small wireless facility or wireless support structure, wherein the applicant is
seeking to perform an activity consistent with this subchapter, shall not
exceed $250.
   (B)   Right-of-way fees.
      (1)   The Department shall charge a right-of-way fee for the collocation
of a small wireless facility on a utility pole in the right-of-way or for the
installation, operation, modification, maintenance or replacement of a utility
pole in the right-of-way provided a permittee is not subject to the municipal
telecommunications license tax.
      (2)   A right-of-way fee shall be directly related to a permittee’s
actual use of the right-of-way and shall be $250 annually for each small
wireless facility.
   (C)   Authority-owned utility pole fees. The rate to collocate a small
wireless facility on an authority pole is $50 per year, per utility pole.
   (D)   Additional compensation. The Department shall not, directly or
indirectly, as a requirement of issuing a permit, require an applicant perform
a service or provide a good unrelated to the permit, including reserving fiber,
conduit or pole space for the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.150) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
§ 152.045 FEDERAL REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   These provisions shall be interpreted and applied in order to comply
with the provisions of federal law. By way of illustration and not limitation,
any small wireless facility which has been certified as compliant with all FCC
and other government regulations regarding the human exposure to radio
frequency emissions will not be denied based on radio frequency (RF) radiation
concerns.
   (B)   Small wireless facilities shall be subject to the requirements of this
subchapter to the extent that such requirements:
      (1)   Do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services; and
      (2)   Do not have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services
within the city.
   (C)   Small wireless facilities may not be expanded pursuant to an eligible
facilities request.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.170) (Ord. 19-06, passed 2-15-2019)
CHAPTER 153: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Street Supervisor
   
153.002   Definitions
   
153.003   City Forester; duties and responsibilities; permit required
   
153.004   Trees located within public property
   
153.005   Interference with city employees and willful injury to trees
   
153.006   Adoption of Public Works Standards
   
153.007   Liability for repair of sidewalk
   
153.008   Defects to be reported and repaired
   
153.009   Material in street
   
153.010   Sales attracting crowds on a sidewalk
   
153.011   Driving or riding on sidewalk
   
153.012   Coasting on street
   
153.013   Irrigation water
   
153.014   Public parade regulations
   
153.015   Removal of snow from sidewalk
   
153.016   No parking in the event of snowfall
Encroachments
   
153.030   Notice to remove; by and to whom given; posting; contents
   
153.031   Failure to remove after notice; removal by Street Supervisor
   
153.032   Action to abate
Excavations
   
153.045   Definitions
   
153.046   Permit required; basis for issuance
   
153.047   Permit application requirements
   
153.048   Emergency work
   
153.049   Permit fees
   
153.050   Permit contents; duration and extensions
   
153.051   Permit; no transfer or assignment
   
153.052   Relocation of structures in public ways
   
153.053   Insurance requirements
   
153.054   Bond; when required, conditions, warranty
   
153.055   Hold harmless agreement; limitations on city liability
   
153.056   Work without permit
   
153.057   Failure to comply; default in performance
   
153.058   Failure to conform to design standards
   
153.059   Appeal of suspension, revocation or stop order
   
153.060   Tampering with traffic barricades
   
153.061   Conflict with governing provisions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STREET SUPERVISOR.
   Under the Direction of the Director of Public Works, it will be the duty of
the Street Supervisor to see that the provisions of this subchapter are
faithfully carried out and who shall perform such other and further duties as
may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.010) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022)
§ 153.002 DEFINITIONS.
   When not consistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not merely directory. For the purpose of this subchapter,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Brigham.
   CITY FORESTER. The Director of Public Works of the city or designee.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   SHADE TREE or TREE. A tree in any public place, except where otherwise
indicated.
   TREE PLANTING STRIP. The area between curb, or place where curb should be,
and the property line; or an area inside the property line where an easement is
given for the purpose of permitting the planting of shade trees; also
designated herein as “parking”.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.020) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022)
§ 153.003 CITY FORESTER; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   There is hereby established the office of a City Forester. The City
Forester shall supervise the execution and enforcement of the provisions of
this subchapter and all other plans, standards and specifications for the
regulation of matters pertaining to shade trees that may be officially adopted
by the city. The City Forester shall have the authority to issue all permits
and conditions necessary for the approval of such permits regarding the
planting, removing, moving, spraying, trimming or pruning of any city trees
located within the public right-of-way or city-owned property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to plant, move, remove, spray, trim or prune out,
above or below ground, disturb or alter any tree or shrub on the city parking
strips, parks or any public property, or to cause such acts to be done by
others, without first submitting an application and obtaining a written permit
from the City Forester. The City Forester shall cause such permit to be issued
if, in his or her judgment, the work is necessary. A permit shall not be
required to cultivate and irrigate. As a condition to any permit to remove any
public tree or shrub within public property, the City Forester may require
certain conditions that the person plant and maintain one or more trees or
shrubs in place of the one removed. An additional condition of the placement of
any permit is the acceptance of the person of responsibility for the repair or
replacement of any damage to sprinkling systems or adjacent property caused
while pursuing the work under the approval. Any request submitted to permit the
removal of a tree for the purpose of installing new driveway access or similar
change in the curb and gutter or sidewalk shall be accompanied by a permit to
work in the public right-of-way from the Public Works Department.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.030) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.004 TREES LOCATED WITHIN PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   The city shall assume responsibility for relieving the following conditions
caused by trees or shrubs on city tree planting strips, public parks or
property:
   (A)   Removal of dead trees or limbs, or trees or limbs that, as determined
by the City Forester, appear to be a hazard or liable to fall;
   (B)   Removal of trees or limbs from trees or shrubs that have actually
fallen across a street, sidewalks or upon city property;
   (C)   Removal of diseased or dying trees that are beyond reclamation;
   (D)   Removal of trees or roots directly in the way of street widening
projects, new curb and gutters, or sidewalk and curb repairs; and
   (E)   All pruning of trees and shrubs.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.040) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022)
§ 153.005 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY EMPLOYEES AND WILLFUL INJURY TO TREES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the City
Forester or his or her assistants in the execution or enforcement of this
section.
      (2)   However, nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prevent
a public hearing on the permit or any remedy legal or equitable in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of
any property within the city.
   (B)   No person shall willfully injure or destroy any tree on the city tree
planting strips, public parks or other public property of the city by any
means, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Knowingly withholding water;
      (2)   Constructing a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk or
otherwise filling up the ground area around any tree so as to shut off air,
light or water from the roots, except under written authority from the City
Council;
      (3)   Piling building material, equipment or other substance around any
tree so as to cause injury;
      (4)   Pouring any injurious matter on or around any tree, or on the
ground around it or on any lawn or sidewalk; and/or
      (5)   Injuring any tree, tree-stake or guard with any vehicle or animal,
or in any other manner causing injury to any tree or lawn on public property.
   (C)   Tree-stakes or guards may be placed around trees by property owners;
provided, the same are placed near a tree for the purpose of protecting or
training such trees.
   (D)   The City Forester shall determine when any tree roots or limbs
originating on private property are interfering with the city sidewalks or
property and serve notice by mailing to the owners or party occupying such
premises to either remove such tree or trim the roots of any tree in order to
protect the city sidewalks from damage.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.050) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.006 ADOPTION OF PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City Council that certain manual
entitled Brigham City Public Works Standards, most current edition, containing
certain minimum standards for the construction of streets, culinary water
lines, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, street intersections, street designs,
details for construction of curb and gutter, sidewalks, driveways from public
streets, details for private connections to public sewer and water systems and
related matters, not less than one copy of which have been and are now filed in
the office of the City Recorder. Any amendments, modifications, supplements or
later editions of said manual shall constitute the manual then in effect under
this subchapter; provided, however, that, before any later editions shall take
effect, the City Council, by resolution, shall certify that the later editions
are available and one copy of all amendments, modifications, supplements or
later editions shall be filed for examination and use by the public in the
office of the City Recorder.
   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the city’s Director of Public Works, the
City Engineer or the Supervisor or Manager having jurisdiction, a literal
enforcement of these standards may work an undue hardship or a literal
enforcement may be unnecessary to meet the goals and standards of the city, the
city may modify these standards and specifications. Modifications may be
granted when there are practical difficulties involving carrying out the
provisions of the manual and a panel consisting of the City Engineer, Director
of Public Works and Supervisor or Manager having jurisdiction over that
section, determine that a granting of a modification for an individual case
will meet the goals and requirements of the city without unduly jeopardizing
the public and the individual’s interest. The Supervisor or Manager having
jurisdiction shall first receive an application for modification to the
standards of an interested party. Upon receipt of the application the panel
shall find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of the
standard and practical, and shall find the modification is in conformance with
the intent and purpose of the standards and shall find that such modification
does not in any way lessen the integrity of the standards. When such findings
of fact are made, the panel may grant such modification as it deems
appropriate. The details of an action granted as modification by this panel
shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Public Works office, with
these specific reasons for the granting of said modification.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.060) (Ord. 03-48, passed 12-18-2003; Ord. 22-03, passed 3-
3-2022)
§ 153.007 LIABILITY FOR REPAIR OF SIDEWALK.
   Whenever a sidewalk is out of repair by reason of the act or omission of any
person, the same shall be repaired at his or her expense under the direction of
the Street Supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.070) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022)
§ 153.008 DEFECTS TO BE REPORTED AND REPAIRED.
   (A)   All defects in public streets coming to the knowledge of any officer
or person in the employ of the city shall be by him or her at once communicated
to the Street Supervisor and he or she or some competent person detailed by him
or her shall, without delay, repair or cause such defect to be immediately
repaired.
   (B)   Until such repair is completed, he or she shall do whatever shall be
necessary to protect the public from injury by reason of the defect.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.080) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022)
§ 153.009 MATERIAL IN STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the
public street for the erection or repair of any building, storage of materials
or equipment upon and abutting thereon, without first making application to and
receiving from the city a permit for the occupation or use, for building
purposes, of such portions of streets and for such periods of time and under
such limitations and restrictions as may be required by the city; provided
that, no permit shall be granted to occupy more than 50% of any street,
measured from the curb line, and any such permit may be revoked by the city at
any time when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation
under which it is granted or when, in the opinion of the city, the public good
requires such revocation.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.090) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.010 SALES ATTRACTING CROWDS ON A SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful for any merchant, auctioneer or other individual to
sell or exhibit for sale any kind of property on or near to any street so as to
cause people to gather in crowds on the sidewalk or to obstruct free passage
thereon.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.100) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.011 DRIVING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate or ride a bicycle upon the sidewalks
adjoining Main Street between 200 South and 100 North.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate or ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller
skates and/or in-line skates on the sidewalks adjoining Main Street between 200
South and 100 North as well as the plaza area and sidewalks adjacent to the
city’s corporate offices between Main Street and 100 East.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.110) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.012 COASTING ON STREET.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to coast or slide with any sled,
sleigh, toboggan or vehicle upon any public street, avenue, sidewalk or alley
within the city; provided that, the Council, by public notice or proclamation,
may authorize the use of certain streets for coasting during the winter season.
   (B)   During the period for which such notice or proclamation shall be
issued, coasting and sliding upon such streets as may be designated by the
proclamation or notice shall be permissible.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.120) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.013 IRRIGATION WATER.
   All owners or occupants of lots in the city requiring water from a main
ditch for irrigation or other purposes are hereby required to dig suitable
ditches, erect flumes or lay pipes and maintain the same to convey the water
across the sidewalk to or from their respective lots. It shall be unlawful for
any person to allow or cause any irrigation water to overflow or be directed
upon the street or the public right-of- way where it causes any damage.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.130) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.014 PUBLIC PARADE REGULATIONS.
   The following shall apply to public property adjoining parade routes and
staging areas for parades and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate
these provisions.
   (A)   No person shall place, erect, use or employ any tent or other enclosed
shelters, including vehicles and trailers, on public property along a parade
route or staging areas at any time.
   (B)   No person shall obstruct public sidewalks, paved portions of streets,
or occupy any unsafe position or occupy a position which may cause damage to
public or private property.
   (C)   From and after 8:00 p.m. of the day before a parade and continuing
until the conclusion of the parade, no person shall park a motor vehicle,
trailer or tent trailer on the streets designated as the parade route. Only
motor vehicles and trailers which are parade entries or parts thereof are
allowed to be in the areas designated as staging areas. Any vehicle, motor
vehicle, trailer or tent trailer parked in violation of this section is a
public nuisance and may be towed from the prohibited area at the owner’s
expense. The Mayor may authorize the city to reserve places for the observation
of the parade and to erect and control seating on reserved public property.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.140) (Ord. 04-21, passed 8-5-2004; Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-
2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.015 REMOVAL OF SNOW FROM SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity owning, having charge or
control of or occupying any real estate abutting on any street within the city
to fail, refuse or neglect to remove all weeds and noxious vegetation from the
curb line to the inside line of public sidewalks and further, to keep the
sidewalk in front of such property free from litter, snow, ice and
obstructions.
   (B)   It is unlawful to blow, shovel, or plow snow from private property
onto a public street or right-of-way causing a hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.150) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022; Ord. 23-26, passed 12-
7-2023) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.016 NO PARKING IN THE EVENT OF SNOWFALL.
   (A)   From November 1 through March 31, it is unlawful to park or leave
parked any vehicle upon the paved portion of a city street, while snow plows
are operating or while streets are snow or ice covered; excluding business
parking from 100 North to 200 South on Main Street and 100 West to Main Street
on Forest Street, or around school buildings while school is either in session
or holding official school activities.
   (B)   Vehicles which have been plowed around will be presumed to be
abandoned or in continued violation of this subchapter and shall be subject to
removal. All costs for removal will be borne by the owner of the subject
vehicle.
   (C)   It is further unlawful to blow, shovel or plow snow from private
property onto a public street or right of way causing a hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.160) (Ord. 19-19, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 20-17, passed 9-
3-2020; Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022; Ord. 23-26, passed 12-7-2023) Penalty, see
§
153.999
ENCROACHMENTS
§ 153.030 NOTICE TO REMOVE; BY AND TO WHOM GIVEN; POSTING; CONTENTS.
   (A)   If any street is encroached upon by a fence or building or otherwise,
the Street Supervisor shall, in writing, require the encroachments to be
removed.
(Prior Code, § 24.02.010)
   (B)   Notice must be given to the occupant or owner of the land or person
causing or owning the encroachments or be left at his or her place of
residence, if he or she resides in the city; if not, it must be posted on the
encroachment, specifying the breadth of the street, the place and extent of the
encroachment and requiring the removal thereof within ten days thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 24.02.020)
§ 153.031 FAILURE TO REMOVE AFTER NOTICE; REMOVAL BY STREET SUPERVISOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to leave, or cause to be left, any encroachment
upon the streets of the city after the expiration of five days from the service
or posting of a notice to remove such encroachment. If the encroachment is such
as to effectually obstruct and prevent the use of the highway for vehicles, the
Street Supervisor shall forthwith remove the same.
   (B)   If the encroachment is not denied, but is not removed, for three days
after the notice is complete, the Street Supervisor shall cause such
encroachment to be removed at the expense of the owner, occupant or person
controlling the same and recover his or her costs and expenses in an action for
that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 24.02.030) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.032 ACTION TO ABATE.
   If the encroachment is denied and the owner, occupant or person controlling
the matter or thing charged with being an encroachment refuses either to remove
or permit the removal thereof, the Council shall direct the City Attorney to
commence in the proper court an action to abate same as a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 24.02.040)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 153.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person who makes application for a permit.
   APPURTENANCES. Miscellaneous concrete surfaces within the public way, such
as parking bays and carriage walks.
   BUSINESS. Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
   CITY. Brigham City, a municipal corporation of the State of Utah.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer, or his or her authorized representative.
   EMERGENCY. Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of
which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property, or which
causes interruption of utility services.
   ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS. The latest
version of the Brigham City Public Works Standards and Technical
Specifications.
   FAILURE. A work site restoration which fails to meet public works standards
and technical specifications, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard
condition within the duration of the warranty period. FAILURE may be settlement
of surfaces, deterioration of materials or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of FAILURE shall be further defined in the engineering regulations.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the right-of-way.
   OPERATOR. Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system
and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in
such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of
such a system.
   PERMITTEE. Any person that has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed
to fulfill the requirements of this subchapter.
   PERSON. Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
provider, corporation, company, organization or entity of any kind.
   PRIVATE DRAIN LINE. A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
   PROVIDER. An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee or
public utility company.
   PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY. Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the
state’s Public Service Commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone or other utility product or services for use by
the general public.
   PUBLIC WAY. Includes all public rights-of-way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys and public drainage ways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within PUBLIC WAYS of the city, except where activities
proposed by an infrastructure provider, operator, person or public utility
company involves attachment to a pole owned by the city.
   RESELLER. Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which
a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the
underlying system used for the transmission and does not install any system in
the rights-of-way.
   RESIDENT. The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
   STORM DRAINS. A dedicated pipe, conduit, water way or ditch installed in a
right-of-way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This
term does not include private drain lines.
   SYSTEM LESSEE. Any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a
system to provide services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM. All conduits, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment,
wire and appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider located in the
construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEM.
   WORK SITE RESTORATION. Includes the restoring of the original ground or
paved hard surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and includes,
but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation
of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.010) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.046 PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to perform work of any kind, including, but not
limited to, excavation and pole attachment, in a public way within the city,
shall make application for a permit.
   (B)   The decision by the city to issue a permit shall include, among other
factors determined by the city, the following:
      (1)   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or
structures proposed to be installed in the public way;
      (2)   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in
addition to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other
users of the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and
water;
      (3)   The damage or disruption, if any of public or private facilities,
improvements or landscaping previously existing the public way;
      (4)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the public way; and
      (5)   Compliance with Brigham City Public Works Standards.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.020) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.047 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a permit shall be filed with the Public Works
Department on a form or forms to be furnished by the city.
      (2)   Applicants shall follow the requirements of the current edition of
Brigham City Public Works Standards.
   (B)   The Public Works Department may deny the issuance of permits to
contractors, utility companies or other permit applicants who have shown by
past performance that, in the opinion of the Public Works Department, they will
not consistently conform to the Engineering Regulations, Specifications, Design
Standards or the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   When necessary, in the judgment of the Public Works Department, to
fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to existing or proposed
facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether the work proposed
complies with the engineering regulations, construction specifications and
design standards, the Public Works Department may require the filing of
engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in
sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance,
or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and
sketches are filed and approved.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work upon any public
way until the Public Works Department has approved the application and until a
permit has been issued for such work, except as specifically approved to the
contrary in this subchapter or the Brigham City Public Works Standards.
   (E)   (1)   The disapproval or denial of an application by the Public Works
Department may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council by filing of a
written notice of appeal within ten days of the action of the Public Works
Department.
      (2)   The City Council shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefor be timely filed as soon as practical, and render its decision within
two weeks following notice of such appeal.
   (F)   In approving or disapproving work within any public way, or permits
therefor, in the inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or
specifications; and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred upon
him or her by this subchapter, the Public Works Department shall act in such
manner as to preserve and protect the public way and the use thereof, but shall
have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of permittees and
applicants or other persons which have no relationship to the use, preservation
or protection of the public way.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for a city, county, state, federal or other
government employee to perform routine maintenance work, not involving
excavations, without first having obtained a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.030) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.048 EMERGENCY WORK.
   Refer to current Brigham City Public Works Standards.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.040) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.049 PERMIT FEES.
   The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon issuance of the
permit, a fee, which shall be established by resolution. Additional charges to
cover the reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review,
inspection and work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be
charged by the city to each permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.050) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.050 PERMIT CONTENTS; DURATION AND EXTENSIONS.
   Refer to current Brigham City Public Works Standards.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.060) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.051 PERMIT; NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT.
   Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that, the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
subchapter and under said permit.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.070) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.052 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   The Public Works Department may direct any person owning or
maintaining facilities or structures in the public way to alter, modify or
relocate such facilities or structures as the Public Works Department may
require. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults,
trash receptacles and overhead and underground gas, electric, telephone,
telecommunication and communication facilities shall specifically be subject to
such directives. The person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
shall, at his, her or their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written
notice by the city, promptly protect or promptly alter or relocate such
facilities or structures, or part thereof, as directed by the city. In the
event that such person refuses or neglects to conform to the directive of the
city, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate
such part of the facilities or structures without liability to such person.
Such person shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the city in connection
with such work performed by the city, including also design, engineering,
construction, materials, insurance, court costs and attorney’s fees.
   (B)   Any directive by the Public Works Department shall be based upon the
following:
      (1)   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or determined by the Public Works Department to be
structurally unsound or defective;
      (2)   The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under
state statute or city ordinance; (This section shall not, however, be deemed to
diminish the vehicle impound authority of the Police Department.)
      (3)   The authority under which the facility or structure was installed
has expired or has been revoked;
      (4)   The facility or structure is not in conformity with public
improvements consistent with the General Plan of the city for the area;
      (5)   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
      (6)   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.080) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.053 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to the city
evidence that such applicant has a comprehensive general liability and property
damage policy that includes contractual liability coverage endorsed with the
following limits and provisions:
      (1)   A minimum of $2,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
bodily injury, personal injury and property damage and not less than $1,000,000
in the aggregate. The general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the
permit, or the general aggregate limit shall be two times the required
occurrence limit. The coverage shall be in the nature of broad from commercial
general liability coverage. The City Attorney may increase or decrease minimum
insurance limits, depending on the potential liability of any project;
      (2)   All policies shall include the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers and assigns, as insured. Any reference to the
“city” shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns;
      (3)   The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers and assigns. Any insurance
or self-insurance maintained by the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee’s insurance
and shall not contribute to or with it;
      (4)   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall
not affect coverage provided to the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers and assigns;
      (5)   Coverage shall state that the permittee’s insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s liability;
      (6)   Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against
the city, it being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so
affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all
losses covered by the described insurance;
      (7)   The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have
no recourse against the city for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy;
      (8)   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage
shall not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or in limits,
except after 30 days’ prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested sent to the city;
      (9)   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and
defend the city and its officers and employees against any claim or loss,
damage or expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property
occurring by reason of permit work done by the permittee, his or her
subcontractor or agent, whether or not the work has been completed and whether
or not the right-of-way has been opened to public travel; and
      (10)   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the city, and its officers and employees against any claim or loss,
damage or expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work
pursuant to the permit including, but not limited to, falling objects or
failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights a required form the time
work begins until the work is completed and right-of-way is opened for public
use.
   (B)   Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best rating of no
less than an A carrier, with a rating of A7 or higher.
   (C)   The permittee shall furnish the city with certificates of insurance
and original endorsements affecting coverage required by the permit. The
certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a
person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The city
expressly reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all
required insurance policies at any time. Consequently, the permittee shall be
prepared to provide such copies prior to the issuance of the permit.
   (D)   If any of the required policies are, or at any time become,
unsatisfactory to the city as to form or substance, or if a company issuing any
such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to the city, the
permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to the city for
approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as required by the
city. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such insurance as provided
herein, the city may declare the permit to be in default and pursue any and all
remedies the city may have at law or in equity, including those actions
outlined in this subchapter.
   (E)   The permittee shall include all subcontractors as insured under its
policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each
subcontractor. All coverage for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the
requirements stated herein.
   (F)   Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared to and
approved by the city. At the option of the city, either the insurer shall
reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the
city, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the
permittee shall procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the city, guaranteeing
payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense
expenses.
   (G)   A property owner performing work adjacent to his or her residence may
submit proof of a homeowner’s insurance policy that demonstrably provides
coverage for work in the public way in lieu of the insurance requirements of
this section.
   (H)   A provider may be relieved of the obligation of submitting
certificates of insurance under the following circumstances: if such company
shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
      (1)   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this subchapter, or has
complied with state requirements to become self insured. Public utilities may
submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit;
      (2)   Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage that
would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this
subchapter; or
      (3)   The work to be performed under the permit issued to the applicant
is to be performed by the city, in which case insurance requirements shall be
negotiated between the city and the applicant by separate agreement.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.090) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.054 BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY.
   (A)   Except as noted in this subchapter, each applicant, before being
issued a permit, shall provide the city with an acceptable corporate surety
bond in the amount to be established by resolution to guarantee faithful
performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this
subchapter. The amount of the bond required may be increased or decreased at
the discretion of the Public Works Department whenever it appears that the
amount and cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily completed,
may vary from the amount of bond otherwise required under this subchapter. The
form of the bond and the entity issuing the bond shall be subject to the
approval of the City Attorney.
   (B)   Public utilities franchised by the city shall not be required to file
a corporate surety bond if such requirement is expressly waived in the
franchise documents.
   (C)   The bond required by this section shall be conditioned as follows:
      (1)   The permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the city
ordinances and regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by the
city relative to work in the public way, and respond to the city in damages for
failure to conform therewith;
      (2)   After work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with diligence
and expedition and shall promptly complete such work and restore the public way
to construction specifications, so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary; and
      (3)   The permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship
pursuant to the Brigham City Public Works Standards.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.100) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.055 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY.
   The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the permit. The
issuance and acceptance of any permit under this subchapter shall constitute
such an agreement by the permittee to this section. This subchapter shall
neither be construed as imposing upon the city, its officers, employees and
agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by or
by reason of the performance of any work within the public way, or under a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter; nor shall the city, its officers,
officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof be deemed to have
assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspection authorized
hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any work.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.110) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.056 WORK WITHOUT PERMIT.
   A stop order may be issued by the Public Works Department directed to any
person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way
without a permit. Any person found to be doing work in the public way without
having obtained a permit, as provided in this subchapter, shall be required to
pay a permit fee equal to two times the normal permit fee. For replacement
work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for new
construction shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.120) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.057 FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the
Public Works Department, after notice to the permittee for:
      (1)   Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any
provision of this subchapter;
      (2)   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or
law relating to the work; or
      (3)   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   (B)   A suspension or revocation by the Public Works Department, and a stop
order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the Public Works
Department and notice to the person performing the work in the public way.
Notice to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the Public
Works Department has posted a stop work order at the location of the work. Upon
posting of a stop work order, written notice of the stop work order shall be
mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by the permittee on
the permit.
   (C)   Whenever the Public Works Department finds that a default has occurred
in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice
thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond, if there
is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the Public Works Department to
be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
   (D)   In the event that the surety (or principal), within a reasonable time
following the giving of such notice (taking into consideration the exigencies
of the situation, the nature of the work, the requirements of public safety and
for the protection of persons and property), fails either to commence and cause
the required work to be performed with due diligence, or to indemnify the city
for the cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, the city may
perform the work, at the discretion of the Public Works Department, with city
forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be commenced by the City
Attorney against the contractor and bonding company and such other persons as
may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the city, including attorney
fees and a 15% overhead charge, on account thereof. In the event that cash has
been deposited, the cost of performing the work may be charged against the
amount deposited, and suit brought for the balance due, if any.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.130) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.058 FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS.
   For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the Public
Works Department may:
   (A)   Suspend or revoke the permit;
   (B)   Issue a stop order;
   (C)   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
   (D)   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
   (E)   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.140) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.059 APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR STOP ORDER.
   (A)   Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the Public Works
Department may be appealed by the permittee to the Appeal Authority by filing a
written notice of appeal within ten days of the action of the Public Works
Department.
   (B)   The Appeal Authority shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefor be timely filed, as soon as practical, and render its decision within
a reasonable time following filing of notice of appeal.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.150) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.060 TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.160) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.061 CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS.
   Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this subchapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.170) (Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whenever any tree or shrub has been removed or destroyed pursuant to
permit, per §
153.003(B) of this chapter, it shall be a Class B misdemeanor for the permittee
to fail, refuse or neglect to plant and maintain another tree(s) or shrub(s) of
the type and size and at the location specified in the permit, within the time
specified by the permit.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.030)
   (C)   (1)   A violation of any provision of §
153.005(B) of this chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Any person found
violating §
153.005(B) of this chapter shall also provide restitution for any and all costs
associated with repairing any injured or destroyed tree, including the cost of
maintenance, removal, replacement and/or other related services.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to pursue a civil action against any
person for any violation of the above section. In the event a person violated
any of §
153.005 of this chapter and, after being notified, fails to perform the actions
being requested by the city, the same person shall be indebted to the city for
the cost of maintenance, removal, replacement and/or other related services
associated with remedying the violation. The city reserves the right to place a
lien against any real property owned by the person for failure to reimburse for
stated costs. In the event legal action is commenced to obtain reimbursement
for said costs the person found violating §
153.005 of this chapter shall also pay all legal expenses incurred by the city
in obtaining judgment for such costs.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.050)
   (D)   The violation of §
153.015  of this chapter shall constitute an infraction. Additionally, should
the city choose to remove the weeds, vegetation, litter, snow, ice or
obstructions, the real property owner shall be indebted to the city for the
reasonable cost of such removal. In the event legal action is commenced to
obtain reimbursement for said costs, the abutting property owner shall also pay
all legal expenses incurred by the city in obtaining judgment for such costs.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.150)
   (E)   Penalties for violating §
153.016 of this chapter shall be a Class C misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 24.01.160)
   (F)   (1)   Unless otherwise specified in §§
153.045 through
153.061 of this chapter, a violation of any provision of §§
153.045 through
153.061 of this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension,
revocation or stop work, by any person, whether a permittee or a subcontractor
to a permittee, shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists
shall be a separate offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person
from otherwise complying with the provisions of §§
153.045 through
153.061 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.180)
      (2)   Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the
public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures
upon notice to do so by the Public Works Department, per §
153.052 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. All costs of
alteration, modification or relocation shall be borne by the person owning or
maintaining the facilities or structures involved.
(Prior Code, § 24.03.080)
(Ord. 98-38, passed 8-20-1998; Ord. 19-19, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 20-17, passed
9-3-2020; Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2022; Ord. 23-26, passed 12-7-2023)
CHAPTER 154: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Storm Drain Utility
   
154.001   Purpose
   
154.002   Definitions
   
154.003   Storm Drain Utility
   
154.004   Storm Drain Utility fee
   
154.005   Billing
Storm Drainage
   
154.030   Obstruction
   
154.031   Prohibited discharges
   
154.032   Prohibition of dumping and littering
   
154.033   Damaging storm water system prohibited
   
154.034   Manhole covers
   
154.035   Drinking water protection
   
154.036   Prohibition of illicit connections
   
154.037   Requirements for approval of connections
   
154.038   Best management practices
   
154.039   Easements
   
154.040   Authority to inspect
   
154.041   Requirement to monitor and analyze
   
154.042   Enforcement procedures
   
154.043   Compliance with federal and state laws
Storm Water Permits
   
154.060   Storm water construction activity permit
   
154.061   Proper operation and maintenance
   
154.062   Inspection and entry
   
154.063   Enforcement of storm water construction activity permit
   
154.064   Storm water connection permit
   
154.065   Exemptions
   
154.066   Appeal
   
154.067   Compliance with federal and state law
Long-Term Storm Water Management
   
154.080   Purpose and intent
   
154.081   Controls required
   
154.082   Agreement; authority to inspect
   
154.083   Low impact development
   
154.084   Retention of specific rainfall event
STORM DRAIN UTILITY
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the city and its inhabitants by improving the city’s storm drain system,
managing and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing
polluted waters from entering the city’s water supply and other receiving
waters, and establishing a viable and fair method of financing the
construction, operation and maintenance of the storm drain system.
(Prior Code, § 24.05.020) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 1-16-2025)
§ 154.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and all other ordinances relating to storm
water, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Management procedures, schedules of
activities, prohibited practices, maintenance procedures, treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff,
spills or leaks, sludge, water disposal or drainage from raw material storage.
   CATCH BASIN. An inlet into the storm water system designed to keep out large
or obstructive matter.
   CITY or MUNICIPALITY. Brigham City, Utah. The CITY may also be referred to
as a MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. One plan for development or sale, separate parts
of which are related by any announcement, piece of documentation (including a
sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, plat,
blueprint, contract, permit application, zoning request, computer design and
the like), physical demarcation (including contracts) that identify the scope
of the project, regardless of phasing, combination with other construction
activities or implementation by different owners or operators and may be
commercial, industrial or residential in nature.
   DEBRIS. Any pollutant, dirt, rock, sand, tree, rubbish, litter or any other
item or combination of items.
   DETENTION BASIN. A water storage pond designed to store a volume of water
that reduces the post-development peak runoff of a storm to the pre-development
runoff rate or other rate, as defined by the city. This is accomplished by the
use of an outlet which controls the rate of flow out of the pond into the
receiving storm drain or water body. DETENTION PONDS contain an inlet, outlet
and spillway; the inlet and outlet may be the same. The DETENTION BASIN is
intended to drain the storm water within a period of time to make the volume
available for the next storm event.
   DEVELOPED PARCEL. Any parcel of real property that has been altered from its
natural condition by grading, filling or the construction of improvements or
other impervious surfaces.
   DEVELOPMENT or LAND DEVELOPMENT. Any change to improved or unimproved real
property, including, but not limited to, site preparation, filling, grading,
paving, excavation and construction of buildings or other structures.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works of the city or his or her duly
authorized representative.
   DISTURB. To alter the physical condition, natural terrain or vegetation of
real property by clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, filling, building or
other construction activity.
   DRAIN INLET. A point of entry into a sump, detention basin or storm drain
system.
   DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE. The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a ground water source of drinking water supplying a public water
system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and
reach such ground water source.
   EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU). The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical,
chemical or infections characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to a substantial presence or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL includes, but is not limited to, any
hazardous substance designated under 40 C.F.R. part 116, pursuant to §
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not
limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted or approved by a government agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected to the storm drain system which
has not been:
         (a)   Documented in plans, maps or equivalent records; and
         (b)   Approved by the city.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system
that is not composed entirely of storm water, except discharges pursuant to a
UPDES permit (other than the UPDES permit for discharges from the municipal
separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from emergency firefighting
activities.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than
the natural surface.
   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID). An approach to land development (or re-
development) that works with nature to more closely mimic pre-development
hydrologic functions. LID employs principles such as preserving and recreating
natural landscape features, minimizing effective imperviousness to create
functional and appealing site drainage that treat storm water as a resource
rather than a waste product. There are many practices that have been used to
adhere to these principles such as bioretention facilities, rain gardens,
vegetated rooftops, rain barrels and permeable pavements.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains).
   NON-STORM WATER RUNOFF. Any runoff other than storm water.
   PARCEL. The smallest separately segregated unit or plot of real property
having an identified owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented for
tax purposes and given a property tax or lot number by the County Assessor.
   PERCOLATION. The ability of a soil to absorb water, typically measured by a
Standard Percolation Test as referred to in the Brigham City Public Works
Standards in units of minutes per inch.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company or
body politic, including any agency of the state and the United States
Government.
   POLLUTANT. Any thing which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS
may include, but are not limited to paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles and accumulations so that same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals;
animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure (including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries and concrete
resonates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   REDEVELOPMENT. The addition, replacement or improvement of impervious
surfaces on a developed site.
   RETENTION BASIN. A water storage pond designed to store the runoff volume of
a storm and dispose of water through percolation, infiltration and evaporation
within a period of time to make the volume available for the next storm event.
A RETENTION BASIN contains an inlet and spillway, but no structure outlet.
   SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW (SSO). A discharge of untreated sanitary wastewater.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. A residential building having only one living
unit, or a residential building having more than one living unit, if living
units are separately owned and titled.
   STORM DRAIN. A closed conduit for conducting storm water that has been
collected by inlets or collected by other means.
   STORM WATER. Any flow that occurs during or following any form of natural
precipitation. STORM WATER includes only the portion of the flow that is
composed of precipitation.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP). The SWMP document which is the written
plan that is used to describe the various control measures and activities the
city will undertake to implement the requirements of the general permit for
discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems as issued by the
state’s Department of Environment Quality, Division of Water Quality.
   STORM WATER SYSTEM. The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, detention basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels, sumps, storm drains and ground
water) owned and operated by the city, which is designed and used for
collecting or conveying storm water. The STORM WATER SYSTEM may also be
referred to as the STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
or MS4.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. Precipitation that is not intercepted or otherwise
captured at a site which eventually enters into the storm water system and
natural water bodies such as rivers, streams and lakes.
   SUMP. A formalized structure underground, surrounded by drain rock, that
acts as a detention basin to allow the slow release of water into the
surrounding sub-soil. SUMPS usually receive storm water runoff from paved areas
such as streets, parking lots, building roofs and the like.
   UPDES. Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. All definitions found in
the general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer
systems (MS4s), not included in the above, are hereby incorporated by
reference.
(Prior Code, § 24.05.030) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.003 STORM DRAIN UTILITY.
   (A)   Creation. The City Council hereby creates and establishes a Storm
Drain Utility as part of the city’s overall drain system. The Storm Drain
Utility shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the
city’s storm drain system.
   (B)   Enterprise Fund. The City Council hereby establishes a Storm Drain
Utility Enterprise Fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial
transaction related to the Storm Drain Utility.
      (1)   All Storm Drain Utility service charges shall be deposited in the
Enterprise Fund. Money in the Storm Drain Utility Enterprise Fund shall not be
commingled with or transferred to other city funds. However, the Storm Drain
Utility may pay other city funds for services and expenses directly
attributable to the Storm Drain Utility.
      (2)   The Enterprise Fund shall be operated according to state law and
city policy.
   (C)   Facilities and assets.
      (1)   The Storm Drain Utility shall operate independently of city
operations funded by the General Fund. The Storm Drain Utility shall have the
same relationship to the city as other city utilities, such as the electric,
water and waste treatment utilities.
      (2)   Upon creation of the utility, all of the city’s storm drain
facilities and assets (other than streets and other facilities and assets
designated by the city) shall be transferred to the Storm Drain Utility in
consideration for the Storm Drain Utility’s agreement to take primary
responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, maintaining,
administering and operating the city’s storm drain system.
   (D)   Administration. The Storm Drain Utility shall be administered by the
city’s Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may adopt policies, to
assist in the application, administration and interpretation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 24.05.040) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.004 STORM DRAIN UTILITY FEE.
   (A   Imposed. Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be
charged a Storm Drain Utility fee.
   (B)   ESU. The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service units
(ESUs) contained in the parcel. One ESU equals 3,000 square feet of impervious
surface area.
   (C)   Calculation. Each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay
a base rate of one ESU. All other developed parcels, including multiple-family
residential parcels, shall be charged a fee based on the number of ESUs on the
parcel. If there is more than one city utility bill for the parcel, the fee
shall be divided between the city utility bills covering the parcel. The actual
monthly fee (service charge) shall be computed by multiplying the total ESUs
for the parcel by the monthly rate.
   (D)   Charge per ESU. The amount charged for each ESU shall be established
by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Exemptions and credits. The Storm Drain Credit Review Committee may
establish exemptions and credits to the storm drain utility fee. Exemptions set
forth by City Res. 98-20 include the following.
      (1)   Undeveloped parcels. Undeveloped parcels shall not pay any storm
water drainage utility fees.
      (2)   Streets. All streets (publicly and privately owned) are part of the
storm utility conveyance system and are therefore exempt from the storm drain
fee. For the purpose of this section, STREETS shall include the following:
         (a)   Any publicly-owned rights-of-way;
         (b)   Any property that has been dedicated, deeded or condemned as a
street and accepted by the city as a street;
         (c)   Any property that has been abandoned to the public as a street,
if the city considers the property a street and maintains it as such;
         (d)   Any thoroughfares (publicly or privately owned) that are open to
the public, provide access to real property and are used primarily for
vehicular traffic; and
         (e)   Any railroad rights-of-way.
      (3)   Common area. Common areas in residential condominium and PUD
developments shall not be assessed a storm drain utility fee if each of the
residential units in the development are assessed the standard residential fee.
   (F)   Policies. The Public Works Director may adopt policies, consistent
with this chapter and any resolutions passed by the City Council, to assist in
the application, administration and interpretation of this chapter.
   (G)   Appeals. Any person or entity that believes that this chapter, or any
storm drain utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously may
appeal to the Director of Public Works. The appeal shall be in writing, shall
state any facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within ten days of the
decision, action or bill being appealed. The Director may elect to hold a
hearing on the appeal. The Director shall decide the appeal within ten days of
when the appeal is filed. If the person or entity is not satisfied with the
Director’s decision, a further appeal may be made to the City Council (or his
or her designee). The appeal to the City Council shall follow the same
procedure as the appeal to the Director. The City Council’s decision shall be
final and binding on all parties.
(Prior Code, § 24.05.050) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.005 BILLING.
   (A)   (1)   The Storm Drain Utility fee shall be included on the city’s
regular monthly utility bill for any given property. If there is no regular
utility bill for the property, the Storm Drain Utility fee shall be charged to
the owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the
city by the person or entity paying for the city utility services provided to
the property. All properties shall be charged the fee, regardless of whether or
not the owner or occupant of the property requests the Storm Drain Utility
services.
      (2)   Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may result in
termination of other utility services. The Storm Drain Utility fee shall, from
time to time, be set by resolution.
   (B)   Non-single-family residential parcels will be assessed a fee based on
the actual amount of impervious surface on the parcel. Single-family
residential parcels will all be assessed a common fee, based on the average
amount of impervious surface area found on single-family residential parcels in
the city. The City Council finds that the common fee for single-family
residential parcels is justified because of the following:
      (1)   Each single-family residential parcel contributes approximately the
same amount of storm water runoff; and
      (2)   It would be impractical and difficult to administer the utility if
each single-family residential parcel were measured individually.
   (C)   (1)   The City Council finds ESUs to be of the most accurate
measurement for determining the amount that each parcel contributes to,
benefits from, and otherwise uses the Storm Drain Utility.
      (2)   The City Council establishes the amount of impervious surface
included in each ESU to be equal to the average amount of impervious surface
found on single-family residential parcels. Therefore, each single-family
residential parcel will pay the fee for one ESU.
(Prior Code, § 24.05.060) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
STORM DRAINAGE
§ 154.030 OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the
obstruction of the flow of storm water runoff or non-storm water runoff into
any sump, detention or retention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain
inlet or other associated structural controls that convey storm water and/or
non-storm water runoff.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to cause any obstruction that inhibits
the normal flow of storm water and/or non-storm water runoff in any curb and
gutter, subject to the exemptions below. The following obstructions are exempt
from the prohibitions of this section:
      (1)   Street and/or storm water improvement projects authorized by the
city;
      (2)   Flood-control and prevention activities performed by the city;
      (3)   Obstructions approved by the city as part of a site’s storm water
control plan; and
      (4)   Obstructions occurring during clean-up periods established by the
city; provided that, the materials are placed according to city directions and
do not obstruct drain inlets.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a person to cover any drain inlet for any reason or
purpose, except:
      (1)   For the purpose of filtering the storm water; or
      (2)   For emergency situations per authorized personnel, such as to
prevent hazardous contaminants from entering the storm drain system.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.010) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.031 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge non-storm water discharges
including spills, illicit connections, illegal dumping and sanitary sewer
overflows (“SSOs”) into the storm water system.
   (B)   The following discharges to the storm water system are exempt from the
prohibitions of this section:
      (1)   Discharges regulated under a valid permit from the state’s
Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality; provided,
compliance with all permit conditions are maintained; and
      (2)   Those discharges as listed under § 1.2.2.2 of the general permit
for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s).
(Prior Code, § 24.06.020) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.032 PROHIBITION OF DUMPING AND LITTERING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to dump, or to allow to be dumped into
any sump, detention or retention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain
inlet or other storm drainage structure that conveys storm water and/or non-
storm water, any type of debris, petroleum product, chemical, paint, pesticide,
herbicide, heavy metal, acid or base product, solid or liquid waste product,
hazardous waste product, green waste and/or human or animal waste.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, leave, maintain or
keep any refuse, rubbish, garbage, discarded or abandoned object, articles or
other materials containing pollutants or hazardous materials on public or
private lands which may result in the discharge of a pollutant and/or hazardous
material.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.030) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.033 DAMAGING STORM WATER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   Any person who damages, breaks, defaces or uncovers any portion of a storm
water system shall be responsible for the repair and/or replacement of any
damaged portion of that line and any connecting lines. Repairs shall be made as
per the specifications in the Public Work Standards. It is unlawful to remove
any part or portion of the storm drain lines or any lines connecting to the
storm drain system without approval from the Director of Public Works or his or
her designee.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.040) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.034 MANHOLE COVERS.
   No person shall open any storm drain manhole or other storm drain enclosure
without permission from the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.050) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.035 DRINKING WATER PROTECTION.
   To provide for the public health, safety and welfare of citizens, compliance
with the current Drinking Water Source Protection Plan is required.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.060) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.036 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.070) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.037 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Connections are allowed for storm water runoff; provided, they:
      (1)   Comply with this chapter;
      (2)   Are approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works; and
      (3)   Connections are documented on as-built plans provided to the city
as required by the city.
   (B)   Appropriate charges for such hookups are paid as established by
resolution adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.080) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.038 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   Any person connecting to the storm water system or developing a commercial
or industrial site shall employ best management practices (BMPs) approved by
the city. The BMPs may be structural and/or non-structural, depending on the
needs of the site. The BMPs shall be designed to ensure that the quality and
quantity of storm water released to the city’s storm water system meets the
requirements of federal, state and local laws and regulations and the city’s
UPDES permit, and will not exceed the designed capacity of the storm water
system or jeopardize the integrity of the storm water system.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.090) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.039 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair,
maintenance or any portion of the storm drain facilities lying within the
easement, or the performance of any other duties pertinent to the operation of
the storm drain.
   (B)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on an easement, shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.100) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.040 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
provision of this chapter, or whenever the city has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this subchapter, the city may enter such premises at
all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records
related to storm water compliance.
      (2)   In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to
enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek
assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
   (B)   A long-term storm water management agreement may be required for all
storm water features and controls located on private property when a project is
vested subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. The storm water
management agreement shall be promulgated in the form and manner as determined
by the Public Works Director and may be in the form of a note on the recorded
plat so long as the agreement includes:
      (1)   City oversight authority of the storm water measures;
      (2)   A provision that the agreement acts as a covenant that runs with
the land;
      (3)   Allows the city to perform necessary maintenance or corrective
actions neglected by the owner/operators or the qualified third party; and
      (4)   Allows the city to recoup the costs from the owner/operator as
necessary to cover the expenses for necessary actions conducted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.110) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.041 REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE.
   (A)   Any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any facility
which is suspected of causing or contributing to storm water pollution, illegal
discharges or non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system or waters of
the United States, to undertake at said person’s expense such monitoring and
analyses and furnish such reports to the city as deemed necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   City tests or inspections indicate that a site is causing or
contributing to storm water pollution, illegal discharges and/or non-storm
water discharges to the storm water system or waters of the United States and,
if the violations continue after notice from the city, the city may require any
person engaged in the illicit activity and/or the owner of operator of the site
to provide, at his, her or their own expense, monitoring and analyses required
by the city to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.120) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.042 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   Whenever the city finds that a person, organization or institution (not to
exclude the county, state, or federal government) has violated a prohibition or
failed to comply with a requirement of this chapter, the city will provide
notice of the violation and require compliance by the following procedure.
   (A)   A verbal warning shall be given. The verbal warning shall be
documented by the qualified person (code enforcement officer, city inspector,
public works employee) who issued the warning. The city may skip the
requirements set forth in this section and immediately proceed with other more
severe actions against the violator if:
      (1)   The violator has committed the same violation in the past;
      (2)   The violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious risk
to persons, the environment or property; or
      (3)   The city deems the violation to constitute an emergency.
   (B)   Issue a written notice of violation to the responsible person(s),
organization or institution. The notice of violation shall be documented by the
qualified person who issued the warning. Such notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   A timeframe for correcting the violation;
      (6)   Payment to cover administrative, remediation, monitoring, analyses
and reporting costs;
      (7)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs; and
      (8)   The city may skip the notice requirements set forth in this section
and immediately proceed with criminal and/or civil action against the violator
if:
         (a)   The violator has committed the same violation in the past;
         (b)   The violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious
risk to persons, the environment, or property; or
         (c)   The city deems the violation to constitute an emergency.
   (C)   Issue a fine or penalty. The fine or penalty shall be documented by
the qualified person who issued the warning. Such violations may penalize the
violator as follows.
      (1)   The violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class B
misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this
chapter, the city or any other party suffers damages and is required to make
repairs and/or replace any materials, the cost of repair and/or replacement
shall be borne by the violating party and shall be in addition to any criminal
or civil fines and/or penalties.
      (3)   Violators of this chapter may also be subject to prosecution, fines
and penalties from the state and the United States EPA.
      (4)   The small MS4 general UPDES permit, Permit No. UTR090000 defines
the maximum penalties for violations of permit conditions as follows.
         (a)   The general UPDES permit provides that any person who violates a
permit condition implementing provisions of the Act is subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed $10,000 per day of such violation. Any person who
willfully or negligently violates permit conditions or the Act is subject to a
fine not exceeding $25,000 per day of violation. Any person convicted under
U.C.A. § 19-5-115(2) a second time shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$50,000 per day.
         (b)   The general UPDES permit provides that any person who knowingly
makes any false statement, representation or certification in any record or
other document submitted or required to be maintained under this permit,
including monitoring reports or reports of compliance or non-compliance shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $10,000 per violation,
or by imprisonment for not more than six months per violation, or by both
(U.C.A. § 19-5-115(4)).
         (c)   The general UPDES permit provides that any person who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate, any monitoring device or method
required to be maintained under this permit shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine of not more than $10,000 per violation, or by imprisonment for not
more than six months per violation, or by both.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.130) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-
2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.043 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter is intended to relieve any person or
entity from any obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws and
regulations pertaining to clean water and/or storm water runoff.
(Prior Code, § 24.06.140) (Ord. 00-22, passed 6-1-2000; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
STORM WATER PERMITS
§ 154.060 STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT.
   (A)   When required. The city storm water construction activity permit is
required before any person or entity may excavate, grub and clear, grade or
perform construction activity under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Five thousand square feet or greater: any activity disturbing 5,000
square feet of land or more;
      (2)   Common plan of development: construction activity related to
residential building on an individual lot or parcel which is part of a common
plan of development or sale; and
      (3)   Special concern areas: any activity causing disturbance of land
that is likely to result in erosion or the transport of sediment off of the
site by storm water to a degree substantially greater than that which would
occur under natural landscape conditions.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.010)
   (B)   Application. Any person or entity desiring to obtain a storm water
construction activity permit must first file an application with the Public
Works Department. The application shall include a list of required items and a
statement of the city’s best management practices.
      (1)   The application shall include an erosion control plan or storm
water pollution prevention plan and notice of intent (NOI), as applicable.
      (2)   (a)   The applicant shall file the application on or before the
following dates:
            1.   Subdivision: at least five business days prior to the pre-
construction meeting if the applicant proposes to develop a subdivision;
            2.   Site plan: at least five business days prior to the pre-
construction meeting if the applicant proposes to develop a site plan or
amended site plan;
            3.   Common plan of development or building permit: the date that
the applicant submits a building permit application if the applicant proposes
to construct a building on an existing lot or parcel;
            4.   Other: at least five business days prior to when the applicant
intends to perform any type of earth disturbance; and
            5.   No work: no work shall commence until an approved storm water
construction activity permit is obtained by the applicant.
         (b)   If an applicant’s development comes under more than one of the
categories listed above, then the applicant shall submit the storm water
construction activity permit application on the earliest of the listed dates.
      (3)   (a)   Failure to comply with the application dates set forth above
is not a criminal offense, but may delay the applicant’s project.
         (b)   It is unlawful to commence work on a site before obtaining a
required storm water construction activity permit.
      (4)   The applicant for a storm water construction activity permit shall
pay a fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
      (5)   The city shall review the permit application within 14 business
days of receipt and shall approve the application and grant the permit if the
application is complete and meets the criteria set forth in §
154.061 of this chapter. The city shall deny the application if the city
determines that the measures proposed fail to meet the criteria set forth in §
154.061 of this chapter.
      (6)   Unless otherwise revoked or suspended, a storm water construction
activity permit shall be in effect for the full period of the construction
activity. The construction activity will not be considered to be completed
until the following events occur:
         (a)   For permits associated with a subdivision:
            1.   The permittee must complete all required subdivision
improvements; and
            2.   One of the following three events must occur:
               a.   The city issues a final certificate of occupancy for each
lot in the subdivision;
               b.   Individual storm water construction activity permits have
been issued for each lot in the subdivision not having a final occupancy
permit; or
               c.   The property has been re-vegetated or landscaped in a
manner that eliminates erosion and sediment discharge or that brings the
property back to its natural state.
         (b)   For permits associated with a site, the date that the permittee
has completed all required landscaping and all outside construction work
associated with the site plan.
         (c)   For permits associated with a building, the date that the city
issues a final occupancy permit for the structure covered by the building
permit.
         (d)   For permits issued that are not tied to other approvals from the
city, the date that the permittee has completed all work associated with the
permit and takes steps required by the permit to prevent further erosion and
runoff from the site.
      (7)   No storm water construction activity permit shall be considered
terminated until the permittee notifies the city of the completion of the
project and a final inspection is performed by an authorized city inspector to
verify site stabilization. In such cases when a notice of intent was issued,
the permittee shall submit a notice of termination to the state when the City
Inspector has verified the site is stabilized. the permittee shall keep and
maintain all permit-required improvements on the site until the city accepts
the notice of termination.
      (8)   In the event that the proposed construction activity for a site to
which a permit pertains is materially altered from that described in an
original plan in a way that may have a significant impact upon the
effectiveness of the measures and controls described in the original plan, the
permittee shall redline the storm water pollution prevention plan, as set forth
below.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.020)
      (9)   Attachments.
         (a)   1.   For sites:
               a.   With a disturbance area between 5,000 square feet and
43,560 square feet (one acre) and not considered a common plan of development;
and
               b.   Located within a special concern area (as determined by the
city) with any amount of disturbance, an erosion control plan shall be
required.
            2.   The erosion control plan shall identify:
               a.   The general topographic features of the site;
               b.   The direction of existing storm water flows from the site;
               c.   Proposed improvements to the site;
               d.   Locations of best management practices to control quantity
and quality of storm water leaving the site during disturbance, including
restoration; and
               e.   Sequencing plan or narrative.
         (b)   A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), including a
state-issued notice of intent, shall be required for all sites disturbing one
acre or greater and that are less than one acre that are part of a common plan
of development. The SWPPP shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information: (For complete requirements, see the general permit for
construction activities, UTR300000 which can be found on the state’s Department
of Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality, website.)
            1.   A site description (including a map with spot elevations and
contour lines) which includes a description of the nature and location of the
construction activity, a description of the intended sequence of major
activities which will disturb soils for major portions of the site (e.g.,
grubbing, excavation, grading, utilities and infrastructure installation and
the like), and estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of
the site that is expected to be disturbed by excavation, grading or other
activities; and
            2.   A description of the proposed measures and controls that will
be implemented during construction activity and/or while the site is not
stable. The plan must clearly describe the times during the construction
process that the measures will be implemented for each major activity
identified pursuant to division (C)(2)(a) above. The plan shall also state the
name and phone number of the person or entity responsible for implementation of
each control measure.
         (c)   The proposed measures and controls described in the plan shall
be designed to meet the following goals and criteria.
            1.   The proposed measures and controls shall be designed to
prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of
sediment, debris and other construction-related pollutants from the
construction site by storm water runoff into the storm drainage system.
            2.   The proposed measures and controls shall be designed to
prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the deposit, discharge,
tracking by construction vehicles, or dropping of mud, sediment, debris or
other potential pollutants onto public streets and rights-of-way. Any such
discharge shall be cleaned up and removed immediately upon notification to the
permittee or when it otherwise comes to the attention of the permittee. at a
minimum, the deposit or discharge shall be cleaned and removed at the end of
the work shift in which the deposit occurred, or at the end of the workday,
whichever comes first.
            3.   The proposed measures and controls shall consist of best
management practices (BMPs) available at the time that the plan is submitted.
BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to, temporary silt or sediment
fences, sediment traps and detention ponds, gravel construction entrances and
wash down pads to reduce or eliminate off-site tracking, straw bale sediment
barriers, establishment of temporary grasses and permanent vegetative cover,
use of straw mulch as a temporary ground cover, erosion control blankets,
temporary interceptor dikes and swales, storm drain inlet protection, check
dams, pipe slope drains, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining
systems and gabions.
            4.   The proposed measures and controls shall be designed to
preserve existing vegetation, where possible. Disturbed portions of the site
shall be stabilized. Stabilization practices may include temporary seeding,
permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer
strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation and other
appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be
avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in
disturbed portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily
or permanently ceased, but in no case more than 14 days after the construction
activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased,
except under the following circumstances:
               a.   If the initiation of stabilization measures by the
fourteenth day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceases is
precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures
shall be initiated as soon as practicable; or
               b.   If construction activity on a portion of the site is
temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing will resume within 21 days, temporary
stabilization measures need not be initiated on that portion of the site.
            5.   The proposed measures and controls shall be employed to
minimize the risk of discharge of construction-related pollutants (such as
paint, thinners, solvents and other chemicals) from the construction site. Such
measures may include implementation of storage practices to minimize exposure
of the material to storm water as well as spill prevention and response.
         (d)   PLAN shall be defined as the erosion control plan or storm water
pollution prevention plan, as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.030)
(Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 154.061 PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The recipient of a storm water construction activity permit (the permittee)
shall install the erosion and sediment control measures required by the
approved plan before commencing any construction activity on the site to which
the plan applies or at such times indicated in the plan. The erosion and
sediment control measures shall be properly installed and maintained in
accordance with the permit, the manufacturers’ specifications and good
engineering practices. The permittee shall maintain such measures on the site
until the city accepts the termination of the permit pursuant to §
154.060(B)(7) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.040) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.062 INSPECTION AND ENTRY.
   (A)   The permittee shall allow any authorized employees and representatives
of the city, representatives of the state’s Division of Water Quality, and
representatives of the EPA to enter the site to which a permit applies at any
time and to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the
permittee.
   (B)   The permittee shall also allow inspection of any records pertaining to
the conditions of the permit. See § 154.045 of this chapter for further
information on inspection authority.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.050) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.063 ENFORCEMENT OF STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT.
   (A)   A storm water construction activity permit shall be enforced as
follows: Any violation may not result in an order to stop construction activity
if:
      (1)   An applicant selects the preferred best management practice for the
site conditions;
      (2)   An applicant implements and properly maintains the best management
practices as described in §
154.038, by the city system; and
      (3)   The violation is a result from a deficiency in the best management
practice.
   (B)   The city shall notify the applicant, in writing, of a violation and
shall provide the applicant a reasonable time of at least 24 hours to correct
the violation; and may perform an inspection to verify that the violation is
corrected.
      (1)   If an applicant does not correct the violation described within the
deadline set in the notice the city shall notify the applicant, in writing,
that the violation has not been corrected;
      (2)   May issue a written warning that construction activity may be
stopped if the violation is not corrected within no less than another 24-hour
period; and
      (3)   May perform an inspection to verify that the violation is
corrected.
   (C)   If an applicant does not correct the violation within the deadline
set, the city:
      (1)   Shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the violation has not
been corrected; and
      (2)   May order the applicant to stop construction activity until the
city performs an inspection to verify that the violation is corrected or the
applicant demonstrates that the violation is corrected through electronic site
inspection.
   (D)   The city shall not impose the process described above later than 30
days after the day on which the city provides the notice of violation or
continuing violation.
   (E)   The city may issue a stop work order earlier than described above if
the city has a clearly documented reason articulating an immediate threat to
water quality.
   (F)   The city may recoup the costs incurred to correct a violation the
applicant refuses to correct after the enforcement process has been exhausted
if the city, at the time of clean up, determines a significant harm to water
quality or the storm water system is imminent.
   (G)   The city has developed a checklist for a pre-construction prevention
plan review that is consistent with the federal Clean Water Act and had
developed and published standard operating procedures.
   (H)   The applicant, or an applicant's designee, shall participate in the
pre-construction site inspections.
   (I)   The city may conduct a pre-construction site inspection in person or
using an electronic site inspection tool.
   (J)   The city shall conduct an oversight inspection through an electronic
site inspection.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.060) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.064 STORM WATER CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall connect to the city’s storm water
system, either directly or indirectly, without first obtaining a storm water
connection permit from the city.
   (B)   When permit required. Any person beginning new construction
(development of an undeveloped parcel) or redevelopment (as defined in this
chapter) in the city shall obtain a storm water connection permit before
commencing construction when a connection to the storm water system is planned.
   (C)   Application. The applicant for a storm water connection permit shall
submit the following to the city:
      (1)   Application form. A completed application form;
      (2)   BMP plan. A plan incorporating storm water BMPs that meet the
requirements of §
154.043 of this chapter;
      (3)   Maintenance plan. A plan outlining how the applicant will maintain
the storm water improvements listed in the application; and
      (4)   Fee. A fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Application when submitted. The application for a storm water
connection shall be submitted to the city as part of the building permit
application, at least five business days prior to prior to a subdivision pre-
construction meeting, or at least 30 days prior to commencement of the work.
   (E)   Review.
      (1)   The storm water connection permit application shall be reviewed by
the City Engineer for subdivision and commercial site plans or by the Building
Official for private residences, and/or the Public Works Director or his or her
designee.
      (2)   The permit application shall either approved, approved with
conditions or denied. Either the permit applicant or the city may appeal the
city staff’s decision to the City Council.
   (F)   Factors. When deciding whether to approve, conditionally approve or
deny a storm water connection permit application, the following factors shall
be considered:
      (1)   Whether the application complies with applicable city ordinances
and policies;
      (2)   Whether the application complies with the city’s storm drainage
master plan and storm water management plan;
      (3)   Whether the proposed connection incorporates effective best
management practices;
      (4)   Whether the proposed connection introduces pollutants into the
storm drain system;
      (5)   Whether the proposed connection creates a safety hazard;
      (6)   Whether the proposed connection affects the integrity of the storm
water system infrastructure; and
      (7)   Whether the applicant has submitted a maintenance plan ensuring the
proper maintenance and upkeep of the applicant’s connection and on-site storm
water improvements.
   (G)   Failure. Failure to construct or maintain storm water improvements in
accordance with an approved storm water connection permit shall be a violation
of this subchapter.
   (H)   As-built plans. Any person connecting to the storm water system shall
provide the city’s Storm Water Utility with “as-built” plans showing the
details and the location of the connection. The plans shall be in a format that
is acceptable to the city.
   (I)   Design. Connections to the storm water system shall be designed in
accordance with the Public Works Standards.
   (J)   Exempt connections. The following connections to the storm water
system are exempt from the permitting requirements of this section:
      (1)   Connections from single-family residences; provided that, the
runoff from the residences is handled according to a plat or site plan approved
by the city. However, any person desiring to use a basement pump, foundation
drain, or other related fixture directly or indirectly connecting to the storm
water system must obtain a storm water connection permit; and
      (2)   Connections made for a city-sponsored project, constructed either
by the city or a contractor hired by the city.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.070) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.065 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter:
   (A)   Actions by a public utility, the city or any other entity to remove or
alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, reopen a public
thoroughfare to traffic or otherwise protect public health and safety and
welfare; and
   (B)   Bona fide agricultural and farming operations which constitute the
principal use of any lot or tract of ground located within the city and which
meet the requirements of the zoning code of the city. Bona fide agricultural
activities are exempt from this requirement; however, such activities should be
performed in such a manner as to prevent pollutants (including, but not limited
to, sediment, fertilizers, and contaminated irrigation tailwater) from entering
the storm water system. Construction activities and stockpiling of import
material on agricultural or farming property are not exempt activities.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.090) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.066 APPEAL.
   (A)   An applicant for a storm water construction activity permit or a
permittee of a storm water construction activity permit may appeal any decision
or directive made by the city or its representatives pursuant to this
subchapter. The party desiring to appeal shall file a notice of appeal with the
City Recorder’s within ten days of the decision or directive being appealed.
The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address and daytime telephone number;
      (2)   A short statement describing the basis for the appeal; and
      (3)   The relief sought by the appellant.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Recorder shall schedule
an appeal with the Public Works Director for its consideration and final
determination.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.100) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.067 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter is intended to relieve any person or
entity from any obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws and
regulations pertaining to clean water and/or storm water runoff.
(Prior Code, § 24.07.110) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
LONG-TERM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
§ 154.080 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to address post-construction storm water
runoff from new development and redevelopment construction sites in order to
maintain compliance with the UPDES general permit for discharges from small
municipal separate storm sewer systems.
(Prior Code, § 24.08.010) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.081 CONTROLS REQUIRED.
   Long-term (post-construction) storm water control measures shall be required
at all new and redevelopment sites. BMPs shall be selected, designed,
installed, operated and maintained in such a way as necessary to protect water
quality and reduce the discharge of pollutants.
(Prior Code, § 24.08.020) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.082 AGREEMENT; AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (A)   All new development and redevelopment sites containing privately owned
and maintained BMPs may be required to enter into a long-term storm water
management agreement with the city.
      (1)   This agreement shall contain provisions defining:
         (a)   Construction responsibilities;
         (b)   BMP(s) ownership and maintenance;
         (c)   Inspection and maintenance report responsibilities;
         (d)   Oversight inspection authority by the city, including permission
to access property;
         (e)   Noticing requirements;
         (f)   Repair responsibilities;
         (g)   City’s corrective action authority; and
         (h)   City ability to recoup repair and/or maintenance costs.
      (2)   The agreement shall run with the land.
   (B)   See also § 154.045 of this chapter for the city’s authority to obtain
access to sites and properties containing long-term storm water control
measures.
(Prior Code, § 24.08.030) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.083 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT.
   All new development or redevelopment projects, whose subdivision or site
development application date is on or after 3-1-2020 are required to low impact
development approaches to land development as detailed in the Public Works
Standards.
(Prior Code, § 24.08.050) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
§ 154.084 RETENTION OF SPECIFIC RAINFALL EVENT.
   All new development or redevelopment projects, whose subdivision or site
development application date is on or after 3-1-2020 are required to manage
rainfall on-site and prevent the off-site discharge of the precipitation from
all rainfall events of a specific rainfall event as detailed in the Public
Works Standards.
(Prior Code, § 24.08.060) (Ord. 20-01, passed 1-2-2020; Ord. 25-03, passed 1-
16-2025)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Short title
   
155.002   Purposes
   
155.003   Final plat required before lots may be sold or transferred
   
155.004   Enactment
   
155.005   Applicability and authority
   
155.006   “Subdivision” defined
   
155.007   Dedication by plat of public streets and other public places
   
155.008   Fees
   
155.009   Prohibited acts
   
155.010   Enforcement
   
155.011   Legal lot and required licenses and permits, including building
permits
   
155.012   When an applicant is entitled to approval of an application;
exceptions; city may not impose unexpressed requirements; city required to
comply with the requirements of this chapter
   
155.013   City imposed requirements and exactions on application approval
   
155.014   Restrictions for solar and other energy devices
   
155.015   Validity
   
155.016   Required subdivision standards
   
155.017   Revisions and amendments to the Act and/or Utah Code
   
155.018   Definitions
Pre-Application or Concept Plan Meeting (Optional for Some Subdivision
Applications)
   
155.030   Pre-application or concept plan meeting; purposes
   
155.031   Pre-application or concept plan meeting application; requirements and
time frame
   
155.032   Pre-application or concept plan meeting; Development Review Team
(DRT) discussion only
   
155.033   Actions following a pre-application or concept plan meeting; Planning
Commission presentation (optional for some subdivision applications)
   
155.034   Pre-application or concept plan; not an application for subdivision
approval
Preliminary Subdivision Plat Applications
   
155.045   Intent and preliminary subdivision plat applications
   
155.046   Land use authorities
   
155.047   Preliminary subdivision plat application review procedures
   
155.048   Determination of a complete preliminary subdivision plat application
   
155.049   Appeal of a determination of application completeness or
incompleteness by Department
   
155.050   Preliminary subdivision plat application; Development Review Team
(DRT) review and recommendations
   
155.051   Effect of approval, with or without revisions, of a preliminary
subdivision plat application and effective period
   
155.052   Site preparation work, sale of lots prohibited until final plat
approval
   
155.053   Preliminary subdivision plat applications
   
155.054   Restrictions for solar and other energy devices
   
155.055   Landscaping and infrastructure improvements
   
155.056   Building permits
   
155.057   Appeal of preliminary subdivision plat application decision
   
155.058   Exceptions for geologic hazard timelines
   
155.059   Public comment permitted
Final Subdivision Plat Applications
   
155.070   Intent
   
155.071   Final subdivision plat applications; preliminary subdivision plat
approval required
   
155.072   Land use authorities and final subdivision plat application types
   
155.073   Final subdivision plat application review procedures; requirements
   
155.074   Determination of a complete final subdivision plat application
   
155.075   Appeal of a determination of application completeness or
incompleteness by the Department
   
155.076   Final subdivision plat applications
   
155.077   Restrictions for solar and other energy devices
   
155.078   Effect of approval, with or without conditions, of a final
subdivision plat application and effective period
   
155.079   Recordation of a plat without necessary signatures; not an approved
final plat
   
155.080   Expiration of subdivision application
   
155.081   Dedication of streets and other public places
   
155.082   Common area parcels on a final subdivision plat; no separate
ownership; ownership interest equally divided among other parcels on the final
subdivision plat and included in description of other parcels
   
155.083   Subdivision landscaping and infrastructure improvements
   
155.084   Appeal of final subdivision plat application decision
   
155.085   Exceptions to review cycles
Combined Preliminary/Final, No-Dedication Subdivisions of Five or Fewer Lots
   
155.095   Separate application process for no-dedication subdivisions of five
or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units
   
155.096   Application requirements for a no-dedication subdivision of five or
fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units
   
155.097   Determination of a complete no-dedication subdivision of five or
fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units application
   
155.098   Appeal of a determination of application completeness or
incompleteness by the Department
   
155.099   No-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units application review procedures
   
155.100   Effect of approval, with or without requirements, of a no-dedication
subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units
application and effective period
   
155.101   Recordation of a subdivision plat without necessary signatures
   
155.102   Expiration of subdivision application
   
155.103   Approval of no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no
more than ten dwelling units shall occur once only
   
155.104   Site preparation work prohibited
   
155.105   Subdivision landscaping and infrastructure improvements; warranty
   
155.106   Appeal of no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more
than ten dwelling units application decision
Cluster Subdivision Option
   
155.120   Purpose
   
155.121   Intent
   
155.122   Allowed uses and development standards
   
155.123   Applicable zoning districts
   
155.124   Lot size and requirements
   
155.125   Maximum number of lots and future divisions
   
155.126   Approval procedures and applications
   
155.127   Land use authority review and approval
   
155.128   Open space and agricultural use
Subdivision Improvement Assurance and Improvement Completion Warranty Standards
   
155.140   Minimum requirements
   
155.141   Required infrastructure/improvement completion assurance
   
155.142   Estimated cost of installation of public landscaping and improvements
   
155.143   Improvement completion warranty
   
155.144   Improvement completion assurance and completion warranty agreements
   
155.145   Site preparation work and any development activity occurring before
required infrastructure is completed; improvement completion assurance
Atypical Subdivision Streets and Lot Configurations
   
155.160   Purpose
   
155.161   Connectivity; applicable General Plan policy
   
155.162   Road, street and right-of-way connectivity required; limited
exception
   
155.163   Flag lot(s)
   
155.164   Private driveway
   
155.165   Public utility lots
Development Agreements
   
155.180   Purposes
   
155.181   Scope
   
155.182   Requirements
   
155.183   Procedures
   
155.184   Review
   
155.185   Effect of approval
   
155.186   Binding nature of development agreements
   
155.187   Expenses
   
155.188   Enforcement
Subdivision Plat Revisions, Vacations of Public Streets, Exchange of Title,
Renaming Plats
   
155.200   Vacating, altering or amending a subdivision plat
   
155.201   Petition to vacate a public street or municipal utility easement
   
155.202   Exchange of title (lot line adjustment)
   
155.203   Subdivision or plat name changes
Noticing
   
155.215   Purpose
   
155.216   Land use ordinance amendments
   
155.217   Public meetings and public hearings
   
155.218   Notice for an amendment to a subdivision
   
155.219   Notice for vacation of or change to a street
   
155.220   Notice to vacate a public street or municipal utility easement
   
155.221   Third-party notice; high priority transportation corridor notice
   
155.222   Canal owner or operator; notice to the city
   
155.223   Notice for an amendment to public improvements in a subdivision or
development
   
155.224   Notice challenge
   
155.225   Courtesy notice
Appeals
   
155.240   Purpose
   
155.241   Appeals of Department decisions administering or interpreting this
chapter
   
155.242   Appeals of determinations of application completeness or
incompleteness by Department
   
155.243   Appeals of a Land Use Authority decision
   
155.244   Appeals of city geologic hazard standards and requirements or
subdivision improvement plans
   
155.245   Appeals of final decisions
Standards for Subdivision Development, Design and Construction
   
155.260   Public works standards
   
155.261   Design and construction standards applicable to all subdivisions
   
155.262   Design and configuration of lots and parcels
   
155.263   Street design requirements
   
155.264   Street naming
   
155.265   Road and street curvature and alignment requirements
   
155.266   Frontage on freeways or major highways
   
155.267   Minimum roadbed and paving
   
155.268   Maximum road and street grade
   
155.269   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters required
   
155.270   Traffic-control devices
   
155.271   Pedestrian crosswalks
   
155.272   Lot size standards
   
155.273   Easement standards
   
155.274   All utilities to be underground
   
155.275   Alleys
   
155.276   Secondary irrigation water; required
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Brigham City
Subdivision Ordinance”, identified within this document and other documents as
“ordinance”, “the ordinance”, “this chapter”, “subdivision ordinance” or “land
use ordinance”. This chapter is a city land use ordinance, as defined by U.C.A.
§§ 10-9a et seq., as amended (“Act”).
(Prior Code, § 25.01.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.002 PURPOSES.
   This chapter is adopted to promote the purposes of the Act and to provide
for the orderly division and development of land, and to secure various
efficiencies in the installation, construction and maintenance of all necessary
infrastructure, facilities and services.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.003 FINAL PLAT REQUIRED BEFORE LOTS MAY BE SOLD OR TRANSFERRED.
   As provided by the Act, a final subdivision plat shall be approved, as
required by this chapter and the Act, before such final subdivision plat is
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and lots are sold, or ownership
transferred.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.004 ENACTMENT.
   (A)   The Council adopts this chapter under the provisions of the Act and
all other authorities and provisions of state and federal statutory laws, and
all common laws, as applicable.
   (B)   This chapter is a land use ordinance of the city, as authorized and
identified by the Act.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.005 APPLICABILITY AND AUTHORITY.
   Upon adoption by the Council, and its effective date of February 1, 2024,
this chapter shall supersede the city’s previously adopted subdivision
ordinance and shall govern the division of any lands located within the
municipal boundaries of the city.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.006 “SUBDIVISION” DEFINED.
   For this chapter, and as provided by the Act, SUBDIVISION shall have the
meaning provided in §
155.018 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.007 DEDICATION BY PLAT OF PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   A plat that is signed, dedicated and acknowledged by each owner of
record, and approved according to the procedures of this chapter and the Act
operates, when recorded in the office of the County Recorder, as a dedication
of all public streets and other public places, as identified, and vests the fee
of those parcels of land with the city for the public uses named or intended on
the plat.
   (B)   The dedication established by this section does not impose liability
upon the city for public streets and other public places that are dedicated in
this manner but are unimproved unless:
      (1)   Adequate financial assurance is provided as required by this
chapter and the Act; and
      (2)   The city has accepted the dedication.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.070) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.008 FEES.
   The Council, by resolution, shall establish necessary fees payable for
application processing and review, inspection services and other services
provided by the city, as required by this chapter. The Council may amend such
fees from time to time by resolution, as determined necessary by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.080) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.009 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   An owner of land located in a subdivision who transfers or sells any
lot or land before a final subdivision plat has been approved and recorded, as
required by this chapter and the Act, is guilty of a violation of this chapter
and the Act for each lot or parcel transferred or sold.
   (B)   The description by metes and bounds in an instrument of transfer or
other documents used in the process of selling or transferring lots does not
exempt the transaction from being a violation of this chapter and the Act or
from the penalties or remedies provided by this chapter or the Act.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the recording of an
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring real property that violates this chapter and the Act:
      (1)   Does not affect the validity of the instrument or another document;
and
      (2)   Does not affect whether the property that is the subject of the
instrument or other document complies with the land use ordinances of the city
including this chapter or other land use ordinances.
   (D)   The city may bring an action against an owner to require the property
to conform to the provisions of this section, this chapter or the Act.
   (E)   (1)   An action under this section by the city may include an
injunction, abatement, merger of title or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate the violation.
      (2)   The city needs only to establish a violation to obtain an
injunction.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.010 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The city may take all actions, allowed under the law, to ensure
compliance and enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)    Failure of the city to enforce any provision, or seek remedies to
any violation of this chapter, may not legalize any such violation.
   (B)   The city, or any adversely affected owner of the property, in which
violations of this chapter are occurring, or are about to occur may, in
addition to other remedies provided by law, institute:
      (1)   Injunctions, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate actions;
or
      (2)   Proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful
building, use or act.
   (C)   (1)   An action under this section by the city may include an
injunction, abatement, merger of title or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate the violation.
      (2)   The city needs only to establish a violation to obtain an
injunction
   (D)   The city may bring an action against a property owner to require that
the property conform and comply with the provisions of this chapter and the
Act.
   (E)   An action brought by the city against a property owner and authorized
by this chapter and the Act may include an injunction, abatement, merger of
title or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate
the violation of this chapter.
   (F)   To enforce this chapter, the city may withhold or deny the approval or
issuance of any required land use permit or building permit, as provided by §
155.011 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.100) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.011 LEGAL LOT AND REQUIRED LICENSES AND PERMITS, INCLUDING BUILDING
PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   From the effective date of this chapter, no approval, including
the issuance of any building permit, may be issued by the city unless such
approval complies with the requirements and provisions of this chapter,
including a determination that the lot or parcel, proposed for the approval or
permit, is a legal lot created pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or
prior enactments of this chapter, or is a legal lot of record recorded on, or
before 11-1-1986.
      (2)   Any approval or permit issued in conflict with the provisions and
requirements of this chapter shall be void and invalid.
   (B)   It is unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter or change the use of
any building or other structure located within the city without the approval of
a building permit, unless such construction, reconstruction, alteration or
change is exempt, as provided by the city’s adopted building codes.
   (C)   Except as provided by §
155.012 of this chapter, the city’s Building Official may not approve, and may
not issue, a building permit unless the plans for the proposed erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or use conform to all adopted land use
ordinances and the building and fire codes, as adopted.
   (D)   The city’s Building Official may not approve and or issue any permit
or license that would be a violation of this chapter or other land use
ordinances.
   (E)   No city employee may approve and issue any permit or license that
would be a violation of this chapter or other land use ordinances.
   (F)   Any approval, permit or license issued in conflict with any standard
or requirement of this chapter, or other land use ordinances, shall be void and
invalid.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.110) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.012 WHEN AN APPLICANT IS ENTITLED TO APPROVAL OF AN APPLICATION;
EXCEPTIONS; CITY MAY NOT IMPOSE UNEXPRESSED REQUIREMENTS; CITY REQUIRED TO
COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   An applicant is entitled to the approval of a land use application if
the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter, and the city’s
other land use ordinances, land use maps, or official maps as may be applicable
and in effect at the time the Community and Economic Development Department
(“Department”) determines the land use application complete and all fees are
paid, unless:
      (1)   A Land Use Authority, on the record, finds that a compelling,
countervailing public interest would be jeopardized by approving the
application; or
      (2)   In the manner provided by local ordinance and before the land use
application is submitted, the city has formally initiated proceedings to amend
its land use ordinances in a manner that would prohibit approval of the
application as submitted.
   (B)   The city shall process a land use application without regard to
proceedings initiated to amend a land use ordinance, including this chapter and
the zoning ordinance if:
      (1)   One hundred and eighty calendar days have passed since the
proceedings were initiated; and
      (2)   The proceedings have not resulted in an enactment that prohibits
approval of the land use application, as submitted.
   (C)   If the final subdivision plat, as required by §§
155.070 through
155.083 of this chapter conforms to the requirements of this chapter, and the
city’s other land use ordinances, and has received written approvals or
approval recommendations from the various authorities identified by §
155.075(A) of this chapter the final subdivision plat shall be approved.
   (D)    The city may not impose any requirement or condition on an applicant
for any approval, permit or license required by this chapter that is not
expressed:
      (1)   In the approval required by this chapter or in documents on which
such approval is based; or
      (2)   In this chapter or the city’s other land use ordinances.
   (E)   The city may not withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
because of an applicant’s failure to comply with a requirement that is not
expressed:
      (1)   In the building permit, or in documents on which the building
permit is based; or
      (2)   In this chapter, or the city’s other land use ordinances.
   (F)   The city shall be bound by the terms and standards of this chapter and
the city’s other land use ordinances, as applicable, and shall comply with all
mandatory requirements and provisions of such ordinances and the Act.
   (G)   The city shall process and render a decision on each land use
application required by this chapter with reasonable diligence.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.130) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.013 CITY IMPOSED REQUIREMENTS AND EXACTIONS ON APPLICATION APPROVAL.
   The city may not impose any requirement(s) or exaction(s) on any approval
required by this chapter unless:
   (A)   An essential link exists between a legitimate governmental interest
and each requirement or exaction; and
   (B)   Each requirement or exaction is roughly proportionate, in both nature
and extent, to the impact of the proposed subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.140) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.014 RESTRICTIONS FOR SOLAR AND OTHER ENERGY DEVICES.
   A Land Use Authority may refuse to approve or renew any plat, subdivision
plan, or dedication of any street or other ground, if deed restrictions,
covenants or similar binding agreements running with the land for the lots
covered by the plat or subdivision prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting
reasonably sited and designed solar collectors, clotheslines or other energy
devices based on renewable resources from being installed on buildings erected
on lots or parcels covered by the plat or subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.150) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.015 VALIDITY.
   If any subchapter, section, division, sentence, standard or requirement of
this chapter is found to be invalid, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
finding shall not affect the validity of any other subchapter, section,
division, sentence, standard or requirement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.160) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.016 REQUIRED SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   (A)   As provided by the Act, the city may adopt all land use standards as
determined necessary by the Council.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, the city may not adopt or impose
any land use ordinance, requirement, regulation, condition or standard that
conflicts with a provision of the Act, any other state law or any federal law.
   (C)   The city may adopt land use standards that exceed the standards of the
Act, any other state law, or any federal law, complying with division (B)
above, if such standards are found to be in the interests of the city, as
determined by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.170) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.017 REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO THE ACT AND/OR UTAH CODE.
   All references to the Act, Utah Code or federal statutes, as provided by
this chapter for the purposes of reference, understanding or clarity, shall be
automatically revised and amended to reference successor laws, titles,
chapters, sections and subsections of the Act, Utah Code and federal laws, as
revised and amended from time to time. As the Act, Utah Code and federal laws
are amended, such amendments affecting any procedural requirements of this
chapter, including any figures, such shall be automatically amended to conform
and comply with such act, Utah Code and federal law amendments.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.180) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.018 DEFINITIONS.
   This chapter provides definitions for terms for which a definition is
considered necessary. Words not defined shall have a meaning consistent with
the Act, the Utah Code and/or Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary, latest
edition, whichever is most applicable. For this chapter, if a conflict arises
between an illustration and a definition, the definition shall apply.
   ACCESS. The provision of vehicular and/or pedestrian ingress and egress to
any lot, parcel, building or structure.
   ACCESS RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land which is part of a lot and provides
access to another lot.
   ACT, THE. Municipal Land Use, Development and Management Act (U.C.A. Title
10, Chapter 9a). Includes only this title and chapter and no other title or
chapter of Utah Code.
   ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION. Any form of human-powered mode of transportation,
including walking or bicycling.
   ADJACENT (OR ADJOINING). Sharing a common boundary.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY. A lot or parcel that has any portion of common boundary
with another lot or parcel.
   ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS/DECISIONS. The application of standards to a set of
facts. ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS do not create legislation or have broad policy
effects but apply existing regulations. See also LAND USE DECISION.
   ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY. The Development Review Team unless
otherwise specified.
   AFFECTED ENTITY. A county, municipality, local district, special service
district under U.C.A. Title 17D, Chapter 1, Special Service District Act,
school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under U.C.A. Code
Title 11, Chapter 13, Interlocal Cooperation Act, specified public utility,
property owner, property owner’s association or the state’s Department of
Transportation, if:
      (1)   The entity’s services or facilities are likely to require expansion
or significant modification because of the intended use of land;
      (2)   The entity has filed with the city a copy of the entity’s general
or long-range plan; or
      (3)   The entity has filed with the city a request for notice during the
same calendar year and before the city provides notice to an affected entity.
   AFFECTED OWNER. The owner of real property that is:
      (1)   A single project;
      (2)   The subject of a land-use approval that triggers a referendum
timely challenged in accordance with U.C.A. § 20A-7-601(5)(a); and
      (3)   Determined to be legally referable under U.C.A. § 20A-7-602.8.
   APPEAL AUTHORITY. The person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by ordinance to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use
application or a variance.
   APPLICANT. Any person(s) presenting an application for approval required by
this chapter.
   APPLICATION. A written request for approval, completed in a manner
prescribed by this chapter for review and decision by a Land Use Authority.
   APPLICATION, COMPLETE. An application that includes all information required
by this chapter and payment of all applicable fees.
   APPLICATION, INCOMPLETE. An application that lacks any information required
by this chapter or the payment of all applicable fees.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT. The person with written authorization to represent the
property owner(s).
   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards
(setbacks) have been provided; except that, land with an average grade
exceeding 15% slope shall not be considered BUILDABLE AREA.
   BUILDING/BUILDABLE ENVELOPE. The three-dimensional space on a lot or parcel
within which a building or structure is permitted. This three-dimensional space
is created by the maximum building height and the minimum front, rear and side
yard setback requirements, as established for the zoning district.
   BUILDING LINE. The line circumscribing the buildable area of a lot.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated by the city and responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the city’s adopted building codes.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required by the city’s building codes and
authorizing a construction activity.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The duly elected Mayor of Brigham City.
   CITY. The political subdivision of Brigham City, Utah, a Utah municipal
corporation.
   CITY ATTORNEY. An attorney admitted to practice law in the State of Utah and
so appointed by the city.
   CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The duly elected City Council of Brigham City,
Utah.
   CITY ENGINEER. The civil engineer licensed in the State of Utah and so
appointed by the city.
   CITY RECORDER. The person serving as the keeper of the city’s archives and
the preserver and manager of official records and other land use documents and
so appointed by the city.
   CITY STAFF. Staff from various city departments involved with the review and
in certain cases the approval of land use applications.
   CLEAR VIEW AREA. Areas at intersecting streets and driveways where
unobstructed vision is maintained, as required by any city land use ordinance.
   CLUSTER SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land in which the lots have an area
less than the minimum lot area required by the zoning district in which the
subdivision is located, but which complies with the cluster subdivision
provisions of this chapter.
   COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION. The duly appointed Planning Commission of
Brigham City, Utah.
   COMMON AREA. Facilities and land under common ownership.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Any area reserved and set aside for recreational uses,
landscaping or open space areas for the common use and enjoyment of the owners.
   COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The person so appointed by the
city, or designee.
   CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING. As defined by the Act.
   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE MATERIALS. Sand, gravel or rock aggregate.
   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE MATERIALS OPERATIONS. The extraction, excavation,
processing or reprocessing of critical infrastructure materials.
   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE MATERIALS OPERATOR. A person, corporation,
association, partnership, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian,
fiduciary, agent, or other organization or representative, either public or
private, including a successor, assign, affiliate, subsidiary and related
parent company, that:
      (1)   Owns, controls or manages a critical infrastructure materials
operation; and
      (2)   Has produced commercial quantities of critical infrastructure
materials from the critical infrastructure materials operations.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A road, street or right-of-way with only one outlet and not
providing continuing road, street or right-of-way connections to adjacent
property(ies), but providing a turnaround with a radius, or another layout, for
reverse traffic movements.
   CULINARY WATER AUTHORITY. The department, agency or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of the culinary water
system and sources for the subject property. For this chapter, the city’s
Public Works Department is the CITY’S CULINARY WATER AUTHORITY.
   CUT. The process of lowering the natural grade of all or a portion of
property or the depth or the volume of such material removal. Reference to a
CUT shall be measured from the natural grade.
   DECLARATION. A legal instrument by which property is subjected to the
provisions of the state’s Condominium Ownership Act, or a declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions.
   DEDICATION. The setting aside of land by an owner for any public use and
owned by a public agency.
   DENSITY, GROSS. The intensity or number of non-residential and residential
uses expressed in terms of unit equivalents per acre or lot or units per acre.
DENSITY is a function of both the number and type of dwelling units and/or non-
residential square footage and the total land area.
   DENSITY, NET. The intensity or number of non-residential and residential
uses expressed in terms of unit equivalents per acre or lot or units per acre.
DENSITY is a function of both the number and type of dwelling units and/or non-
residential square footage and the total land area, minus any dedicated land(s)
or common areas.
   DEPARTMENT. The Brigham City Community and Economic Development Department.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use that
creates additional demand and need for public facilities;
      (2)   Any change in the use of a building or structure that creates
additional demand and need for public facilities; or
      (3)   Any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and
needs for public facilities.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM (DRT). Staff from various city departments and other
agencies involved with the review and in certain cases the recommendation of
land use applications.
   DIVISION or PLANNING DIVISION. The Planning Division of the Community and
Economic Development Department.
   EASEMENT. That portion of a lot or parcel reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the fee owner(s) of the property. The EASEMENT
may be for use under, on or above a lot or parcel.
   ESCROW. A deposit of cash or approved alternate in place of cash held to
ensure a guarantee.
   EXACTION. A requirement or condition imposed by a Land Use Authority on a
land use application if:
      (1)   An essential link exists between a legitimate governmental interest
and each exaction; and
      (2)   The exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent,
to the impact of the proposed development.
   FILL. The process of raising the natural grade, or the depth or the volume
of material. The reference for a FILL shall be measured from natural grade.
   FINAL DECISION. The final vote or decision taken by a Land Use Authority on
a land use application.
   FIRE AUTHORITY. The department, agency or public entity with the
responsibility to review and recommend the feasibility of fire protection and
suppression services for the subject property. For the purposes of this
chapter, the city’s Fire Department is identified as the CITY’S FIRE AUTHORITY.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface or ground
waters from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official maps of the city on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated areas of flood hazard.
   FLOODPLAIN. Land that:
      (1)   Is within the 100-year floodplain designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency; or
      (2)   Has not been studied or designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, but presents a likelihood of experiencing chronic flooding
or a catastrophic flood event because the land has characteristics that are
like those of a 100-year floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   FRONTAGE. All areas of a lot or parcel that adjoin a public or private road
or street measured along the property line.
   GENERAL PLAN. The Brigham City General Plan setting forth various city
policies, including the city’s possible annexation areas.
   GEOLOGIC HAZARD.
      (1)   A surface fault rupture;
      (2)   Shallow ground water;
      (3)   Liquefaction;
      (4)   A landslide;
      (5)   Debris flow;
      (6)   Unstable soil;
      (7)   A rockfall; or
      (8)   Any other geologic condition that presents a risk:
         (a)   To life;
         (b)   Of substantial loss of real property; or
         (c)   Of substantial damage to real property.
   GRADING. A cut or fill, or the act of cutting or filling.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The elevation of the surface of the land after the
completion of any grading.
   GRADE, NATURAL. The elevation of the surface of the land existing before any
grading or other human activity.
   HIGH PRIORITY TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR. A transportation corridor identified
as a high priority transportation corridor under U.C.A. § 72-5-403.
   IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed under U.C.A. Title 11, Chapter 36a,
Impact Fees Act.
   IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE. A cash deposit or cash security held with
an FDIC financial institution required by the city to guaranty the proper
completion of landscaping or an infrastructure improvement required as a
condition precedent to:
      (1)   Recording a subdivision plat; or
      (2)   Development of a commercial, industrial, mixed-use or multi-family
project.
   IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY. An applicant’s unconditional warranty that the
applicant’s installed and accepted landscaping or infrastructure improvement:
      (1)   Complies with the city’s written standards for design, materials
and workmanship; and
      (2)   Will not fail in any material respect, as a result of poor
workmanship or materials, within the improvement warranty period.
   IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY PERIOD. The period:
      (1)   No later than one year after the city’s acceptance of required
landscaping; or
      (2)   No later than one year after the city’s acceptance of required
infrastructure, unless the city:
         (a)   Determines for a good cause that a one-year period would be
inadequate to protect the public health, safety and welfare; and
         (b)   Has substantial evidence, on record:
            1.   Of prior poor performance by the applicant; or
            2.   That the area upon which the infrastructure will be
constructed contains suspect soil and the city has not otherwise required the
applicant to mitigate the suspect soil.
   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT. The permanent infrastructure that is essential
for the public health and safety or that:
      (1)   Is required for human occupation; and
      (2)   An applicant must install:
         (a)   In accordance with the published installation and inspection
specifications for public improvements; and
         (b)   Whether the improvement is public or private, as a condition of:
            1.   Recording a subdivision plat;
            2.   Obtaining a building permit; or
            3.   Developing a commercial, industrial, mixed-use, condominium or
multi-family project.
   INTERNAL LOT RESTRICTION. A platted note, platted demarcation or platted
designation that:
      (1)   Runs with the land; and
      (2)   Creates a restriction that is enclosed within the perimeter of a
lot described on the plat; or designates a development condition that is
enclosed within the perimeter of a lot described on the plat.
   LAND USE APPLICANT. A property owner, or the property owner’s designee, who
submits a land use application affecting or regarding the property owner’s
land.
   LAND USE APPLICATION. An application required by a city land use ordinance
and is submitted by a land use applicant to obtain a land use decision. LAND
USE APPLICATION does not mean an application to enact, amend or repeal a land
use regulation. For the purposes of this chapter, and as examples only, a
preliminary subdivision application and a final subdivision application are
LAND USE APPLICATIONS.
   LAND USE AUTHORITY. A person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by the City Council to act upon a land use application, or if the
City Council has not designated a person, board, commission, agency or other
body, the City Council. For the purposes of this chapter, the Development
Review Team and  Community and Economic Development Director or designee are
both identified as an Administrative Land Use Authority, being designated as
such by the passage of this chapter by the City Council.
   LAND USE DECISION. An administrative decision of a Land Use Authority or
appeal authority regarding:
      (1)   A land use permit;
      (2)   A land use application; or
      (3)   The enforcement of a land use regulation, land use permit or
development agreement.
   LAND USE ORDINANCE. A planning, zoning, development, or subdivision
ordinance of the city, but does not include the General Plan. This chapter is a
LAND USE ORDINANCE of the city.
   LAND USE PERMIT. A permit issued by a Land Use Authority. For the purposes
of this chapter, and as examples only, a preliminary subdivision application
approval and a final subdivision application approval are LAND USE PERMITS.
   LAND USE REGULATION.
      (1)   A legislative decision enacted by ordinance, law, code, map,
resolution, specification, fee or rule that governs the use or development of
land;
      (2)   Includes the adoption or amendment of a zoning map or the text of
the zoning code; and
      (3)   Does not include:
         (a)   A land use decision of the Council acting as the Land Use
Authority, even if the decision is expressed in a resolution or ordinance; or
         (b)   A temporary revision to an engineering specification that does
not materially:
            1.   Increase a land use applicant’s cost of development compared
to the existing specification; or
            2.   Impact a land use applicant’s use of land.
   LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS/DECISIONS. Actions and decisions of the City Council
establishing policy or law. These have broad considerations and impact more
than one individual or property owner. See also LAND USE REGULATION.
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The duly elected City Council of Brigham City, Utah.
   LOCAL DISTRICT. An entity under U.C.A. Title 17B, Limited Purpose Local
Government Entities - Local Districts, and any other governmental or quasi-
governmental entity that is not a county, municipality, school district or the
state.
   LOT. A tract of land, regardless of any label, that is created by and shown
on a subdivision plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   LOT AREA. The total area of a lot or parcel.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines
measured in the direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot or parcel abutting two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
   LOT, FLAG. A lot shaped like a flag on a staff, with a narrow strip of land
(the staff) providing direct access to a public road or street for the lot or
parcel (the flag) and located immediately behind an adjacent lot or parcel that
meets the minimum frontage on a road or street.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT, ILLEGAL. A lot created for any purpose that has not received the
approvals required by this chapter or any other city land use ordinances, or
their prior enactments.
   LOT, IRREGULAR. A lot whose rear property line is not generally parallel to
the front property line, such as a pie-shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the
side property lines are not parallel to each other.
   LOT, LEGAL LOT OF RECORD. A lot or parcel that existed and recorded in the
County Recorder’s office, with a separate property identification number as
provided by the County Recorder and County Assessor, on or before 11-1-1986 and
all lots legally created pursuant to the terms and requirements of any city
land use ordinances and the laws of the state occurring after 11-1-1986.
   LOT LINE. The property lines bounding the lot.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
      (1)   A relocation of a lot line boundary between adjoining lots or
parcels, whether the lots are in the same subdivision, under U.C.A. § 10-9a-
608, with the consent of the owners of record.
      (2)   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT does not mean a new boundary line that:
         (a)   Creates an additional lot; or
         (b)   Constitutes a subdivision.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. For an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street; for
a corner lot or through lot, the lot line adjoining either street adjacent to
the architectural front or main entry. The LOT LINE, FRONT shall be used for
address designation.
   LOT LINE, REAR. Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most
distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of an irregular lot, the
Director shall designate the REAR LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. A SIDE
LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot
line; a SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a street-side lot line.
   LOT WIDTH. For an interior lot or parcel, the shorter horizontal distance
between side lot lines, measured at the required front yard setback line or
rear setback line. For a corner lot, the distance between one of the front lot
lines and the opposite side yard line at the required setback line.
   MAYOR. The duly elected Mayor of Brigham City, Utah.
   MONUMENT. A permanent survey marker established by the County Surveyor and/
or a survey marker set according to the City Engineer’s specifications and
referenced to county survey monuments.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY EASEMENT. An easement that:
      (1)   A plat recorded in the County Recorder’s office described as a
municipal utility easement or otherwise as a utility easement;
      (2)   Is not a protected utility easement or a public utility easement as
defined in U.C.A. § 54-3-27;
      (3)   The city or the city’s affiliated governmental entity owns or
creates; and
      (4)   Either:
         (a)   No person uses or occupies;
         (b)   The city or the city’s affiliated governmental entity uses and
occupies to provide a utility service, including sanitary sewer, culinary
water, electrical, storm water or communications or data lines; or
         (c)   A person uses or occupies with or without an authorized
franchise or other agreement with the city.
   NATURAL FEATURES. Non-human-made land characteristics, including slopes,
wetlands, streams, intermittent drainage channels and native stands of shrubs
or trees.
   NATURAL STATE. Land that has not been subject to grading, removal of
vegetation or any change resulting from human activity.
   NATURAL VEGETATION. Vegetation existing on a lot or parcel prior to any
human activity.
   NATURAL WATERWAYS. Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs or gashes which are naturally occurring drainage channels for
any surface waters.
   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot that legally existed prior to its current land use
designation, but does not now meet the requirements of this chapter, the city
zoning ordinance or other land use ordinances.
   OFFICIAL MAP. A map drawn by city authorities and recorded in the County
Recorder’s office that:
      (1)   Shows actual and proposed rights-of-way, centerline alignments and
setbacks for highways and other transportation facilities;
      (2)   Provides a basis for restricting development in designated rights-
of-way or between designated setbacks to allow the government authorities time
to purchase or otherwise reserve the land; and
      (3)   Has been adopted as an element of the city’s General Plan.
   OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, has a legal
or equitable title to the property.
   PARCEL. Any real property that is not a lot created by and shown on a
subdivision plat recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
   PARCEL BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT. A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining
parcels adjusting the mutual boundary, either by deed or by a boundary line
agreement in accordance with U.C.A. § 57-1-45, if no additional parcel is
created and:
      (1)   None of the property identified in the agreement is subdivided
land;
      (2)   The adjustment is to the boundaries of a single person’s parcels;
or
      (3)   Parcel boundary adjustment does not mean an adjustment of a parcel
boundary line that:
         (a)   Creates an additional parcel; or
         (b)   Constitutes a subdivision.
   PARK STRIP or PLANTING STRIP. An area located between a road or street
right-of-way line and the edge of asphalt or curb, but not including driveways,
sidewalks or trails.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, organization, association,
trust, governmental agency or any other legal entity.
   PLANNING COMMISSION OR COMMISSION. The duly appointed Planning Commission of
Brigham City, Utah.
   PLAT. A map or other graphical representation of lands prepared by a Utah-
licensed land surveyor in accordance with U.C.A. §§ 10-9a-603 or 57-8-13.
   POTENTIAL GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREA. An area that:
      (1)   Is designated by a Utah Geological Survey map, county geologist map
or other relevant map or report as needing further study to determine the
area’s potential for geologic hazard; or
      (2)   Has not been studied by the Utah Geological Survey or a county
geologist, but presents the potential of geologic hazard because the area has
characteristics like those of a designated geologic hazard area.
   PRIVATE STREET. A right-of-way provided for the use of its owners only and
not dedicated to any public agency for the use of the public.
   PROPERTY. Any lot, parcel or other areas of land, including any improvements
thereon, in possession of, or owned, or recorded as the real property of, the
same person.
   PROPERTY LINE. The boundary line of a lot or parcel.
   PUBLIC. That which is under the ownership or control of the United States
Government, the State of Utah or any political subdivision of the State of
Utah, including the city (or any departments or agencies thereof).
   PUBLIC AGENCY.
      (1)   The federal government;
      (2)   The state;
      (3)   A county, municipality, school district, local district, special
service district or other political subdivision of the state; or
      (4)   A charter schools.
   PUBLIC HEARING. A hearing at which members of the public are provided a
reasonable opportunity to comment on the subject of the hearing.
   PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting that is required to be open to the public under
U.C.A. Title 52, Chapter 4, Open and Public Meetings Act.
   PUBLIC POWER DIRECTOR. The person so appointed by the city or designee.
   PUBLIC STREET. A public right-of-way, including a public highway, public
avenue, public boulevard, public parkway, public road, public lane, public
trail or walk, public alley, public viaduct, public subway, public tunnel,
public bridge, public byway, another public transportation easement or another
public way.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Includes every railroad corporation, gas corporation,
electrical corporation, distribution electrical cooperative, wholesale
electrical cooperative, telephone corporation, telegraph corporation, water
corporation, sewerage corporation, heat corporation and independent energy
producer not described in U.C.A. § 54-2-201, where the service is performed
for, or the commodity delivered to the public generally, or in the case of a
gas corporation or electrical corporation where the gas or electricity is sold
or furnished to any member or consumers within the state for domestic,
commercial or industrial use.
   PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT. An interest in land owned by a public utility,
recognized by the state, allowing its owner to install and maintain either a
below grade or above grade public utility transmission line or other directly
related facilities.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The person so appointed by the city or designee.
   PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS. The most recent edition of The Brigham City Public
Works Standards for Development, Design and Construction, as adopted.
   RECEIVING ZONE. An area of the city that the city designates, by ordinance,
as an area in which an owner of land may receive a transferable development
right.
   RECORD OF SURVEY MAP. A map of a survey of land prepared in accordance with
Utah Code.
   REVIEW CYCLE. The occurrence of:
      (1)   The applicant's submittal of a complete subdivision land use
application;
      (2)   The city's review of that subdivision land use application;
      (3)   The city's response to that subdivision land use application; and
      (4)   The applicant's reply to the city's response that addresses each of
the city's required modifications or requests for additional information.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area provided for use by any motorized or non-motorized
means of travel or circulation.
   RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE. A set of rules that govern and prescribe:
      (1)   Parliamentary order and procedure;
      (2)   Ethical behavior; and
      (3)   Civil discourse.
   SANITARY SEWER AUTHORITY.
      (1)   The department, agency or public entity with the responsibility to
review and approve the feasibility of sanitary sewer services or on-site
wastewater systems.
      (2)   For this chapter, the city’s Public Works Director or designee is
the CITY’S SANITARY SEWER AUTHORITY.
   SENDING ZONE. An area of the city that the city designates, by ordinance, as
an area from which an owner of land may transfer a development right.
   SETBACK or REQUIRED YARD AREA. The shortest distance on a lot or parcel
between a building line and a property or designated right-of-way line.
   SLOPE.
      (1)   The level of inclination of land from the horizontal plane
determined by dividing the horizontal run, or distance, of the land into the
vertical rise, or distance, of the same land and converting the resulting
figure into a percentage value; and
      (2)   For this chapter, horizontal run shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
   SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT. A limited purpose local government entity, as
described in U.C.A. § 17D-1-103, that:
      (1)   Is created under the authority of the Utah Constitution Article XI,
§ 7; and
      (2)   Operates under, is subject to, and has the powers set forth in
U.C.A. Title 17D, Chapter 1.
   SPECIFIED PUBLIC AGENCY.
      (1)   The state;
      (2)   A school district; or
      (3)   A charter schools.
   SPECIFIED PUBLIC UTILITY. An electrical corporation, a gas corporation or
telephone corporation, as those terms are defined in U.C.A. § 54-2-1.
   STATE. Includes any department, division or agency of the State of Utah.
   STUB STREET. A transportation facility:
      (1)   Whose right-of-way terminates at a parcel boundary;
      (2)   Consists of a short segment that is intended to serve current and
future development by providing continuity and connectivity of the public
street network; and
      (3)   Is constructed to the property line.
   SUBDIVIDED LAND. The land, tract or lot described in a recorded subdivision
plat.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided
into two or more lots or other division of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or development either on the
installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions.
SUBDIVISION includes:
         (a)   The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat or other recorded instrument,
regardless of whether the division includes all or a portion of a parcel or
lot; and
         (b)   Except as provided in § 64(c) the Act, being U.C.A. § 10-9a-103
(66), divisions of land for residential and non-residential uses, including
land used or to be used for commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
      (2)   SUBDIVISION does not include:
         (a)   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel,
nor the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable
land use ordinance.
         (b)   An agreement recorded with the County Recorder’s office between
owners of adjoining unsubdivided properties, adjusting the mutual boundary by a
boundary line agreement in accordance with U.C.A. § 57-1-45, if:
            1.   No new lot is created; and
            2.   The adjustment does not violate applicable land use
ordinances.
         (c)   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record:
            1.   Revising the legal description of more than one contiguous
parcel of property that is not subdivided land into one legal description
encompassing all such parcels of property; or
            2.   Joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided, if the joinder does not violate
applicable land use ordinances.
         (d)   An agreement between owners of adjoining subdivided properties
adjusting the mutual lot line in accordance with the Act, U.C.A. § 10-9a-603,
if:
            1.   No new dwelling lot or housing unit will result from the
adjustment; and
            2.   The adjustment will not violate any applicable land use
ordinance.
         (e)   A bona fide division or partition of land by deed or another
instrument where the Land Use Authority expressly approves in writing the
division in anticipation of further land use approvals on the parcel or
parcels:
            1.   A parcel boundary adjustment;
            2.   A lot line adjustment;
            3.   A road, street or highway dedication plat; or
            4.   A deed or easement for a road, street or highway purpose.
      (3)   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a subdivision as to
the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the unsubdivided parcel to this
chapter.
   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The civil engineering plans associated with
required infrastructure and city controlled utilities required for a
subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE REVIEW. Review by the city to verify that a
subdivision land use application meets the criteria of the city's subdivision
ordinances.
   SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW. A review of the applicant's subdivision improvement
plans and other aspects of the subdivision land use application to verify that
the application complies with city ordinances and applicable standards and
specifications.
   SUBDIVISION SITE PREPARATION. Any action taken by any person to affect or
alter the existing topography, slope, grade, water channels, drainage patterns,
wetlands, upland areas, vegetation or other natural or existing feature or
characteristic of the subject property.
   SUBJECT PROPERTY. The land area, identified by the parcel identification
number, provided by the County Recorder’s office or County Assessor’s office,
for which an approval is required to comply with this chapter or Utah Code.
   SUSPECT SOIL. Soil that has:
      (1)   A high susceptibility for volumetric change, typically clay-rich,
having more than a 3% swell potential;
      (2)   Bedrock units with high shrink or swell susceptibility; or
      (3)   Gypsiferous silt and clay, gypsum or bedrock units containing
abundant gypsum commonly associated with dissolution and collapse features.
   TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHT. A right to develop and use land that
originates by an ordinance that authorizes a landowner in a designated sending
zone to transfer land use rights from a designated sending zone to a designated
receiving zone.
   UNINCORPORATED. Areas located outside of the incorporated area of a city or
town.
   UTAH CODE. The Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
   VESTED CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE MATERIALS OPERATIONS. Critical infrastructure
materials operations operating in accordance with a legal non-conforming use or
a permit issued by the county that existed or was conducted or otherwise
engaged in before:
      (1)   A political subdivision prohibits, restricts or otherwise limits
the critical infrastructure materials operations; and
      (2)   January 1, 2019.
   WATER INTEREST. Any right to the beneficial use of water, including:
      (1)   Each of the rights listed in U.C.A. § 73-1-11; and
      (2)   An ownership interest in the right to the beneficial use of water
represented by:
         (a)   A contract; or
         (b)   A share in a water company, as defined in U.C.A. § 73-3-3.5.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area of the city, identified on a zoning map, that
provides use and development standards for the geographic area(s) of the city
identified.
   ZONING MAP. A map adopted as part of a land use ordinance that shows zoning
districts, including overlay zones.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. A land use ordinance of Brigham City that provides
provisions, standards, and regulations for the use and development of land
including land use zones, overlays, districts or other areas of the city.
(Prior Code, Ch. 25.15) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-
2024)
PRE-APPLICATION OR CONCEPT PLAN MEETING (OPTIONAL FOR SOME SUBDIVISION
APPLICATIONS)
§ 155.030 PRE-APPLICATION OR CONCEPT PLAN MEETING; PURPOSES.
   (A)   Any applicant proposing to subdivide any land(s) located within the
city for purposes of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or
townhomes may schedule a pre-application meeting with the Department. The city
highly recommends a pre-application meeting prior to submitting a preliminary
subdivision plat application. A pre-application meeting is optional and does
not count toward the maximum number of review cycles for subdivision
applications. The purposes of this meeting are to promote understandings of the
city's requirements for subdivisions, to obtain applications and required
application materials, to obtain feedback on the concept plan, and to review
application procedures.
   (B)   All applicants proposing to subdivide any land(s) located within the
city for purposes of multifamily, cluster, planned unit development,
commercial, or industrial uses shall schedule a concept plan meeting with the
Department as outlined in §
155.031.
 
Pre-Application or Concept Plan Meeting Procedures
       Any applicant proposing a subdivision (excluding a no-dedication
       subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units)
       for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or townhomes may
       schedule a pre-application meeting with the Department before submitting
Step 1 a preliminary subdivision plat application. Any applicant proposing a
       subdivision (excluding a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots
       and no more than ten dwelling units) for multifamily, cluster, planned
       unit development, commercial, or industrial shall schedule a concept
       plan meeting with the Department before submitting a preliminary
       application.
       As applicable, the concept plan application and applicable fees shall be
       submitted to the Department prior to the concept plan meeting. The
       application is only a discussion document and does not constitute a
Step 2 subdivision approval or bind the city or applicant (§
       155.031 and
       155.034). There are no fees associated with the optional pre-application
       meeting process.
       Applicant attends pre-application or concept plan meeting with the DRT.
Step 3 Application standards, requirement, and any other local, state, or
       federal requirement are discussed.
       Department may present information from the pre-application meeting at a
       regular Commission meeting. Commission identifies items for applicant's
Step 4 consideration with a preliminary subdivision plat application.
       Department shall present information from the concept plan meeting at a
       regular Commission meeting.
       Following the Commission meeting, the applicant may file a preliminary
Step 5 subdivision plat application with the Department (See §
       155.047(A)).
 
(Prior Code, § 25.02.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.031 PRE-APPLICATION OR CONCEPT PLAN MEETING APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS AND
TIME FRAME.
   (A)   The pre-application or concept plan meeting application, as
applicable, is a discussion document only. The application is designed to
facilitate and promote discussion, feedback, and understanding, including
application processing and review procedures, subdivision requirements and
standards, and other items that may be considered once a complete preliminary
subdivision plat application is received (see §
155.047(A)). To achieve these purposes, a pre-application or concept plan
meeting application, as applicable, shall provide the following information:
      (1)   A conceptual layout of the proposed subdivision for the entire area
of the subdivision site ("subject property"), including all proposed
subdivision phases, as applicable, and all proposed lots, meeting the minimum
development standards, as required by the zoning district in which the subject
property is located including lot area, lot frontage, lot width, and yard
requirements unless proposed as a cluster subdivision;
      (2)   The conceptual layout shall identify the proposed layout of all
public and private roads and streets, including proposed rights-of-way widths,
road, and street lengths, and proposed connections to all existing roads and
streets and adjoining properties;
      (3)   The number and size of paper copies stated on the application of
the proposed conceptual layout; and
      (4)   An electronic copy of the concept plan in PDF format.
   (B)   Upon receiving a pre-application meeting application for single-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, or townhomes subdivision, within 15 business
days of the request the city shall, schedule the meeting to review the concept
plan and provide initial feedback.
   (C)   Upon receiving a concept plan meeting application for multifamily,
cluster, planned unit development, commercial, or industrial subdivision, the
city shall schedule the application on the next available Development Review
Team (DRT) meeting.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.032 PRE-APPLICATION OR CONCEPT PLAN MEETING; DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM
(DRT) DISCUSSION ONLY.
   At the pre-application or concept plan meeting, the DRT may identify the
procedures anticipated for subdivision plat application review, application
requirements, standards, other applicable city, county, state and federal
requirements and any other matters. (See §
155.030 of this chapter.)
(Prior Code, § 25.02.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.033 ACTIONS FOLLOWING A PRE-APPLICATION OR CONCEPT PLAN MEETING; PLANNING
COMMISSION PRESENTATION (OPTIONAL FOR SOME SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Following the pre-application meeting, and upon the applicant's
request, the Department may present the information to the Brigham City
Planning Commission ("Commission") at a regular Commission meeting as a
discussion item only. The Commission may identify items the applicant should
consider with a preliminary subdivision plat application.
   (B)   All concept plan applications for multifamily, cluster, planned unit
development, commercial, or industrial subdivisions will be presented to the
Commission for discussion.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.034 PRE-APPLICATION OR CONCEPT PLAN; NOT AN APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION
APPROVAL.
   A pre-application or concept plan meeting application does not constitute a
land use application, under this chapter or the Act, for any approval, review
cycle, permit or license and is not binding on the city or the applicant. A
pre-application or concept plan meeting or Commission discussion should not be
considered by the applicant, or any others, as an indication in any way of a
land use application approval, permit or license, or disapproval, either actual
or implied.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS
§ 155.045 INTENT AND PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS.
   It is the intent of this chapter, and this subchapter, that all actions
taken and related to a preliminary subdivision plat application shall be
administrative actions.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.046 LAND USE AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Development Review Team (DRT) - preliminary plat applications. The DRT
shall be the Administrative Land Use Authority for all preliminary plat
applications not specifically identified as having a different Administrative
Land Use Authority.
   (B)   Department Director - combined preliminary/final, no-dedication
subdivision of five fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units. The
Director, or designee shall be the Administrative Land Use Authority for all
applications for combined preliminary/final, no-dedication subdivisions of five
or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units. All references to "combined
preliminary/final, no-dedication subdivisions of five or fewer lots" means
"combined preliminary/final, no-dedication subdivisions of five or fewer lots
and no more than ten dwelling units." For procedures relating to combined
preliminary/final, no-dedication subdivisions of five or fewer lots and no more
than ten dwelling units see §§
155.095 -
155.106. Any application that includes or requires a road or street dedication
may not be considered a combined preliminary/final, no-dedication subdivision
application.
   (C)   City Council - preliminary and final subdivision applications. The
City Council is the Land Use Authority for any subdivision for multifamily,
cluster, planned unit development, commercial, or industrial uses.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.047 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Preliminary plat application review procedures:
 
Preliminary Subdivision Plat Application Procedures
       Applicant submits required application materials (§   Department
Step 1 155.047(B)) and pays application fees to the           determines
       Department. The Department must determine if the       application
       preliminary subdivision plat application is complete.  incomplete
Step 2 Department determines application complete.            An applicant has
       No later than 15 business days after receiving a       30 days from time
       complete application, city's Development Review Team   of the
Step 3 (DRT) reviews application to ensure all requirements   Departments
       have been met and that the DRT has all applicable      written notice of
       materials.                                             decision to
       After review, the DRT may approve, approve with        submit missing
Step 4 revisions, or deny the application subject to the      materials and
       city's Land Use Ordinance and all other requirements,  fees. If the
       as applicable.                                         application
       Multifamily, cluster, planned unit development,        remains
Step 5 commercial, and industrial subdivision applications    incomplete, fees
       are presented to the Planning Commission for their     and materials
       recommendation to the City Council.                    submitted to the
       If the application is approved or approved with        Department are
       revisions, the applicant may proceed with the final    returned to the
       subdivision plat application (see §                   applicant, and
Step 6 155.073(A)). This application must be submitted        the application
       within one year of the approval of the preliminary     is no longer
       subdivision plat application in order to be valid.     considered.
 
   (B)   (1)   Information. All preliminary subdivision plat applications,
filed with the Department shall provide the following information (at a
minimum), and all materials required for the Department to determine the
application complete, and for the Land Use Authority, as applicable, to decide
the application:
         (a)   Application form. A preliminary subdivision plat application
form completed and signed by the owner(s) of the subject property or the
authorized agent(s) of the owner(s). The application shall be accompanied by a
notarized affidavit identifying all owners and, if applicable, an agent as
being duly authorized to represent the owner(s) in all matters related to the
preliminary subdivision plat application. All persons with a fee interest in
the subject property shall be required to join in and sign the preliminary
subdivision plat application and the notarized affidavit.
         (b)   Preliminary subdivision plat application and review fees. The
preliminary subdivision plat application shall include the payment of all
preliminary subdivision plat application fees and review fees, as established
by the Council and any total amount, or deposit amount, required to provide the
services of the city’s contracted City Engineer, and other consultants,
determined by the city. A breakdown of the fees is available on the Brigham
City website.
         (c)   Legal description. a complete and accurate legal description of
the subject property; and
         (d)   Preliminary subdivision plat. a preliminary subdivision plat,
prepared, dated and stamped by a licensed land surveyor, as required by Utah
Code, and drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, or at an
alternative scale, as determined by the Department or City Engineer. The
preliminary subdivision plat shall be prepared digitally, and all sheets shall
be consecutively numbered. A minimum number of copies and sizes of copies as
stated on the application shall be provided. A digital copy of the preliminary
subdivision plat, in a format acceptable to the city’s geographic information
system, shall be provided. The applicant shall also provide a digital PDF copy
of the preliminary subdivision plat. The preliminary subdivision plat shall
show the following:
            1.   A vicinity map, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet, clearly identifying the boundaries of the subject property;
            2.   Property accesses, adjoining subdivision outlines and names,
as applicable, including all roads and streets and the names of all adjoining
property owners of record;
            3.   The basis of bearings used, graphic and written scale, true
north point, township, range, section, quarter section, lot number and the
total area of the subject property;
            4.   Proposed road and street layout;
            5.   The boundaries, course and dimensions of all lots and parcels
proposed, measured by their boundaries, course and extent, whether the owner
proposes that the lot or parcel is intended to be used as a road, street or for
any other public or private use. Any remaining portion of the subject property
shall be included in a lot;
            6.   The location of any common space or open space areas,
including the location of all property, proposed to be set aside for public or
private reservation, with the designation of the purpose of such set-asides,
and conditions, if any;
            7.   The lot, unit or building reference, road, street or site
address, the road and street name or coordinate address, acreage and square
footage for all parcels, units or lots proposed. All parcels, units or lots
proposed shall be numbered consecutively. Any remaining portion of the subject
property shall be included in a lot and numbered;
            8.   All existing and proposed rights-of-way and easement grants of
record for underground facilities and all other utility facilities, as well as
all proposed road and street rights-of-way and easement grants of record; and
            9.   A title block, placed on the right side of the preliminary
subdivision plat showing:
               a.   Proposed name or designation of the subdivision distinct
from any other Subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder;
               b.   Name and address of the owner(s) of record and the name,
address, and license number of the licensed surveyor responsible for preparing
the preliminary subdivision plat; and
               c.   Date of preparation of the preliminary subdivision plat and
all revision dates, as applicable.
      (2)   Required subject property information. The following information
shall be provided, on separate sheets, at the same scale as the preliminary
subdivision plat, as applicable:
         (a)   The identification of known natural features including, but not
limited to, jurisdictional wetlands identified by the United States Army Corps
of Engineers, areas of slope exceeding 5% grade, floodplains, flood channels
and drainage ways identified as required by any local, state or federal agency,
all watercourses, areas where ground water is located within three feet of the
ground surface, waterbodies, marshy or swampy areas, and any other natural
features, as required by the Department or City Engineer, including the total
area of each;
         (b)   All trees over six inches in diameter, measured three feet above
the ground. Wooded areas and location of trees to remain shall be indicated;
         (c)   Existing contours, at intervals of no greater than two feet,
overlaid with the proposed subdivision layout. Elevations shall be based on
National Geodetic Survey sea level data. In cases of predominately-level
topography, one-foot interval contours may be required by the Department or
City Engineer;
         (d)   The location of any known human-made features on, or contiguous
to the subject property, including all existing parcels and lots, all utility
easements, railroads, power lines and power poles, telephone and other
telecommunication lines and facilities, bridges, culverts, drainage channels,
all rights-of-way and easements, field drains and well or spring protection
areas;
         (e)   The location and dimensions of all existing buildings, fence
lines and property lines overlaid with the proposed subdivision layout;
         (f)   The layout of existing and proposed power lines, including the
source and connection to the existing or proposed power supply;
         (g)   All existing and proposed road and street locations and
dimensions, with cross-sections and vertical and horizontal profiles of all new
roads and streets, whether proposed to be dedicated or not, showing the grades
of all proposed roads and streets and identifying all proposed cuts and fills
exceeding three feet from the existing natural grade. The proposed radius of
all centerline curves shall be shown. The location and size of existing and
proposed culinary water and sanitary sewer lines and the location of all wells
and springs, if any, and the location of all existing and proposed secondary
water locations, as required by the Public Works Director or City Engineer;
         (h)   Existing and proposed storm drainage and flood-control systems,
including existing and proposed pipe sizes, inlets, detention areas and
drainage arrows;
         (i)   The location of all existing and proposed fire hydrants,
including the sizes of all existing and proposed water lines serving all fire
hydrants;
         (j)   The location of all existing and proposed streetlights
identifying the location, type, height and light output of all existing and
proposed streetlights; and
         (k)   The location of all existing and proposed street trees and other
landscape plantings identifying the location and type of all street trees,
shrubs and other landscape materials and plantings.
      (3)   Geotechnical report. A report complying with and meeting the
requirements of the city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and
Construction, as adopted.
      (4)   Preliminary subdivision not to include improvement plans. The
Department and City Engineer may not engage in substantive review of
subdivision improvement plans per U.C.A. § 10-9a-604.2 during the preliminary
plan approval stage or at any other time prior to the beginning of the review
cycles for subdivision improvement plans during final plat review and approval.
Any submission, review, or comments for subdivision improvement plans prior to
the beginning of the review cycles for subdivision improvement plans may be for
convenience only and are not binding on the city.
      (5)   Preliminary grading plan. for subject properties of one acre or
larger, a preliminary grading plan shall be provided and indicated by solid-
line contours, using two-foot intervals, imposed on dashed line contours, also
using two-foot intervals, of the existing topography for the entire subject
property. For subject properties that have predominately level topography, one-
foot contour intervals may be required by the Department or City Engineer. The
preliminary grading plan shall identify the proposed grading for each proposed
lot or parcel to be created.
      (6)   Preliminary erosion control plan. When required by the Department
or City Engineer, a preliminary erosion control plan shall be provided and
included with the preliminary subdivision application. The preliminary erosion
control plan shall identify the proposed drainage and erosion control
techniques and methods for each proposed lot or parcel to be created.
      (7)   Preliminary easement plan. A preliminary easement plan, identifying
the location, size and use of all existing and proposed easements.
      (8)   Title report. A preliminary title report for the entire subject
property, provided by a title company, within 30 calendar days from the date of
filing the preliminary subdivision plat application.
      (9)   Evidence of availability of necessary services. The following
information is required to establish the availability of services to the
subject property, and do not constitute subdivision improvement plans as
defined in U.C.A. § 10-9a-604.2.
         (a)   Culinary water. Approval, with recommended plat and drawing
revisions, as necessary, for the culinary water system and services from the
city’s Public Works Department, acting as the city’s Culinary Water Authority.
The proposed culinary water system shall meet all requirements of the city. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information and
materials, required by the Public Works Department to provide written approval
of the proposed culinary water system and services.
         (b)   Sanitary sewer. Approval, with recommended plat and drawing
revisions, as necessary, for the sanitary sewer system and services from the
city’s Public Works Department, acting as the city’s Sanitary Sewer Authority.
The proposed sanitary sewer system shall meet all requirements of the city. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information and
materials, as required by the Public Works Department to provide written
approval of the proposed sanitary sewer system and services.
         (c)   Fire protection, suppression and access. Recommendation, with
recommended plat and drawing revisions, as necessary, for the fire protection
and suppression system from the city’s Fire Department, acting as the city’s
Fire Authority. The proposed fire protection and suppression system shall meet
all requirements of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
(s) to provide all information and materials as required by the Fire Department
to provide a written recommendation of the proposed fire protection and
suppression system and access.
         (d)   Vehicular and active transportation. Approval, with recommended
plat and drawing revisions, as necessary, for the transportation system,
including all roads, streets, sidewalks, trails, biking facilities and other
transportation-related facilities from the City Engineer, acting as the city’s
Transportation Authority. All transportation facilities and systems shall meet
all requirements of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
(s) to provide all information and materials, as required by the City Engineer
to provide written approval of the proposed transportation facilities and
system.
         (e)   State and/or county access permit. If the proposed subdivision
is accessed from a state highway, an appropriate access permit, as required by
the state’s Department of Transportation shall be provided. if the subdivision
will be accessed from a county road, authorization from the county to allow the
subdivision access from a county road shall be provided. it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information and materials, as
required by the state’s Department of Transportation and the county to provide
the necessary access permit(s).
         (f)   Storm drainage and flood control. Approval, with recommended
plat and drawing revisions, as necessary, for the storm drainage and flood-
control system from the City Engineer, acting as the city’s Storm Drainage and
Flood-Control Authority. The proposed storm drainage and flood-control system
shall meet all requirements of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant(s) to provide all information and materials, as required by the City
Engineer to provide the written approval of the proposed storm drainage and
flood-control system.
         (g)   Secondary water. Approval, with recommended plat and drawing
revisions, as necessary, for the secondary water system from the City Engineer,
acting as the city’s Secondary Water Authority. The proposed secondary water
system shall meet all requirements of the city. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant(s) to provide all information and materials, as required by
the City Engineer to provide the written approval of the proposed secondary
water system.
         (h)   Electrical power system. Approval, with recommended plat and
drawing revisions, as necessary, for the electrical power system from the
city’s Public Power Department, acting as the city’s Public Power Authority.
The proposed electrical power system shall meet all requirements of the city.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information
and materials, as required by the Public Power Director to provide the written
approval of the proposed electrical power system.
         (i)   Fiber optic. Approval, with recommended plat and drawing
revisions, as necessary, for the fiber optic system from the city’s Public
Power Department, acting as the city’s Fiber Optic Authority. The proposed
fiber-optic system shall meet all requirements of the city. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information and materials, as
required by the Public Power Director to provide the written approval of the
proposed fiber-optic system.
         (j)   Special Service District or Special Service Area. If the subject
property is within the boundaries of a Special Service District or a Special
Service Area, a written recommendation from the governing board of such
district or area shall be provided with the preliminary subdivision plat
application materials, identifying potential impacts resulting from the
proposed subdivision. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to
provide all information and materials, as required by the district or area to
give the written recommendation required.
         (k)   Other. As may be applicable, approvals and permits from any
federal, state and local agency, including approval by the Bear River Health
Department or the state’s Department of Health.
      (10)   Additional information and materials. When the Department staff or
other Development Review Team (DRT) member(s) determines necessary, the
applicant may be required to provide other information, materials, studies and
other evidence indicating the suitability of the subject property for the
proposed subdivision. This includes, but is not limited to, compliance with the
city’s transportation plan(s) including access management plans, adequacy of
infrastructure and utilities, public safety and fire protection, ground water
protection, plant cover maintenance, geologic or flood hazard, erosion control,
wildlife habitat preservation and any other infrastructure, physical,
environmental or cultural matter.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.048 DETERMINATION OF A COMPLETE PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION.
   An application shall be considered complete to begin the review cycle when
the following items are submitted:
   (A)   A completed Brigham City preliminary subdivision plat application;
   (B)   Owner's affidavit and consent;
   (C)   Payment of application fees and engineering deposit;
   (D)   All listed items on the preliminary subdivision plat application
checklist;
   (E)   All items listed in §
155.047(B)(2);
   (F)   The number and size of paper copies for the Administrative Land Use
Authority as identified on the application checklist; and
   (G)   An electronic copy of all plans in PDF format.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.049 APPEAL OF A DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS OR
INCOMPLETENESS BY THE DEPARTMENT.
   See the requirements and standards of §§
155.240 through
155.245 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.050 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS; DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM
(DRT) REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (A)   DRT meeting. Before the Administrative Land Use Authority considers a
preliminary subdivision plat application for single-family, two-family
dwellings, or townhomes, as required herein, members of the city's DRT shall
review the preliminary subdivision plat application for compliance to all
requirements of this chapter and other land use ordinances and requirements, as
applicable. The results of the DRT meeting, including all review comments and
recommendations, shall be provided to the Administrative Land Use Authority and
applicant no later than 15 business days after receiving a complete preliminary
subdivision plat application. Any correspondence from a municipal agency,
employee, or officer other than an official report from the DRT with an
application may not be deemed the municipality's response to the application
for purposes of determining review cycles.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.070)
   (B)   Preliminary subdivision plat application - decision required.
      (1)   The Administrative Land Use Authority in deciding a preliminary
subdivision plat application for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
or townhomes, shall consider the city's DRT review comments and recommendation
and all information and materials received.
      (2)   The Administrative Land Use Authority may approve the preliminary
subdivision plat application as presented, approve the preliminary subdivision
plat application with revisions, continue the item, or deny the preliminary
subdivision plat application, with findings of compliance or non-compliance
with this chapter, the city's other land use ordinances, and other expressed
standards and requirements, as applicable. If the preliminary subdivision plat
application complies with the applicable city ordinances and requirements of
the Act, the Administrative Land Use Authority shall approve the preliminary
subdivision plat application.
      (3)   The Administrative Land Use Authority, may require revisions to the
preliminary subdivision plat, and its accompanying materials, including, but
not limited to the items identified by § 155.047(B).
      (4)   The Council, as Land Use Authority, in deciding a preliminary
subdivision application for multifamily, cluster, planned unit development,
commercial, or industrial, shall consider the Commission's recommendation and
all information and materials received.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.080)
      (5)   The applicable land use authority may not grant approval of any
preliminary subdivision application if any requirement of this chapter or the
applicable standards is proposed to be satisfied by relation to or
incorporation of components of another phase or related development, unless the
applicant first enters into a development agreement with the city governing the
applicable phases or related development or otherwise modifies the application
to satisfy all requirements independently.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed
1-16-2025)
§ 155.051 EFFECT OF APPROVAL, WITH OR WITHOUT REVISIONS, OF A PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION AND EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (A)   (1)   The approval of a preliminary subdivision plat application, with
or without revisions, by the Land Use Authority, as applicable, and with
required findings, may not constitute final approval of the proposed
subdivision.
      (2)   A preliminary subdivision plat application approval may not
authorize the division or any development of the subject property, but allows
the applicant(s) to proceed with the preparation of the final subdivision plat
application for the subject property.
   (B)   (1)   As provided by Utah Code, the continuing validity of a
preliminary subdivision plat application approval is conditioned upon the
applicant(s) proceeding after approval to implement the approval with
reasonable diligence.
      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, the approval of a preliminary
subdivision plat application shall be effective for one year from the date of
approval by the Land Use Authority at the end of which time the applicant(s)
shall have submitted a final subdivision plat application to the Department.
      (3)   If a final subdivision plat application is not received by the
Department within one year of preliminary plat application approval, the
preliminary subdivision plat application approval for the subject property
shall be rendered void and invalid.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.052 SITE PREPARATION WORK, SALE OF LOTS PROHIBITED UNTIL FINAL PLAT
APPROVAL.
   (A)   No site preparation work, including any excavation, grading, regrading
or any other development activity may occur on the subject property until a
final plat application has been approved, as required by §§
155.070 through
155.083 of this chapter, and the approved final plat is recorded in the office
of the County Recorder, except as provided by division (B) below.
   (B)   Subdivision site preparation work may occur if the proposed
subdivision has:
      (1)   Received both preliminary approval and final approval, as required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Received the approval of all required subdivision improvement plans
by the City Engineer, as demonstrated by the dated signature of the City
Engineer, including plans for all required landscaping and infrastructure
improvements. See §
155.082 of this chapter; and
      (3)   As provided by U.C.A. § 10-9a-604.5, the applicant has posted an
improvement completion assurance for any required landscaping or infrastructure
improvements, as required by §
155.082 of this chapter.
   (C)   As required by §
155.003 of this chapter, no lots may be transferred or sold until a final plat
application has been approved, as required, and the approved final plat is
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.100) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.053 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   No-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units may be approved once only. The approval of a preliminary/final
subdivision plat application by the Director, or designee for a no-dedication
subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units, with or
without requirements, may only occur once per legal parcel of property
occurring on or before November 1, 1986 (“parcel of property” means the
property described and recorded in the Office of the Box Elder County Recorder
as determined by the Property Identification Number existing on the date of the
application submission). The preliminary/final plat shall contain a note
identifying that any portion of the plat, including any remaining portion of
the original parcel, may not be further subdivided without the approval and
recordation of a new preliminary/final plat or an amended final plat with the
effect of modifying the existing final plat.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.110)
   (B)   Fees. The preliminary subdivision plat application fees shall be
established by a resolution of the Council and published on the city’s website.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.120)
   (C)   Engineering review fees. In addition to application fees, applicant(s)
for a preliminary subdivision plat application shall pay all costs incurred by
the city for the provision of city engineering services, provided by a licensed
civil engineer, contracted by the city and required to review the preliminary
subdivision plat application, and all associated materials for conformity to
the requirements of this chapter, other applicable land use ordinances and
requirements and accepted civil engineering practice.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.130)
   (D)   Consultant review fees. As determined necessary by the Department,
City Engineer, or Administrative Land Use Authority, as applicable, applicant
(s) for a preliminary subdivision plat application shall pay all costs incurred
by the city for the provision of necessary consultant services, selected by the
city, and required to review the preliminary subdivision plat application, and
all associated materials for conformity to the requirements of this chapter,
other applicable land use ordinances and requirements.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.140)
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
§ 155.054 RESTRICTIONS FOR SOLAR AND OTHER ENERGY DEVICES.
   See §
155.014 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.150) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.055 LANDSCAPING AND INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.
   As required by the Act, the Council shall establish, by resolution,
construction and inspection standards for the city’s approval or acceptance of
all landscaping or infrastructure improvements required by the Land Use
Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.160) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.056 BUILDING PERMITS.
   The city’s Building Official may not review, and may not approve or issue
any building permits for the subject property, or any lots proposed to be
created, until a final subdivision plat is approved by the Land Use Authority,
as applicable, and the approved final subdivision plat is recorded in the
office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.170) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.057 APPEAL OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION DECISION.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Land Use Authority, as applicable,
related to a preliminary subdivision plat application may appeal the decision
to the city’s appeal authority, which may include the city’s Land Use Hearing
Officer. An appeal shall comply with all requirements and standards of §§
155.240 through
155.245 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.190) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.058 EXCEPTIONS FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARD TIMELINES.
   The requirements for the city to respond within 15 business days of
receiving a complete application do not apply for subdivisions which have
boundaries containing a geologic hazard or potential geological hazard, or for
any subdivisions for uses other than single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, or townhomes.
(Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.059 PUBLIC COMMENT PERMITTED.
   The Department may, but need not, solicit or receive public comment on a
preliminary subdivision application. Any written comments received will be made
a part of the city's record for that preliminary subdivision application and
are subject to Governmental Records Access Management Act (GRAMA) requests.
(Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS
§ 155.070 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter, and this subchapter, that all actions
taken and related to a final subdivision plat application shall be
administrative actions.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.071 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS; PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   As a condition precedent to the presentation of a final subdivision
plat application, a preliminary subdivision plat application for the subject
property, with or without conditions, shall have been approved by the
applicable Land Use Authority (see § 155.047(A)).
   (B)   A no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units is subject to a single, combined preliminary/final plat
application process, as provided in §§
155.095 through
155.105.
   (C)   Any correspondence from a municipal agency, employee, or officer other
than an official report from the DRT with an applicant may not be deemed the
municipality's response to the application for purposes of determining review
cycles.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.072 LAND USE AUTHORITIES AND FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION TYPES.
   (A)   The Council shall be the Land Use Authority for multifamily, cluster,
planned unit development, commercial, or industrial final plat applications.
   (B)   The DRT shall be the Administrative Land Use Authority for all single-
family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or townhomes final subdivision plat
applications.
   (C)   The Director, or designee, shall be the Administrative Land Use
Authority for no-dedication, combined preliminary/final subdivision plat
applications for subdivisions of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units. For more information related to no-dedication subdivisions of
five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units, see §§
155.095 through
155.105.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.073 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Final subdivision plat application procedures:
Final Subdivision Plat Application Procedures
Final Subdivision Plat Application Procedures
     Before submitting a final subdivision plat application, the
     applicant(s) must have received approval of a preliminary
Step subdivision plat application from the Land Use Authority, as     Department determines application incomplete
1    applicable (see §
     155.046 and §
     155.047(A)).
     Applicant submits all required application materials (division
Step (B) of this section) and pays application fees to the
2    Department, the Department must determine if the final
     subdivision plat application is complete.
Step Department determines application complete.
3
     No later than 20 business days after an applicant submits a
Step complete final subdivision plat application, department and all
4    applicable agencies and departments shall review and provide
     written comments on the final subdivision plat application to
     the DRT.                                                         An applicant has 30 days from time of the Department’s written notice of
     All applicable required permit approvals and recommendations     decision to submit missing materials and fees. If the application remains
Step from parties listed in §                                        incomplete, fees and materials submitted to the Department are returned to
5    155.075 must be received and submitted to the DRT prior to       the applicant, and the application is no longer considered.
     completing final review.
     After receiving all permit approvals and recommendations, the
Step Land Use Authority, as applicable (see §
6    155.072), may approve, approve with revisions, or deny the
     application subject to the city's Land Use Ordinance and all
     other requirements, as applicable.
     Within 365 days of the application approval as specified in §
Step 155.079, the final subdivision plat must be presented to the
7    Department for recording with the Office of the Box Elder
     County Recorder.
 
   (B)   (1)   Information. All final subdivision plat applications filed with
the Department shall provide the following information required for the
Department to determine the application complete and begin the review cycle:
         (a)   Application form. A final subdivision plat application form
completed and signed by the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized
agent(s) of the owner(s). The application form shall be accompanied by a
notarized affidavit identifying(i) the owner and, if applicable, (ii) an agent
as being duly authorized to represent the owner(s) in all matters related to
the final subdivision plat application. All persons with a fee interest in the
subject property shall be required to join in and sign the final subdivision
plat application, or the notarized affidavit, if applicable.
         (b)   Final subdivision plat application and review fees. The final
subdivision plat application shall include the payment of all final subdivision
plat application fees and review fees, as established by the Council, and any
total amount, or deposit amount, required to provide the services of the city’s
contracted City Engineer, and other consultants determined by the city to
review the application.
      (2)   Final form. All information and revisions from the preliminary
subdivision plat approval provided in their final form, including a written
explanation in response to the city's review comments, identifying and
explaining the applicant's revisions and reasons for declining to make
revisions, if any.
      (3)   Title report. An accurate title report, provided within 60 calendar
days of submission of the final plat application and setting forth any
mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record
affecting the subject property;
      (4)   Final subdivision plat. A final subdivision plat, prepared by a
licensed land surveyor, as required by Utah Code, and drawn at a scale of not
less than one-inch equals 50 feet, or at an alternative scale as determined by
the Department or City Engineer. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared
digitally, and all sheets shall be consecutively numbered. A minimum number of
copies and sizes of copies, as stated on the application shall be provided. A
digital copy of the final subdivision plat, in a format acceptable to the
city’s Geographic Information System, shall be provided. The final subdivision
plat shall show the following:
         (a)   Legal description. a complete and accurate legal description of
the subject property, accurate in scale, dimension and bearing, and giving the
location of and ties to the nearest survey monument. The map shall have an
error of closure of not greater than 1:10,000. The survey must be tied to the
state grid or other permanent marker established by the county. Bearings shall
be shown to the nearest second, lengths to the nearest hundredth foot, and
areas to the nearest hundredth acre. The location of all monuments erected,
corners and other points established in the field. The material of which the
monuments, corners or other points are made shall be noted. All parcels, units
or lots proposed to be created shall be numbered as required by the County
Recorder. All lands within the boundaries of the subject property and the final
subdivision plat shall be accounted for as parcels, lots, roads, streets,
alleys, walkways or other designations;
         (b)   Required signature blocks. The final plat shall contain
signature blocks for approval by the Mayor or Department Director, as
applicable, Commission chair, the owners of record, City Engineer and City
Attorney;
         (c)   Vicinity map. A vicinity map, at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 1,000 feet, clearly identifying the boundaries of the entire subject
property;
         (d)   Access(es). Property accesses, adjoining subdivision outlines
and names, as applicable, and relevant features located within one-half mile of
the subject property boundary. Surrounding roads and streets and the names of
all adjoining property owners of record shall be shown;
         (e)   Basis. The basis of bearings used, graphic and written scale,
true north point, township, range, section, quarter section, lot number and the
total area of the subject property;
         (f)   Proposed road and street layout. All existing and proposed road
and street names shall be shown;
         (g)   Accuracy. The boundaries, course and dimensions of all lots and
parcels created, measured by their boundaries, course and extent, whether the
owner proposes that the lot or parcel is intended to be used as a road, street
or for any other public use and whether any such area is proposed for a public
purpose. Any remaining portion of the subject property’s original legal
description shall be included in a lot;
         (h)   Common area/common open space. The location of any common area
(s) or common open space area(s), including the location of all property,
proposed to be set aside for public or private reservation, with the
designation of the purpose of such set-asides, and conditions, if any, of the
dedication or reservation. Such property shall be included in a lot;
         (i)   Naming and numbering. The lot, unit or building reference, road,
street or site address, the road and street name or coordinate address, acreage
and square footage for all parcels, units or lots proposed to be created. All
parcels, units or lots proposed shall be numbered consecutively;
         (j)   Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements. All existing
and proposed rights-of-way and easement grants of record for underground
facilities and all other utility facilities, as well as all proposed road and
street rights-of-way and easement grants of record;
         (k)   Owner’s dedications. The owner’s dedication(s) shall include a
legal description of the subject property boundaries and the dedication of all
public rights-of-way or spaces. The owner’s dedication shall be signed and
dated by a public notary. This dedication shall include a reference to any
covenants that may be declared and blanks where the County Recorder may enter
the book and page number of their recording;
         (l)   Title block. A title block, placed on the right side of the
final subdivision plat showing:
            1.   Proposed name or designation of the subdivision that is
distinct from any other subdivision already recorded in the office of the
County Recorder;
            2.   Name and address of the owner(s) of record and the name,
address, license number and stamp of the licensed surveyor responsible for
preparing the final subdivision plat; and
            3.   Date of preparation of the final subdivision plat and all
revision dates, as applicable.
         (m)   Ownership and maintenance. Improvements ownership, operation and
maintenance acceptance. As evidenced by the authorized signatures of all
proposed owners or operators of the subdivision improvements on the final plat,
acknowledging the acceptance of ownership, operation and maintenance of all
public and quasi-public improvements;
         (n)   Inclusions. As required by this division (B)(4), all common
space, open space areas, agricultural use areas and other areas proposed for a
public or private reservation shall be included in a lot and numbered;
         (o)   Digital copy. A digital copy of the final subdivision plat, in a
format acceptable to the city’s Geographic Information System standards;
         (p)   Final easement plan. A final easement plan, identifying the
location, size and use of all existing and proposed easements;
         (q)   Final subdivision improvement plans. Final subdivision
improvement plans, as required by the city’s Public Works Standards for
Development, Design and Construction, and stamped by a licensed civil engineer,
for all public and quasi-public improvements. These plans shall include all
required and proposed below grade and above grade utilities and facilities,
landscaping and infrastructure improvements. All conditions or restrictions
governing the location of all utilities and facilities within a right-of-way,
and easement grants of records shall be shown;
         (r)   Estimated cost of installation of landscaping and improvements.
See §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter;
         (s)   Final grading plan. For subject properties of one acre or
larger, a final grading plan shall be provided and indicated by solid-line
contours, using two-foot intervals, imposed on dashed line contours, also using
two-foot intervals, of the existing topography for the entire subject property.
For subject properties that have predominately level, topography one-foot
contour intervals may be required by the Department or City Engineer. The final
grading plan shall identify the proposed grading for each proposed lot or
parcel to be created; and
         (t)   Final erosion control plan. When required by the Department or
City Engineer, a final erosion control plan shall be provided and included with
the final subdivision application. The final erosion control plan shall
identify the proposed drainage and erosion control techniques and methods for
each proposed lot or parcel to be created.
      (5)   Other documents. All documents establishing any required
agreements, guarantees, obligations and payments;
      (6)   Dedications and grants of easements. A final plat that includes any
public utility easement shall not be approved unless the applicant provides the
proof the applicant has, as a courtesy, notified each public utility that is
anticipated to provide service to the subdivision. This requirement shall be
met by the applicant providing to the city a public utility notification form,
signed by the applicant and affirming that the affected public utilities have
received courtesy notice. All dedications and grants of easements shall be
described by their:
         (a)   Boundary, course, dimensions and intended use of the right-of-
way and easement grants of record;
         (b)   Location of existing underground utility facilities; and
         (c)   Conditions or restrictions governing the location of the
facilities within the right-of-way, easement grants of record and utility
facilities within the subdivision.
      (7)   Covenants and restrictions. Copies of all protective covenants,
conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), trust agreements, homeowner’s association
articles and bylaws and all other required documents, including those required
by the Council or Director, or designee, as applicable, governing the future
use of property, infrastructure, utility and service systems, re-subdivision
and other provisions required to maintain the integrity of the subdivision; and
      (8)   Improvement construction costs. See §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.074 DETERMINATION OF A COMPLETE FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION.
   An application shall be considered complete to begin the review cycle when
the following items are submitted:
   (A)   A completed Brigham City final subdivision plat application;
   (B)   Owner's affidavit and consent;
   (C)   Payment of application fees and engineering deposit;
   (D)   All listed items on the final subdivision plat application checklist;
and
   (E)   An electronic copy of all plans in PDF Format.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.075 APPEAL OF A DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS OR
INCOMPLETENESS BY THE DEPARTMENT.
   See the requirements and standards of §§
155.240 through
155.245.
(Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
§ 155.076 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Recommendations and permits required.
      (1)   If the subject property is located within the boundaries of a
Special Service District or Special Service Area, a written recommendation from
the governing board of such district or area shall accompany the final
subdivision plat application.
      (2)   If the subdivision is required to secure any approvals or permits
from any federal, state, or local agency, a copy of such approvals and permits
shall accompany the final subdivision plat application.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.070)
   (B)   Final subdivision plat application for a no-dedication subdivision of
five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units; Department to consider
and decide one final subdivision plat application only for original parcel.
Consistent with §
155.053(A), the approval of a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots
and no more than ten dwelling units, with or without requirements, may be
utilized only once per original parcel of property.2 Property subdivided under
these provisions shall be accompanied by a note on the parcel or lot number and
on the final subdivision plat that clearly identifies that this one-time
division has occurred and the resulting lots, including any portion of the
original parcel of property, may not be further subdivided without the approval
and recordation of a new final plat or an amended final plat with the effect of
modifying the existing final plat, as provided by the Act.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.080)
   (C)   Engineering review fees. In addition to application fees, the
applicant(s) for final subdivision plat application shall pay all costs
incurred by the city for the provision of city engineering services, provided
by a licensed civil engineer, contracted by the city and required to review the
final subdivision plat application and all associated materials for conformity
to the requirements of this chapter, other applicable land use ordinances and
requirements, and accepted civil engineering practice.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.090)
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
§ 155.077 RESTRICTIONS FOR SOLAR AND OTHER ENERGY DEVICES.
   See §
155.014 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.100) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.078 EFFECT OF APPROVAL, WITH OR WITHOUT CONDITIONS, OF A FINAL
SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION AND EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (A)   The approval of a final subdivision plat application, with or without
conditions, by the Land Use Authority, as applicable, shall constitute final
approval of the subdivision by the city.
   (B)   After a final plat has been approved by the Land Use Authority, as
applicable, and the final plat has been circulated by the applicant(s) and is
signed by the designated officers, and others, as required by §
155.078 of this chapter, the approved final plat, and any other required
materials, shall be presented to the Department for recordation in the office
of the County Recorder.
   (C)   After the approved final plat, and any other materials, including, but
not limited to, escrow agreements, improvement completion assurance agreements,
development agreement and the like, as applicable, have been recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, and the required subdivision improvements have
been constructed necessary for the issuance of building permits, the applicant
(s) may apply for building permits consistent with the final plat approval and
city requirements for such permits.
   (D)   The applicant(s) is required to pay all fees, including, but not
limited to, application fees, copies, and recording fees of all documents
associated with the approved final plat.
   (E)   As provided by the Act, the continuing validity of a final subdivision
plat approval is conditioned upon the applicant(s) proceeding after approval to
implement the approval with reasonable diligence. For the purposes of this
chapter, the approval of a final subdivision plat application shall be
effective for a maximum period of one year from the date of approval by the
Land Use Authority, as applicable, at the end of which time the applicant(s)
shall have submitted the approved final plat to the Department for recordation.
If the approved final plat is not received by the Department within one year of
approval, the final plat shall be declared void and of no effect.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the Land Use
Authority, as applicable, may extend the period to submit the approved final
subdivision plat to the Department for recordation upon a request from the
applicant(s) and a finding by the Land Use Authority of extenuating
circumstances. The Land Use Authority may extend the period to record the final
subdivision plat, as determined, but shall not extend the period required to
submit the approved final subdivision plat to the Department for recordation
beyond 18 months from the date of approval of the final subdivision plat.
   (G)   The applicant(s) shall submit a request for an extension, pay filing
fees and provide a written request for an extension to the Department a minimum
of four weeks before the approved final subdivision plat is due to expire. An
extension request shall provide:
      (1)   The reasons for the request;
      (2)   An updated title report, updated engineer’s estimate and updated
financial guarantee agreement; and
      (3)   Be accompanied by the extension request application fee(s).
   (H)   Prior to the Land Use Authority action on an extension request, such
request shall be reviewed by the Department and a Department recommendation
provided to the Land Use Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.110) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.079 RECORDATION OF A PLAT WITHOUT NECESSARY SIGNATURES; NOT AN APPROVED
FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   A final plat does not create an approved subdivision unless the final
plat is signed by the following and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder:
      (1)   As applicable, the Mayor, representing the city;
      (2)   The Commission Chair, or the Director, or an authorized designee,
of the Director;
      (3)   The City Engineer;
      (4)   All owners of record, or their authorized agents, shall sign and
acknowledge the final plat;
      (5)   The licensed land surveyor, providing the necessary certificates,
as required by law; and
      (6)   The City Attorney. The City Attorney may not sign the final plat
until all others, as required by this section, have signed, and acknowledged
the final plat, as required.
   (B)   Any subdivision plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder
without the signatures required by this section shall be determined to be an
illegal subdivision and may not be recognized in any way by the city.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.120) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.080 EXPIRATION OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATION.
   (A)   After an approved final subdivision plat application has expired, a
new preliminary subdivision plat application shall be required.
   (B)   A new preliminary subdivision plat application shall comply with all
applicable application and procedural requirements and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.130) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.081 DEDICATION OF STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Final subdivision plats, when made, acknowledged and recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, according to the procedures and requirements of
this chapter, shall operate as a dedication of all roads, streets and other
public places, and vest the fee of those parcels of land with the city for the
use of the public for the uses named or intended by the final subdivision
plats.
   (B)   The provisions of §
155.007(B) of this chapter shall apply, as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.140) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.082 COMMON AREA PARCELS ON A FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT; NO SEPARATE
OWNERSHIP; OWNERSHIP INTEREST EQUALLY DIVIDED AMONG OTHER PARCELS ON THE FINAL
SUBDIVISION PLAT AND INCLUDED IN DESCRIPTION OF OTHER PARCELS.
   (A)   A parcel designated as a common area on a final subdivision plat and
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and not proposed for dedication
to any public agency, may not be separately owned or conveyed independently of
the other parcels created by the final subdivision plat.
   (B)   The ownership interest in a common area parcel described in division
(A) above shall:
      (1)   For purposes of assessment, be divided equally among all parcels
created by the final subdivision plat, unless a different division of interest
for assessment purposes is indicated on the final subdivision plat or an
accompanying recorded document; and
      (2)   Be included in the description of each instrument describing a
parcel on the final subdivision plat by its identifying plat number, even if
the common area interest is not explicitly stated in the instrument.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.150) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.083 SUBDIVISION LANDSCAPING AND INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before an applicant conducts any site preparation work on the subject
property, the applicant shall have complied with the requirements of §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter.
   (A)   Final subdivision plat approval. The Land Use Authority, as
applicable, has approved the final plat.
   (B)   Final subdivision improvement plans approvals. All required final
subdivision improvement plans shall have been approved by the City Engineer, as
demonstrated by the dated signature of the City Engineer.
   (C)   Preconstruction meeting. Meet with the City Engineer, Department
Director, or designee, and with authorized representatives of all other city
departments, as determined necessary and private utility and service providers,
as applicable, in a preconstruction meeting.
   (D)   Landscaping and improvements completion. The applicant shall:
      (1)   Complete all required and proposed public landscaping and
improvements as required by final subdivision approval and the approved
construction plans; or
      (2)   Post required improvement completion assurance and warranty
agreements, as required by §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.160) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.084 APPEAL OF FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION DECISION.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Land Use Authority, as applicable,
related to a final subdivision plat application may appeal the decision to the
city's Appeal Authority that may include the city's Land Use Hearing Officer.
If the appeal arises from the subdivision improvement plans, the city shall
assemble an appeal panel in accordance with Utah law. An appeal shall comply
with all requirements and standards of §§
155.240 through
155.245.
(Prior Code, § 25.04.170) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.085 EXCEPTIONS TO REVIEW CYCLES.
   The review cycle restrictions and requirements do not apply for subdivisions
which have boundaries containing a geologic hazard or potential geological
hazard, or for any subdivisions for uses other than single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, or townhomes.
(Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
COMBINED PRELIMINARY/FINAL, NO-DEDICATION SUBDIVISIONS OF FIVE OR FEWER LOTS
AND NO MORE THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS
§ 155.095 SEPARATE APPLICATION PROCESS FOR NO-DEDICATION SUBDIVISIONS OF FIVE
OR FEWER LOTS AND NO MORE THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   For subdivisions proposing five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units (see division (C) below), and when no dedication of any kind is
required or proposed, a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no
more than ten dwelling units application process may be utilized. Subdivisions
proposing to create more than five lots, or when any dedication of any kind is
required or proposed, shall follow the separate preliminary subdivision plat
and final subdivision plat application procedures provided by §§
155.045 through
155.057 and
155.070 through
155.083 of this chapter.
   (B)   Department Director - no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots
and no more than ten dwelling units. The Director, or authorized designee,
shall be the Administrative Land Use Authority for applications for no-
dedication subdivisions of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling
units. The following shall apply:
      (1)   A combined preliminary subdivision and final subdivision plat
application shall be submitted to the Department for review and decision
consistent with §
155.096 of this chapter.
      (2)   The combined preliminary subdivision and final subdivision plat.
All areas of the subject property shall be located within a lot (no remnant
property remains).
      (3)   No portion of the subject property is proposed or required for
dedication for any road or street.
      (4)   All proposed lots shall have access to required infrastructure and
services and lot frontage on an immediately adjacent road or street. a no-
dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling
units may not cross any other private property to secure access to required
infrastructure and services.
      (5)   The proposed no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no
more than ten dwelling units shall comply with all requirements of this
chapter, all applicable zoning district standards, and all other applicable
requirements and regulations.
      (6)   No land within the proposed subdivision may be located within any
other recorded subdivision.
      (7)   The Director, or designee, may not consider the combined
preliminary plat and final plat application until a Development Review Team
(DRT) review and recommendation has been received.
   (C)   No-dedication subdivisions of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units:
When a subdivision creates five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling
units and involves no dedication, a combined preliminary and final plat review
process is applicable consistent with this subchapter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3213.gif]
 
(Prior Code, § 25.05.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.096 APPLICATION REQUIREME NTS FOR A NO-DEDICATI ON SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR
FEWER LOTS AND NO MORE THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS.
   A no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units application filed with the Department shall provide the
following minimum information, required for the Department to determine the
application complete, and for the Land Use Authority, as applicable, to decide
the application:
   (A)   Application form. A no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots
and no more than ten dwelling units application completed and signed by the
owner(s) of the subject property, or the authorized agent, of the owner(s). The
application form shall be accompanied by a notarized affidavit identifying (i)
the owner(s), and (ii) if applicable, the agent as being duly authorized to
represent the owner(s) in all matters related to the no-dedication subdivision
of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units application. All
persons with a fee interest in the subject property shall be required to join
in and sign the application, or the notarized affidavit, if applicable;
   (B)   No-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units application fees. The no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer
lots and no more than ten dwelling units application shall include the payment
of all no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten
dwelling units application fees and review fees, as established by the Council,
and any total amount, or deposit amount, required to provide the services of
the city’s contracted City Engineer, and other consultants determined by the
city to be required to comprehensively review the application;
   (C)   Legal description. A complete and accurate legal description of the
subject property, accurate in scale, dimension and bearing, and giving the
location of and ties to the nearest survey monument. The map shall have an
error of closure of not greater than 1:10,000. The survey must be tied to the
state grid or other permanent marker established by the county. Bearings shall
be shown to the nearest second, lengths to the nearest hundredth foot, and
areas to the nearest hundredth acre. The location of all monuments erected,
corners and other points established in the field. The material of which the
monuments, corners or other points are made shall be noted. All parcels, units
or lots proposed to be created shall be numbered as required by the County
Recorder. All lands within the boundaries of the subject property and the
subdivision plat shall be accounted for as parcels, lots, roads, streets,
alleys, walkways or other designations;
   (D)   Required subject property information. The following information shall
be provided, on separate sheets, at the same scale as the subdivision plat, as
applicable:
      (1)   The identification of known natural features including, but not
limited to, jurisdictional wetlands, as identified by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, areas of slope exceeding 5% grade, floodplains, flood
channels and drainage ways, identified as required by any local, state or
federal agency, all watercourses, areas where ground water is located within
three feet of the ground surface, waterbodies, marshy or swampy areas and any
other natural features, as required by the Department or City Engineer,
including the total area of each;
      (2)   All trees over six inches in diameter, measured three feet above
the ground. Wooded areas and location of trees to remain shall be indicated;
      (3)   Existing contours, at intervals of no greater than two feet,
overlaid with the proposed subdivision layout. Elevations shall be based on
national Geodetic Survey sea level data. In cases of predominately-level
topography, one-foot interval contours may be required by the Department or
City Engineer;
      (4)   The location of any known human-made features on, or contiguous to
the subject property, including all existing parcels and lots, all utility
easements, railroads, power lines and power poles, telephone and other
telecommunication lines and facilities, bridges, culverts, drainage channels,
all rights-of-way and easements, field drains and well or spring protection
areas;
      (5)   The location and dimensions of all existing buildings, fence lines
and property lines overlaid with the proposed subdivision layout;
      (6)   The layout of existing power lines, including the source and
connection to the existing power supply;
      (7)   All existing road and street locations and dimensions. The location
and size of existing culinary water and sanitary sewer lines and the location
of all wells and springs, if any, and the location of all existing secondary
water locations, as required by the Public Works Director or City Engineer;
      (8)   Existing storm drainage and flood-control systems, including pipe
sizes, inlets, detention areas and drainage arrows;
      (9)   The location of all existing fire hydrants, including the sizes of
all water lines serving all fire hydrants;
      (10)   The location of all existing streetlights identifying the
location, type, height and light output of all streetlights; and
      (11)   The location of all existing street trees and other landscape
plantings, identifying the location and type of all street trees, shrubs and
other landscape materials and plantings.
   (E)   Geotechnical report. A report complying with and meeting the
requirements of the city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and
Construction, as adopted;
   (F)   Title report. An accurate title report, provided within 30 calendar
days, of submission of the no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and
no more than ten dwelling units application materials and setting forth any
mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record
affecting the subject property;
   (G)   Evidence of availability of necessary services. The following
information is required to establish the availability of required services to
the subject property:
      (1)   Culinary water.
         (a)   Approval, with recommended plat and drawing revisions, as
necessary, for the culinary water system and services from the city’s Public
Works Department, acting as the city’s Culinary Water Authority.
         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide
all information and materials, required by the Public Works Department, to
provide written approval of the proposed culinary water system and services;
      (2)   Sanitary sewer. Approval, with recommended plat and drawing
revisions, as necessary, for the sanitary sewer system and services from the
city’s Public Works Department, acting as the city’s Sanitary Sewer Authority.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information
and materials, as required by the Public Works Department, to provide written
approval of the proposed sanitary sewer system and services;
      (3)   Fire protection, suppression and access. A recommendation, with
recommended plat and drawing revisions, as necessary, for the fire protection
and suppression system from the city’s Fire Department, acting as the city’s
Fire Authority. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide
all information and materials as required by the Fire Department to provide the
written recommendation of the proposed fire protection and suppression systems
and access;
      (4)   Vehicular and active transportation. Approval, with recommended
plat and drawing revisions, as necessary, for the transportation system,
including all roads, streets, sidewalks, trails, biking facilities and other
transportation-related facilities from the City Engineer, acting as the city’s
Transportation Authority. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to
provide all information and materials, as required by the City Engineer to
provide the written approval of the proposed transportation facilities and
system;
      (5)   State and/or county access permit. If the proposed subdivision is
accessed from a state highway, an appropriate access permit, as required by the
state’s Department of Transportation, shall be provided. If the subdivision
will be accessed from a county road, authorization from the county to allow the
subdivision access from a county road shall be provided. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information and materials, as
required by the state’s Department of Transportation and the county to provide
the necessary access permit(s);
      (6)   Storm drainage and flood control. Approval, with recommended plat
and drawing revisions, as necessary, for the storm drainage and flood-control
system from the City Engineer, acting as the city’s Storm Drainage and Flood-
Control Authority. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to
provide all information and materials, as required by the City Engineer to
provide the written approval of the proposed storm drainage and flood-control
system;
      (7)   Secondary water. Approval, with recommended plat and drawing
revisions, as necessary, for the secondary water system from the City Engineer,
acting as the city’s Secondary Water Authority. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant(s) to provide all information and materials, as required by
the City Engineer to provide the written approval of the proposed secondary
water system;
      (8)   Electrical power system.
         (a)   Approval, with recommended plat and drawing revisions, as
necessary, for the electrical power system from the city’s Public Power
Director, acting as the city’s Public Power System Authority.
         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide
all information and materials, as required by the Public Power Director to
provide the written approval of the proposed electrical power system;
      (9)   Fiber optic.
         (a)   Approval, with recommended plat and drawing revisions, as
necessary, for the fiber optic system from the city’s Public Power Director,
acting as the city’s Fiber Optic Authority; and
         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide
all information and materials, as required by the Public Power Director to
provide the written approval of the proposed fiber-optic system.
      (10)   Special Service District or Special Service Area. If the subject
property is located within the boundaries of a Special Service District or a
Special Service Area, a written recommendation from the governing board of such
district or area shall be provided with the no-dedication subdivision of five
or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units application materials,
identifying potential impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant(s) to provide all information and
materials, as required by the district or area to provide the written
recommendation required.
      (11)   Other. As may be applicable, approvals and permits from any
federal, state and local agency, including approval by the Bear River Health
Department or the state’s Department of Health.
   (H)   Subdivision plat. A subdivision plat, prepared by a licensed land
surveyor, as required by Utah Code, and drawn at a scale of not less than one-
inch equals 50 feet, or at an alternative scale as determined by the Department
or City Engineer. The subdivision plat shall be prepared digitally, and all
sheets shall be consecutively numbered. A minimum number of copies and sizes of
copies as stated on the application shall be provided. A digital copy of the
subdivision plat, in a format acceptable to the City's Geographic Information
System, shall be provided. The plat shall show the following:
      (1)   A vicinity map, at a minimum scale of 1" = 1,000', clearly
identifying the boundaries of the entire subject property.
      (2)   Property accesses, adjoining subdivision outlines and names, as
applicable, and relevant features located within one-half mile of the subject
property boundary. Surrounding roads and streets and the names of all adjoining
property owners of record shall be shown.
      (3)   The basis of bearings used, graphic and written scale, true north
point, township, range, section, quarter section, lot number, and the total
area of the subject property.
      (4)   Proposed road and street layout. All existing and proposed road and
street names shall be shown.
      (5)   The boundaries, course, and dimensions of all lots and parcels
created, measured by their boundaries, course, and extent. Any remaining
portion of the subject property's original legal description shall be included
in a lot.
      (6)   The location of any common space or open space areas. Such property
shall be included in a lot.
      (7)   The lot, unit, or building reference, road, street, or site
address, the road and street name or coordinate address, acreage and square
footage for all parcels, units, or lots proposed to be created. All parcels,
units, or lots proposed shall be numbered consecutively.
      (8)   All existing rights-of-way and easement grants of record for
underground facilities and all other utility facilities.
      (9)   A title block, placed on the right side of the subdivision plat
showing:
         (a)   Proposed name or designation of the subdivision that is distinct
from any other subdivision already recorded in the Office of the Box Elder
County Recorder.
         (b)   Name and address of the owner(s) of record and the name,
address, and license number of the licensed surveyor responsible for preparing
the subdivision plat.
         (c)   Date of preparation of the subdivision plat and all revision
dates, as applicable.
      (10)   Easement plan. An easement plan, identifying the location, size,
and use of all existing and proposed easements.
      (11)   Subdivision improvement plans. Final subdivision improvement
plans, as required by the city's Public Works Standards for Development,
Design, and Construction, and stamped and dated by a licensed civil engineer,
for all public and quasi-public improvements. These plans shall include all
required and proposed below grade and above grade utilities and facilities,
public landscaping and infrastructure improvements. All conditions or
restrictions governing the location of all utilities and facilities within a
right-of-way, and easement grants of records shall be shown.
      (12)   Grading plan. For subject properties of one acre or larger, a
grading plan shall be provided and indicated by solid-line contours, using two-
foot intervals, imposed on dashed line contours, also using two-foot intervals,
of the existing topography for the entire subject property. For subject
properties that have predominately level, topography one-foot contour intervals
may be required by the Department or City Engineer. The grading plan shall
identify the proposed grading for each proposed lot or parcel to be created.
      (13)   Erosion control plan. When required by the Department or City
Engineer, an erosion control plan shall be provided and included with the
combined preliminary/final subdivision application. The erosion control plan
shall identify the proposed drainage and erosion control techniques and methods
for each proposed lot or parcel to be created.
      (14)   Digital copy. A digital copy of the preliminary/final subdivision
plat, in a format acceptable to the City's Geographic Information System
standards.
      (15)   Improvements ownership, operation, and maintenance. Acceptance of
the ownership, operation, and maintenance of all public and quasi-public
improvements, as evidenced in writing by the proposed owner or operator of the
improvements, as applicable.
      (16)   Estimated cost of installation of landscaping and improvements.
See §§
155.140 through
155.145.
   (I)   Additional information and materials.
      (1)   When the Department staff or other development review team member
(s) determine necessary, the applicant may be required to provide other
information, materials, studies and other evidence indicating the suitability
of the subject property for the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   This includes, but is not limited to, compliance with the city’s
transportation plan(s) including access management plans, adequacy of
infrastructure and utilities, public safety and fire protection, ground water
protection, plant cover maintenance, geologic or flood hazard, erosion control,
wildlife habitat preservation and any other infrastructure, physical,
environmental or cultural matter; and
   (J)   Signature blocks. The subdivision plat shall contain signature blocks
for the Mayor or Department Director, as applicable, City Engineer and City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.097 DETERMINATION OF A COMPLETE NO-DEDICATION SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR
FEWER LOTS AND NO MORE THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS APPLICATION.
   An application shall be considered complete to being the review cycle when
the following items are submitted:
   (A)   A completed Brigham City no-dedication subdivision plat application;
   (B)   Owner's affidavit and consent;
   (C)   Payment of application fees and engineering deposit;
   (D)   All listed items on the no-dedication subdivision plat application
checklist;
   (E)   The number and size of paper copies for the DRT and Administrative
Land Use Authority as identified on the application checklist; and
   (F)   An electronic copy of all plans in PDF format.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.098 APPEAL OF A DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS OR
INCOMPLETENESS BY THE DEPARTMENT.
   See the requirements and standards of §§
155.240 through
155.245.
(Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
§ 155.099 NO-DEDICATION SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR FEWER LOTS AND NO MORE THAN TEN
DWELLING UNITS APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Same as preliminary plat application review procedures, the Director acting
as the Administrative Land Use Authority, unless road or street dedication(s)
is proposed or required:
 
Combined Preliminary - Final Subdivision Plat Application Procedures for No-
Dedication Subdivisions of Five or Fewer Lots and No More Than Ten Dwelling
Units
       Applicant submits required application materials (§   Department
Step 1 155.096) and pays application fees to the Department.  determines
       Within 30 days, the Department must determine if the   application
       preliminary subdivision plat application is complete.  incomplete
Step 2 Department determines application complete.            An applicant has
       No later than 20 business days after receiving a       30 days from time
       complete final subdivision plat application, DRT       of the
Step 3 reviews application before Planning Commission         Departments
       meeting to ensure all requirements have been met and   written notice of
       provides a written report to the applicant.            decision to
       The Director, or designee must consider the DRT        submit missing
Step 4 recommendations and all other materials in its         materials and
       decision to approve, approve with revisions, or deny   fees. If the
       the application.                                       application
                                                              remains
       The approval of a no-dedication subdivision of five    incomplete, fees
       or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units      and materials
       application, with or without requirements, by the      submitted to the
       Director shall constitute final approval of the        Department are
Step 5 subdivision by the city. The plat shall be signed by   returned to the
       all parties required by §                             applicant, and
       155.101 and recorded in the Office of the Box Elder    the application
       County Recorder within 365 days of Director approval.  is no longer
                                                              considered.
 
(Prior Code, § 25.05.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.100 EFFECT OF APPROVAL, WITH OR WITHOUT REQUIREMENTS, OF A NO-DEDICATION
SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR FEWER LOTS AND NO MORE THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS
APPLICATION AND EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (A)   The approval of a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and
no more than ten dwelling units application, with or without requirements, by
the Administrative Land Use Authority, as applicable, shall constitute final
approval of the subdivision by the city.
   (B)   After the plat has been approved by the Administrative Land Use
Authority, as applicable, and the approved plat has been circulated by the
applicant(s) and is signed by the designated officers, and others, as required
by §
155.101 of this chapter, the approved plat and any other required materials,
shall be presented to the Department for recordation in the office of the
County Recorder.
   (C)   After the approved plat and any other materials have been recorded in
the office of the County Recorder, the applicant(s) may apply for building
permits consistent with the combined preliminary/final plat approval and city
requirements for such permits.
   (D)   The applicant(s) is required to pay all fees, including, but not
limited to, application fees, copies and recording fees of all documents
associated with the approved plat.
   (E)   As provided by the Act, the continuing validity of the subdivision
plat approval is conditioned upon the applicant(s) proceeding after approval to
implement the approval with reasonable diligence. For the purposes of this
chapter, the approval of a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and
no more than ten dwelling units application shall be effective for a maximum
period of 365 calendar days (one year) from the date of approval by the Land
Use Authority, as applicable, at the end of which time the applicant(s) shall
have submitted the approved plat to the Department for recordation. If the
approved plat is not received by the Department within 365 calendar days (one
year) of approval, the plat shall be declared void and of no effect.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the Administrative
Land Use Authority, as applicable, may extend the period to submit the approved
subdivision plat to the Department for recordation upon a request from the
applicant(s) and a finding by the Land Use Authority of extenuating
circumstances. The Administrative Land Use Authority may extend the period to
record the approved plat, as determined, but shall not extend the period
required to submit the approved plat to the Department for recordation beyond
18 months from the date of approval of the plat.
   (G)   (1)   The applicant(s) shall submit a request for an extension, pay
filing fees and provide a written request for an extension to the Department a
minimum of four weeks before the approved subdivision plat is due to expire.
      (2)   The extension request shall identify:
         (a)   The reasons for the extension request;
         (b)   An updated title report, updated engineer’s estimate and updated
financial guarantee agreement; and
         (c)   Be accompanied by the extension request application fee.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.101 RECORDATION OF A SUBDIVISION PLAT WITHOUT NECESSARY SIGNATURES.
   (A)   A plat does not create an approved subdivision unless the approved
plat is signed by the following individuals and recorded in the office of the
County Recorder:
      (1)   As applicable, the Mayor, or the Director, or an authorized
designee, of the Director, as applicable;
      (2)   All owners of record, or their authorized agents, shall sign and
acknowledge the plat;
      (3)   The licensed land surveyor, providing the necessary certificates,
as required by law; and
      (4)   The City Attorney. The City Attorney shall not sign the approved
plat until all others, as required by this section, have signed, and
acknowledged the plat, as required by this section.
   (B)   Any subdivision plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder
without the signatures required by this section shall be determined to be an
illegal subdivision and shall not be recognized in any way by the city.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.102 EXPIRATION OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATION.
   After an approved no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no
more than ten dwelling units application has expired, a new no-dedication
subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than ten dwelling units
application shall be required. A new no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer
lots and no more than ten dwelling units application shall comply with all
applicable application and procedural requirements and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.070) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.103 APPROVAL OF NO-DEDICATION SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR FEWER LOTS AND NO
MORE THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS SHALL OCCUR ONCE ONLY.
   (A)   The approval of a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and
no more than ten dwelling units application by the Department Director, or
designee, for a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more
than ten dwelling units, with or without requirements, shall only occur once
per legal parcel of property occurring before 11-1-1986.
   (B)   Property subdivided under these provisions shall be accompanied by a
note on the parcel or lot number and on the final subdivision plat that clearly
identifies that this one-time subdivision occurred and the resulting lots,
including any portion of the original parcel of property, may not be further
subdivided without the approval and recordation of a new final plat or an
amended final plat with the effect of modifying the existing final plat.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.080) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.104 SITE PREPARATION WORK PROHIBITED.
   No site preparation work, including any excavation, grading or regrading may
take place on the subject property, and no building permits shall be issued by
the city, until a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more
than ten dwelling units application has been approved and recorded in the
office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.105 SUBDIVISION LANDSCAPING AND INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS; WARRANTY.
   (A)   Before an applicant conducts any site preparation work, including any
excavation, grading, regrading or any other development activity on the subject
property, the applicant shall:
      (1)   Preconstruction meeting. Meet with the City Engineer, Department
Director, or designee, and with authorized representatives all other city
departments, and private utility and service providers, as applicable in a
preconstruction meeting;
      (2)   Landscaping and improvements completion. Comply with all
requirements of §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter;
      (3)   Assurance. The city may not require an applicant to post an
improvement completion assurance for:
         (a)   Landscaping or an infrastructure improvement that the city has
previously inspected and accepted;
         (b)   Infrastructure improvements that are private and not essential
or required to meet the Building Code, Fire Code, flood or storm water
management provisions, street and access requirements, or other essential
necessary public safety improvements adopted in a land use regulation; or
         (c)   Infrastructure improvements within the area proposed to be
private or for any infrastructure improvements within the subject property the
city requires to be private.
      (4)   Estimated cost of installation of landscaping and improvements. See
§§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter. The applicant engineer’s cost estimates for the
installation of all required subdivision improvements shall be provided for
review by the City Engineer and approved by the Administrative Land Use
Authority, as applicable, to establish the necessary improvements completion
assurance in an amount required by §
155.141 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.100) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
   (B)   Subdivision landscaping and infrastructure warranty: see §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.110) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.106 APPEAL OF NO-DEDICATION SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR FEWER LOTS AND NO MORE
THAN TEN DWELLING UNITS APPLICATION DECISION.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of an Administrative Land Use Authority
related to a no-dedication subdivision of five or fewer lots and no more than
ten dwelling units application may appeal the decision to the city’s appeal
authority, that may include the city’s Land Use Hearing Officer. An appeal
shall comply with all requirements and standards of §§
155.240 through
155.245 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.05.120) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION OPTION
§ 155.120 PURPOSE.
   (A)    The cluster subdivision option (“CSO”) is a legislative consideration
and is provided to allow for subdivisions with clustering of lots with lot
sizes smaller than that required by the zoning district in which the property
is located.
   (B)   However, the total number of lots allowed shall not exceed that
allowed by the zoning district.
   (C)   Cluster subdivisions:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2961.jpg]
 
(Prior Code, § 25.06.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1- 2024)
§ 155.121 INTENT.
   (A)   A CSO is intended to provide subdivisions and accompanying lot
configurations that demonstrate desirable subdivision features including:
      (1)   Protections for sensitive, agricultural and other lands;
      (2)   Provisions for the long-term conservation of open spaces and
agricultural use areas;
      (3)   Provisions for trails, trailheads and other necessary public access
locations to trails; and
      (4)   Cost efficiencies in subdivision development and maintenance,
including the amount and location of required infrastructure, including roads
and streets, and other required utilities and services.
   (B)   A CSO is not provided and is not intended in any way to provide a
mechanism to achieve increased residential density benefits above that provided
by the applicable zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.122 ALLOWED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The allowed uses and all other development standards shall be as provided by
the zoning district in which the subject property is located and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.123 APPLICABLE ZONING DISTRICTS.
   A CSO may only be considered by the Land Use Authority for property located
in the A-5, A-1, RR-5, RR-1, R-1-40, R-1-20, R-1-12, and R-1-10 Zoning
Districts. The Commission is the recommending body to the Council, which is the
Land Use Authority for the CSO.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.124 LOT SIZE AND REQUIREMENTS.
   In no event may any lot in a CSO be smaller than:
   (A)   That required for written feasibility approval from the Culinary Water
Authority;
   (B)   That required for written feasibility approval from the Sanitary Sewer
Authority;
   (C)   That required to comply with all development standards (including
those for primary buildings and structures and accessory buildings and
structures) required by the zoning district in which the subject property is
located; or
   (D)   That required to meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning
district in which the subject property is located and to provide a building
envelope of sufficient size, as recommended by the Commission and approved by
the Land Use Authority. For the purposes of a CSO, the required lot frontage
may be modified, as recommended by the Commission and approved by the Land Use
Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.125 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LOTS AND FUTURE DIVISIONS.
   (A)    The number of lots proposed for a CSO, and approved by the Land Use
Authority, may not be more than the maximum number of lots allowed by the
zoning district in which the property is located. (To calculate the maximum
number of lots allowed, the total number of acres of the subject property shall
be divided by the minimum lot size required by the zoning district in which the
property is located, rounded to the nearest and lowest whole number.) Example:
Total subject property = 5.9 acres located in an RR-1 Zoning District
(requiring a minimum lot size of one acre)
5.9 Acres/1 unit per acre = 5.0 Total Lots possible
   (B)   As provided by this chapter, property subdivided under these
provisions shall be accompanied by a note on the lot and parcel number and on
the final subdivision plat that the resulting lots, including any portion of
the original property parcel, may not be further subdivided without the
approval and recordation of a new final plat or an amended final plat with the
effect of modifying the existing final plat. All other standards and
requirements provided by this chapter shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect, including the requirements of §§
155.140 through
155.145 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.126 APPROVAL PROCEDURES AND APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All CSO subdivision applications shall be required to follow the
procedures of this chapter depending on the number of lots and dedications
proposed.
   (B)   All subdivisions proposing to be developed with a CSO shall be
reviewed, approved, approved with revisions or denied with findings of
compliance, or non-compliance, by the Land Use Authority, as applicable for the
number of lots and dedications, if any, proposed.
   (C)   In addition to the other application requirements of this chapter, a
subdivision application proposing a CSO shall also provide an accurately scaled
drawing identifying the required minimum front, side and rear yards as required
by the zoning district in which the property is located for each proposed lot.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.070) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.127 LAND USE AUTHORITY REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   In addition to the review and approval standards provided by this chapter,
the Land Use Authority, as applicable, shall find:
   (A)   The CSO is consistent with the various goals and provisions of the
General Plan, and compatibility is provided with adjacent properties, uses and
development;
   (B)   The subject property is suitable for a CSO; and
   (C)   There exists compliance of the proposed CSO with the purpose, intent,
and objectives of the CSO option.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.080) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.128 OPEN SPACE AND AGRICULTURAL USE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Like other subdivisions, all areas within a CSO shall be included
within a lot, including all open spaces and areas proposed to continue as
agricultural use.
      (2)   Areas of open space or land to continue for agricultural use may be
identified as a separate lot or included within one or more lots.
      (3)   (a)   Open space and agricultural use areas should be contiguous to
provide for large and integrated open space and agricultural use areas.
         (b)   Non-contiguous areas of open space and agricultural land may be
approved by the Land Use Authority with a finding that such exception is
necessary and desirable based upon the location and characteristics of the
subject property.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.090)
   (B)   Ownership and maintenance. Unless otherwise approved by the Land Use
Authority, the fee ownership of the open space and agricultural use areas shall
be owned by one of the following: homeowners’ association, land trust, a
conservation organization, governmental entity, private individual(s) or other
legal entity. The cost and responsibility of maintaining all open space and
agricultural use areas shall be the responsibility of the fee owner.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.100)
   (C)   Area protections.
      (1)   (a)   Areas of open space and agricultural use areas preserved
shall be protected from further divisions and from uses determined by the Land
Use Authority to be inconsistent with the purposes of the open space and/or
agricultural uses.
         (b)   The applicant shall provide a proposed method of preserving open
spaces and agricultural use areas for review and approval by the Land Use
Authority.
      (2)   The approved method of protecting open spaces and agricultural use
areas shall be recorded concurrently with the recording of the final plat in
the office of the County Recorder and the signed certificate of approval.
(Prior Code, § 25.06.110)
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT ASSURANCE AND IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION WARRANTY STANDARDS
§ 155.140 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the standards and requirements of this chapter, all
applications shall comply with the following, at a minimum:
   (A)   Sections
155.260 through
155.275 of this chapter, Public Work Standards for Development, Design and
Construction, as adopted by the city;
   (B)   All design and construction standards, as applicable, for the
provision of any improvements or services to be dedicated or maintained by any
public or quasi-public agency; and
   (C)   Improvement completion assurance and improvement completion warranty
standards and requirements as provided by §§
155.141 and
155.143 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.07.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-
6-2023)
§ 155.141 REQUIRED INFRASTRUCTURE/IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE.
   (A)   As provided by the Act, and before an applicant conducts any site
preparation work or development activity or records a plat, as applicable, the
applicant shall:
      (1)   Complete all required public landscaping and infrastructure
improvements; or
      (2)   Post an improvement completion assurance for all required public
landscaping and infrastructure improvements.
   (B)   If an applicant elects to post an improvement completion assurance,
the applicant shall provide the city’s required completion assurance for:
      (1)   Completion of 100% of the required public landscaping and
infrastructure improvements; or
      (2)   If the city has inspected and accepted a portion of the public
landscaping and infrastructure improvements, 100% of the incomplete or
unaccepted public landscaping and infrastructure improvements.
   (C)   The improvement completion assurance shall be in the form of one of
the following:
      (1)   Cash deposit in escrow held with a financial institution insured by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) or the National Credit Union
Administration (“NCUA”) together with an escrow agreement;
      (2)   Cash deposit held by city together with a financial guarantee
agreement; or
      (3)   Improvement surety bond together with a bond agreement approved by
the city.
   (D)   As provided by city ordinances and regulations, the applicant and the
city shall comply with the city’s established system for the partial release of
an improvement completion assurance as portions of required public landscaping
and infrastructure improvements are completed and accepted in accordance with
city ordinances and regulations.
   (E)   The city shall not require an applicant to post an improvement
completion assurance for:
      (1)   Public landscaping or an infrastructure improvement that the city
has previously inspected and accepted;
      (2)   Infrastructure improvements that are private and not essential or
required to meet the Building Code, Fire Code, flood or storm water management
provisions, street and access requirements, or other essential necessary public
safety improvements adopted in a land use regulation; or
      (3)   Infrastructure improvements within the area proposed to be private
or for any infrastructure improvements within the subject property the city
requires to be private.
(Prior Code, § 25.07.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-
6-2023; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.142 ESTIMATED COST OF INSTALLATION OF LANDSCAPING AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)    The applicant engineer’s cost estimates for the installation of all
required subdivision improvements shall be provided for review and approval by
the City Engineer to establish the necessary improvements completion assurance
and warranty in an amount required by §
155.141 of this chapter.
   (B)   When the city accepts an improvement completion assurance for public
landscaping and infrastructure improvements for a subdivision in accordance
with this section, the city may not deny an applicant a building permit if the
subdivision lot meets the requirements for the issuance of a building permit
under the Building Code and Fire Code.
   (C)   No occupancy may be permitted on any building until all infrastructure
improvements have been accepted by the city.
   (D)   The provisions of this section do not supersede the terms of a valid
development agreement, an adopted phasing plan or the state’s Construction
Code.
(Prior Code, § 25.07.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-
6-2023; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.143 IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION WARRANTY.
   At any time before the city accepts a public landscaping or infrastructure
improvement, and for the duration of each improvement warranty period, the city
shall require the applicant to:
   (A)   Execute an improvement warranty for the improvement warranty period;
and
   (B)   Post an improvement completion assurance as required by §
155.141 of this chapter in the amount of up to 10% of the lesser of:
      (1)   The City Engineer’s approval of the original estimated cost of
completion; or
      (2)   The applicant’s reasonable proven cost of completion.
(Prior Code, § 25.07.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-
6-2023; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.144 IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE AND COMPLETION WARRANTY AGREEMENTS.
   To ensure the installation of all required subdivision public landscaping
and infrastructure improvements, as required, both the completion assurance and
warranty agreements may include provisions related to completion and warranty
releases.
(Prior Code, § 25.07.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-
6-2023; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 155.145 SITE PREPARATION WORK AND ANY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY OCCURRING BEFORE
REQUIRED INFRASTRUCTURE IS COMPLETED; IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE.
   If an applicant elects to post an improvement completion assurance, the
applicant shall provide the city's required completion assurance for:
   (A)   Completion of 100% of the required public landscaping or
infrastructure improvements; or
   (B)   If the city has inspected and accepted a portion of the public
landscaping or infrastructure improvements, 100% of the incomplete or
unaccepted public landscaping or infrastructure improvements. The City Engineer
shall review and approve an updated warranty completion assurance for all
remaining uncompleted public landscaping and infrastructure improvements.
   (C)   As provided by the city ordinances and regulations, the applicant and
the city shall comply with the city's established system for the partial
release of an improvement completion assurance as portions of required public
landscaping or infrastructure improvements are completed and accepted in
accordance with local ordinance; and issue or deny a building permit in
accordance with the Act, based on the installation of landscaping and/or
infrastructure improvements.
   (D)   The city may not require an applicant to post an improvement
completion assurance for:
      (1)   Public landscaping or an infrastructure improvement that the city
has previously inspected and accepted.
      (2)   Infrastructure improvements that are private and not essential or
required to meet the building code, fire code, flood or stormwater management
provisions, street, and access requirements, or other essential necessary
public safety improvements adopted in a land use regulation; or
      (3)   Infrastructure improvements within the area proposed to be private
or for any infrastructure improvements within the subject property the city
requires to be private.
   (E)   Estimated cost of installation of landscaping and improvements. The
applicant engineer's cost estimates for the installation of all required
subdivision improvements shall be provided for review and approval by the City
Engineer to establish the necessary improvements completion assurance in an
amount required by §
155.141.
   (F)   Subdivision public landscaping and infrastructure warranty. At any
time before the city accepts a public landscaping or infrastructure
improvement, and for the duration of each improvement warranty period, the city
shall require the applicant to:
      (1)   Execute an improvement warranty for the improvement warranty
period; and
      (2)   Post an improvement completion assurance as required by §
155.141 in the amount of up to 10% of the lesser of:
         (a)   The City Engineer's original estimated cost of completion; or
         (b)   The applicant's reasonable proven cost of completion.
      (3)   When the city accepts an improvement completion assurance for
public landscaping or infrastructure improvements for a subdivision in
accordance with this section, the city shall not deny an applicant a building
permit if the subdivision lot meets the requirements for the issuance of a
building permit under the building code and fire code.
      (4)   No occupancy may be permitted on any building until all
infrastructure improvements have been accepted by the city.
      (5)   The provisions of this section do not supersede the terms of a
valid development agreement, an adopted phasing plan, or the state construction
code.
   (G)   Improvements completion assurance. The applicant engineer's cost
estimates for the installation of all required subdivision improvements shall
be provided for review and approval by the City Engineer to establish the
necessary improvements completion assurance in an amount of up to 10% of the
lesser of:
      (1)   A professional engineer's estimated cost of completion; or
      (2)   The applicant's reasonable proven cost of completion.
   (H)   Improvements completion warranty. A proposed improvement warranty
shall be established for the warranty period after the acceptance of all
improvements proposed to be dedicated to city, and in the form of an
improvement completion assurance as required by §
155.141 in an amount of up to 10% of the lesser of:
      (1)   A professional engineer's original estimated cost of completion; or
      (2)   The applicant's reasonable proven cost of completion.
(Prior Code, § 25.07.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-
6-2023; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024; Ord. 25-01, passed 1-16-2025)
ATYPICAL SUBDIVISION STREETS AND LOT CONFIGURATIONS
§ 155.160 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter provides standards for individual atypical subdivision
street designs and lot configurations. These atypical street designs and lot
configurations shall only be allowed by the Land Use Authority, as applicable,
when the more accepted and standard street designs and lot configurations are
determined to be either impractical or against the best interests of the city.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.161 CONNECTIVITY; APPLICABLE GENERAL PLAN POLICY.
   (A)   Consistent with the policies of the city’s General Plan, as adopted,
the city has a clear priority that all new roads, streets and other rights-of-
way provide connections to either existing or proposed roads, streets and other
rights-of-way. These connections should include active transportation
(pedestrian and bicycling) and vehicle movements.
   (B)   Undeniable support for the requirement that all roads, streets and
other rights-of-way be connected is found in the General Plan goal and strategy
statements. For example: “City fathers (leaders) allowed for the layout of a
highly connected city street system that serves to enhance the efficiency and
livability of the city’s transportation network.
   (C)   A well-planned grid system of roads offers a community multiple routes
for arriving at a destination and allows users of all modes (driving, biking,
walking) more direct travel routes. Good connectivity also serves to disperse
traffic.
   (D)   During the (General Plan) process, many citizens voiced their
appreciation and preference for well-connected roads. They expressed their
desire to institute policies that would increase connectivity in areas where it
is lacking, as well as policies that require future development to conform to
connected grid-like patterns” (General Plan, 2017, pp. 50-51).
(Prior Code, § 25.08.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.162 ROAD, STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY CONNECTIVITY REQUIRED; LIMITED
EXCEPTION.
   (A)   (1)   All new roads, streets or other rights-of-way, whether proposed
to be dedicated to the city or to remain private, shall provide connections to
the city’s existing road, street and right-of-way network and be found to be
consistent with the city’s General Plan, including its plans, goals and
strategies.
      (2)   Any cul-de-sac, whether proposed to be dedicated for public use or
to be private shall be prohibited after the effective date of this chapter
unless allowed by division (B) below.
      (3)   Stub streets are required and allowed, considering:
         (a)   To implement the road, street and right-of-way connectivity
policies of the General Plan, and when future property and subdivision
connections are required, or desired, stub streets may be required; and
         (b)   All stub streets shall meet the design requirements of the
city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and Construction, as
adopted.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.030)
   (B)    A cul-de-sac proposed after the effective date of this chapter may be
allowed if the Land Use Authority, as applicable, finds a special or unique
circumstance and compelling evidence to support all the following:
      (1)   No potential exists in the future for any road, street or right-of-
way connection;
      (2)   No goal or strategy of the General Plan will be compromised, nor
any other policy of the city adversely affected;
      (3)   Circumstances exist that benefit the city to not require a future
road, street or right-of-way connection;
      (4)   Notwithstanding the preceding exception standards, non-motorized
connections for active transportation and facilities, may be required; and
      (5)    In addition to the findings required by the Land Use Authority, as
provided by this section, no allowed cul-de-sac may exceed the maximum length
or the maximum number of lots or dwelling units, as provided by §§
155.260 through
155.275 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.040)
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
§ 155.163 FLAG LOT(S).
   (A)   Any flag lot allowed by the Land Use Authority, as applicable, shall
be deemed an exception and may only be allowed where a traditional lot layout
is impractical or impossible.
      (1)    Flag lot(s) defined. A flag lot is an irregularly shaped lot with
limited street frontage. Flag lots may be used for a single-family residence
only. No other uses are allowed unless an accessory use, building, or structure
to a single-family residence was permitted. All shared private driveways for
flag lot access must have an irrevocable access agreement in place, compliant
with the requirements of §
155.164.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3219.gif]
(2)   Flag lot standards. The lot portion and access staff portion of flag
lots, used in determining allowable dimensions on a flag lot.
*All flag lots are required to meet the lot size of the underlying zone without
counting the access staff portion of the site (division (B) of this section).
**The access staff leading to the lot portion may not exceed the maximum length
or be less than the minimum width set by division (B) of this section.[https://
export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3221.gif]
 
(Prior Code, § 25.08.050)
   (B)    Flag lot standards. See division (A)(2), flag lot standards, for
information on how lot and staff size are to be determined:
      (1)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for a flag lot shall be as
required by the zoning district in which the lot is located. No portion of the
lot’s staff section may be included in determining the required minimum lot
size. The size of a flag lot shall be determined from the rear property line of
the lot immediately adjacent that meets the minimum frontage requirement of the
zoning district and including all property within the proposed lot or property
lines.
      (2)   Maximum staff length. The maximum length of the lot’s staff section
may not exceed 200 feet, measured from the property line of the staff section
immediately adjacent to a road or street right-of-way line to the closest point
the rear property line of the immediately adjacent lot, such lot meeting the
minimum frontage requirement of the zoning district.
      (3)   Minimum yard (setback) requirements. The minimum yard requirements
(setbacks) shall be as required by the zoning district unless modified by an
adopted development agreement. The front yard shall be that portion of the lot
immediately accessed by the private driveway.
      (4)   Private driveway; staff portion minimum width. The minimum width of
the lot’s private driveway (staff portion) shall be 30 feet with a minimum of
20 feet being hard-surfaced and a minimum of five feet on each side of the
hard-surfaced area reserved for storm water drainage and snow storage/removal.
Hard surfacing shall include concrete, asphalt, brick pavers or crushed stone.
Structures and Yards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3223.gif]
 
(Prior Code, § 25.08.060)
   (C)   (1)    Fire and emergency vehicle turnaround required. A turnaround,
meeting the requirements of the city’s Fire Department, shall be provided on
the “flag” portion of the lot.
      (2)    Owner’s responsibility and maintenance. All portions of a flag lot
shall be determined to be private property. No part of a flag lot, including
all private driveway maintenance, may the responsibility of the city.
      (3)   Addressing. The lot’s address, as provided by the city, shall be
displayed in a prominent and visible location on both the dwelling and at the
private driveway immediately adjacent to the public road or street for
emergency services and deliveries.
      (4)   Garbage collection and deliveries. All garbage collection shall
take place at public road or street. Garbage cans shall be brought to the road
or street. Mail shall be provided at a postal box located at the road or street
right-of-way or in a central box unit.
      (5)   Geotechnical report required. A geotechnical report shall be
required for a flag lot either as part of the subdivision application and/or
building permit application.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.070)
   (D)   A flag lot shall only be used for one single-family dwelling. No other
uses, unless allowed as an accessory use, building or structure to a single-
family dwelling, may be permitted on a flag lot.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.080)
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
§ 155.164 PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   A private driveway associated with any flag lot may provide access to
another immediately adjacent flag lot; provided, an irrevocable access
agreement is in place and established for both lots prior to approval, for
either one or both lots, and the private driveway (staff portion) complies with
all standards of this chapter. No private driveway shall provide access to any
more than two lots.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.165 PUBLIC UTILITY LOTS.
   (A)   No-dedication subdivision. A public utility, as defined by the code,
may create a lot required for the purposes of the functioning of the utility by
complying with the provisions of this chapter, as applicable. The no-dedication
subdivision procedures may apply if the proposed public utility lot and any
reminder portion of the original parcel meets the requirements for a no-
dedication subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.100)
   (B)   Standards. A public utility lot:
      (1)   May be a size less than the required minimum lot size by the zoning
district, as applicable; provided, no negative impacts or nuisances are created
for any adjacent lot, parcel or owner as recommended by the DRT and determined
by the Administrative Land Use Authority;
      (2)   Both the public utility lot and any remaining portion of the
original parcel shall be described as required by the Administrative Land Use
Authority for recordation in the office of the County Recorder, following the
receipt of a recommendation from the DRT;
      (3)   Shall have an internal lot restriction, as defined by the Act,
restricting the lot for use by a public utility only; and
      (4)   Shall be provided with a recorded permanent and unimpeded right-of-
access, described as required by the Administrative Land Use Authority,
following the receipt of a DRT recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 25.08.110)
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-1-2024)
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 155.180 PURPOSES.
   As provided for by the Act, this chapter establishes the procedures and
standards for the city to consider, decide, and adopt a development agreement.
A development agreement adopted and executed by the Council and the property
owner(s) may:
   (A)   Provide a tool to implement the city's General Plan more effectively
and completely.
   (B)   Provide additional specificity of applicable land use requirements and
regulations for the subject property by providing a development plan,
additional requirements and standards, and other provisions related to its
development.
      (1)   Such additional specificity may include, but is not limited to,
requirements and regulations for:
         (a)   Open space and agricultural use preservation and maintenance.
         (b)   Development configuration.
         (c)   Design standards.
         (d)   Provison of necessary or desired development amenities.
         (e)   Infrastructure and service delivery, including the timing of
infrastructure and services.
   (C)   Extend and provide for additional enforcement actions not otherwise
provided by the city's Land Use Ordinances, as may be agreed upon by the
Council and the owner.
   (D)   Specify development standards applicable to uses.
   (E)   Include requirements identified by the Council necessary to advance
the interests of the city and other provisions and requirements to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents.
   (F)   Provide a mechanism for the integration of all applicable Land Use
Ordinances.
   (G)   Provide a mechanism to address unique features affecting the subject
property and adjacent properties and surrounding areas.
   (H)   Include other lawful requirements, terms, and considerations available
to the city and the owner.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.181 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to
property located within the municipal boundaries of the city.
   (B)   The provisions and requirements of this chapter may apply to:
      (1)   A development providing residential uses only;
      (2)   A development providing nonresidential uses only; or
      (3)   A development providing a combination of compatible residential and
non-residential uses, as determined by the Commission and Council.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.182 REQUIREMENTS.
   All development agreements shall, at a minimum, comply with and provide the
following:
   (A)   Exist in writing;
   (B)   Provide an accurate legal description of the subject property and the
names of all legal and equitable owners;
   (C)   Specify the duration of the development agreement;
   (D)   Identify the uses allowed and the procedures required for the approval
of all allowed uses;
   (E)   Identify all applicable development standards, including the timing
and financial obligations associated with the provision of necessary public
infrastructure and services;
   (F)   Describe any reservations or dedications of lands for any public
purposes; and
   (G)   Specify any conditions, terms, restrictions or other requirements
determined to be necessary to promote the public health, safety or welfare, or
achieve the purposes of the development agreement and the city’s General Plan.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.183 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The consideration of a development agreement by the Commission and
Council shall be considered a legislative matter and may not be combined with
consideration of any administrative matter including subdivision applications
for single family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or townhomes. Development
agreement review for other subdivisions, including cluster, planned unit
development, multifamily, commercial, and industrial, may be submitted and
considered in one application.
   (B)   The Commission, in formulating a recommendation, and the City Council,
in making a final decision, shall find that substantial evidence has been
presented related to the development agreement.
   (C)   At a regular public meeting(s), the Commission shall consider the
proposed development agreement and all other materials and information
presented and shall make a recommendation to the Council.
   (D)   At a regular public meeting(s), the Council shall consider the
Commission’s recommendation and all other information and materials presented
and shall approve or deny the proposed development agreement, with or without
revisions and requirements, and with necessary findings. If approved, the
Mayor, acting as the authorized representative of the Council, and all legal
and equitable property owners shall sign the development agreement, as approved
by the Council.
   (E)   Within 14 calendar days of Council approval, the development agreement
shall be executed and signed by the Mayor and all legal and equitable property
owner(s). The executed development agreement shall be recorded in the office of
the County Recorder, such recorded development agreement constituting a land
use document of the city.
 
Development Agreement Procedures
       An applicant may initiate a
       development agreement procedure
       with the city by submitting          Department determines application
Step 1 required materials (§               incomplete
       155.182) to the Department
       separately from any pending or
       proposed subdivision application.
       Once the department has determined
       the submission materials complete,
       the agreement proposal is reviewed
Step 2 by city staff for compliance with
       applicable Land Use Ordinances and
       regulations. Staff comments are
       provided to the Commission and
       Council for consideration.
       The Commission must conduct a
       public meeting to consider the
       proposed development agreement.
Step 3 Following the consideration, the
       Commission shall recommend to the    An applicant has 30 days from time
       Council an approval, an approval     of the Departments written notice
       with revisions, or denial of the     of decision to submit missing
       agreement.                           materials and fees. If the
       The Council shall hold a public      application remains incomplete,
       meeting before considering the       fees and materials submitted to the
       agreement proposal. After the        Department are returned to the
Step 4 receipt of a recommendation from     applicant, and the application is
       the Commission, the Council shall    no longer considered.
       consider the agreement at a
       regularly schedule Council meeting.
       The Council may approve, approve
       with revisions, or deny development
       agreement proposal. If the
       agreement is approved, it must be
       executed and signed by the Mayor
Step 5 and all legal and equitable
       property owners within 14 days.
       Approved and signed development
       agreements shall be recorded in the
       Office of the Box Elder County
       Recorder.
 
(Prior Code, § 25.09.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.184 REVIEW.
   In reviewing a proposed development agreement, the Commission and Council
shall consider, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Public impacts and benefits;
   (B)   The provision of all necessary public infrastructure and services;
   (C)   The allocations and obligations of both the city and the owners to
achieve the purposes of the development agreement;
   (D)   Appropriateness and adequacy of environmental protection measures; and
   (E)   Protection and enhancements of the public health, safety and welfare
above that already provided by the city’s adopted land use ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.185 EFFECT OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   The city’s land use ordinances shall govern a development agreement
for the duration of the development agreement, supplemented and modified only
to the extent expressly provided by the adopted development agreement.
   (B)   The Council may adopt laws and policies applicable to the subject
property if the Council has determined:
      (1)   Such laws and policies are essential to public health, safety or
welfare; or
      (2)   (a)   Federal and state laws are applicable and preclude full
compliance by the city or property owner(s).
         (b)   A development agreement, subject to subsequent federal and state
law enactment, shall be modified as necessary to comply with the applicable
federal or state laws.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.186 BINDING NATURE OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
   Development agreements shall be binding on the city and the property owner
(s) and all successors and assignees for the term of the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.070) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.187 EXPENSES.
   The city may require the applicant to reimburse the city for expenses
incurred by the city and related to the preparation of the development
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.080) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.188 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Development agreements shall provide specific enforcement mechanisms
to ensure compliance.
   (B)   The city may utilize all available enforcement mechanisms necessary to
achieve compliance with this chapter and any development agreement, including
the withholding of necessary land use approvals and permits and building
permits.
(Prior Code, § 25.09.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
SUBDIVISION PLAT REVISIONS, VACATIONS OF PUBLIC STREETS, EXCHANGE OF TITLE,
RENAMING PLATS
§ 155.200 VACATING, ALTERING OR AMENDING A SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   For all applications proposing to vacate, alter or amend a recorded
final subdivision plat, the procedures, standards and requirements of the Act
shall control.\
   (B)   A plat amendment application shall be presented to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 25.10.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.201 PETITION TO VACATE A PUBLIC STREET OR MUNICIPAL UTILITY EASEMENT.
   For all applications proposing to vacate a public street or municipal
utility easement, the procedures, standards and requirements of the Act shall
control. A plat amendment application shall be presented to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 25.10.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.202 EXCHANGE OF TITLE (LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT).
   For all owners proposing to exchange title (to complete a lot line
adjustment), the procedures, standards and requirements of the Act shall
control.
   (A)   If the proposed lot line adjustment affects a lot of record, a lot
alteration application shall be presented to the Department.
   (B)   If the proposed lot line adjustment affects a recorded final
subdivision plat, a plat amendment application shall be presented to the
Department.
(Prior Code, § 25.10.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.203 SUBDIVISION OR PLAT NAME CHANGES.
   (A)   For all applications proposing to change the name of a subdivision or
a final plat, the procedures, standards and requirements of the Act shall
control.
   (B)   A plat amendment application shall be presented to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 25.10.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
NOTICING
§ 155.215 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is provided to ensure all minimum noticing required by the
Act is provided by the city for all public hearings and public meetings
required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.216 LAND USE ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   This subchapter is a land use ordinance of the city.
   (B)   All proposed amendments hereto and all land use ordinance amendment
applications shall comply with the minimum noticing requirements for a land use
ordinance amendment, as required and as provided by the Act.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.217 PUBLIC MEETINGS AND PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   All public meetings and all public hearings required by this chapter,
conducted by the Director, Commission, or Council, shall be noticed as required
and provided by the Act.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.218 NOTICE FOR AN AMENDMENT TO A SUBDIVISION.
   For all proposed amendments to a subdivision, all noticing and procedures as
required by the Act shall control.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.219 NOTICE FOR VACATION OF OR CHANGE TO A STREET.
   For all proposed vacations, or a change to a road or street, all noticing
and procedures as required by the Act shall control.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.220 NOTICE TO VACATE A PUBLIC STREET OR MUNICIPAL UTILITY EASEMENT.
   For all proposed vacations of a public road or street or a municipal utility
easement, or public utility easement, all notice and procedures as required and
provided by the Act shall control.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.221 THIRD-PARTY NOTICE; HIGH PRIORITY TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR NOTICE.
   As required by the Act:
   (A)   If the city requires notice to adjacent property owners, the city
shall:
      (1)   Mail notice to the record owner of each parcel within parameters
specified by ordinance; or
      (2)   Post notice on the property with a sign of sufficient size,
durability, print quality and location that is reasonably calculated to give
notice to passers-by and alert the public.
   (B)   If the city mails notice to third-party property owners, the city
shall mail equivalent notice to property owners within an adjacent
jurisdiction; and
   (C)   The state’s Department of Transportation (UDOT) may request, in
writing, that the city provide the Department with an electronic notice of each
land use application received by the city that may adversely impact the
development of a high priority transportation corridor. If the city receives a
written request from UDOT, the city shall provide UDOT with timely electronic
notice of each land use application that the request specifies.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.070) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.222 CANAL OWNER OR OPERATOR; NOTICE TO THE CITY.
   (A)   A canal company or a canal operator that owns or operates a canal
located within the city shall ensure the city has on file, in the Department of
Community and Economic Development and Public Works Department, regarding the
canal company or canal operator:
      (1)   A current mailing address and phone number;
      (2)   A contact name; and
      (3)   A general description of the location of each canal owned or
operated by the canal owner or canal operator.
   (B)   If the information described in division (A) above changes after a
canal company or a canal operator has provided the information to the city
departments, as identified, the canal company or canal operator shall provide
the correct information within 30 calendar days of the day on which the
information changes.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.080) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.223 NOTICE FOR AN AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN A SUBDIVISION OR
DEVELOPMENT.
   Before implementing an amendment to adopted specifications for public
improvements that apply to subdivision or development, the city shall give 30
calendar days’ mailed notice and an opportunity to comment to anyone who has
requested the notice in writing.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.224 NOTICE CHALLENGE.
   If notice provided under the authority of this chapter and the Act is not
challenged within 30 calendar days after the hearing(s) or meeting(s) or action
for which notice is given, the notice is considered adequate and proper.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.100) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.225 COURTESY NOTICE.
   (A)   In addition to the public hearing and public meeting notice required
by this chapter, and in the interests of favoring public awareness and
participation, the city may also provide courtesy notice, in addition to the
mandatory public hearing and public meeting notice required by this chapter.
such notice may be provided as determined necessary by the Director, Commission
or Council to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   Courtesy notice shall not be a basis for a challenge of notice, as
provided by §
155.224 of this chapter and the Act.
(Prior Code, § 25.12.110) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
APPEALS
§ 155.240 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to identify the city’s appeal types,
appeal procedures and appeal authorities.
   (B)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Department, the Land Use
Authority or a final decision of the city shall comply with the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.13.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.241 APPEALS OF DEPARTMENT DECISIONS ADMINISTERING OR INTERPRETING THIS
CHAPTER.
   (A)    Except for an appeal of a decision by the Department on a final plat
application, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Department administering
or interpreting this chapter may appeal the decision to the Commission, the
Commission acting as the Appeal Authority for all such decisions of the
Department administering or interpreting this chapter.
   (B)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Department administering or
interpreting this title with respect to an appeal of a decision by the
Department on a final plat application may appeal the decision to the city's
Land Use Hearing Officer, the city's Land Use Hearing Officer acting as the
Appeal Authority for such decisions.
   (C)   An appeal application shall be filed with the Department within ten
calendar days of receipt of the Department’s written decision or
interpretation.
   (D)   The appellant shall have the burden of proving that the Department’s
decision administering or interpreting was incorrect and that the Department
erred in making its decision or interpretation.
   (E)   (1)   The scope of the Commission in rendering an appeal decision of
the Department’s decision administering or interpreting this chapter shall be
limited to the materials and information provided to the Department in the
application.
      (2)   The Commission’s scope shall be those materials and information on
the record with the Department. The Commission shall not consider any other
materials and information not originally provided to the Department.
   (F)   The Commission shall determine whether the record on appeal includes
substantial evidence for each essential finding of fact. The Commission shall:
      (1)   Determine the correctness of the Department’s decision
administering or interpreting this chapter and application of the plain meaning
of the applicable provisions of this chapter; and
      (2)   Interpret and apply the relevant provisions of this chapter in
favor of the application unless the relevant provisions plainly require an
alternative finding and decision.
   (G)   The decision of the Commission, acting as the appeal authority for
Department decisions administering or interpreting this chapter is a quasi-
judicial act.
   (H)   A decision of the Commission made under the authority of this section
shall take effect on the date when the Commission passes a majority motion, on
the record, affirming or denying the appeal application.
(Prior Code, § 25.13.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.242 APPEALS OF DETERMINATIONS OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS OR
INCOMPLETENESS BY THE DEPARTMENT.
    (A)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Department related to a
determination of preliminary plat application completeness or incompleteness
may appeal the decision to the Commission, the Commission acting as the appeal
authority for all determinations of application completeness decisions on a
preliminary subdivision plat applications.
   (B)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Department related to a
determination of final subdivision plat application completeness or
incompleteness may appeal the decision to the Commission, the Commission acting
as the Appeal Authority for all determinations of application completeness
decisions for final subdivision plat applications.
   (C)   An appeal shall be presented via an appeal application, available in
the Department, and presented to the Department within ten calendar days of
receipt of the Department’s written notification of its determination of
completeness or incompleteness.
   (D)   The appellant shall have the burden of proving that the Department’s
determination of application completeness or incompleteness was incorrect, and
that the Department erred in making its determination.
   (E)   The scope of the Commission in rendering an appeal decision of a
determination of application completeness or incompleteness shall be limited to
the materials and information provided to the Department in the application.
The Commission’s scope shall be those materials and information on the record
with the Department. The Commission shall not consider any other materials and
information not originally provided to the Department.
   (F)   The Commission shall determine whether the record on appeal includes
substantial evidence for each essential finding of fact. The Commission shall:
      (1)   Determine the correctness of the Department’s determination of
completeness or incompleteness and application of the plain meaning of the
applicable provisions of this chapter; and
      (2)   Interpret and apply the relevant provisions of this chapter in
favor of the application unless the relevant provisions plainly require an
alternative finding and decision.
   (G)   The decision of the Commission, acting as the appeal authority for
determinations of application completeness or incompleteness, is a quasi-
judicial act.
   (H)   A decision of the Commission made under the authority of this section
shall take effect on the date when the Commission passes a majority motion, on
the record, affirming or denying the appeal application.
(Prior Code, § 25.13.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.243 APPEALS OF A LAND USE AUTHORITY DECISION.
   (A)   Any person, including the applicant, and any officer, department,
board or body of the city, believing they are adversely affected by a final
decision of a Land Use Authority, as applicable, interpreting or administering
this chapter, or a final decision related to a land use application, may appeal
the decision to the city’s Appeal Authority, that may include the city’s Land
Use Hearing Officer.
   (B)   Only a decision in which a Land Use Authority has applied a land use
regulation to a particular land use application, person or parcel may be
appealed to an appeal authority.
   (C)   Any person, including the applicant, and any officer, department,
board or body of the city claiming to be adversely affected by the Land Use
Authority’s decision may, within ten calendar days of the decision, appeal the
decision to the Appeal Authority by alleging that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Land Use Authority in the
administration or interpretation of the land use ordinance.
   (D)   The appellant has the burden of proving that the Land Use Authority
erred.
   (E)   The Appeal Authority, as applicable, shall conduct each appeal as
provided by this section.
   (F)   The Appeal Authority, as applicable, shall respect the due process
rights of each of the participants.
   (G)   Scope of review of factual matters on appeal - Appeal Authority
requirements. The scope of review of all factual matters shall be on the
record. The Appeal Authority shall determine whether the record on appeal
includes substantial evidence for each essential finding of fact. The Appeal
Authority shall:
      (1)   Determine the correctness of the Land Use Authority's
interpretation and application of the plain meaning of the ordinance; and
      (2)   Interpret and apply the ordinance to favor a land use application
unless the ordinance plainly restricts the land use application.
   (H)   Final decision.
      (1)   The Appeal Authority's land use decision is a quasi-judicial act.
The decision of the Appeal Authority takes effect on the date when the Appeal
Authority issues a written decision.
      (2)   A written decision constitutes a final decision under U.C.A. 10-9a-
801(2)(a) or a final action under U.C.A. 10-9a-801(4) of the Act, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 25.13.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.244 APPEALS OF CITY GEOLOGIC HAZARD STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS OR
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   An applicant who has appealed a decision of a Land Use Authority
administering or interpreting the city’s geologic hazard ordinance, standards
or requirements or the requirements of final subdivision improvement plans may
request the city assemble a panel of qualified experts to serve as the Appeal
Authority for purposes of determining the technical aspects of the appeal.
   (B)   If an applicant makes a request under this section, the city shall
assemble the panel described:
      (1)   One expert designated by the city;
      (2)   One expert designated by the applicant;
      (3)   One expert chosen jointly by the city’s designated expert and the
applicant’s designated expert; and
      (4)   Each member of the panel assembled by the city under this division
(B) shall not be associated with the application that is the subject of the
appeal.
   (C)   The applicant shall pay:
      (1)   One-half of the cost of the panel; and
      (2)   The city’s published appeal fee.
(Prior Code, § 25.13.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.245 APPEALS OF FINAL DECISIONS.
   (A)   No person may challenge, in District Court, a land use decision until
that person has exhausted the person’s administrative remedies as provided by
this subchapter, established consistent with Part 7 of the Act.
   (B)   Any person adversely affected by a final decision made in the exercise
of or in violation of the provisions of this chapter may file a petition for
review of the decision with the District Court within 30 calendar days after
the decision is final.
   (C)   All petitions to District Court and all District Court decisions shall
comply with the standards and requirements of Part 7 of the Act, as amended,
being U.C.A. §§ 7-23-101 et seq., or its successor statute.
(Prior Code, § 25.13.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 155.260 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS.
   The standards for development, design and construction shall comply with the
city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and Construction, as
adopted by the Council, incorporated herein by reference. Also, all
subdivisions shall comply with the following sections of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.010) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.261 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The design and construction of all subdivisions shall be found by the
Land Use Authority, as applicable, to preserve and protect the existing natural
terrain, drainage, topsoil and trees of the subject property, as practicable.
   (B)   (1)   The design and construction of all subdivisions shall recognize
any hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions, including, but not limited
to, landslides, mud and debris flows, rock falls, avalanches, areas of existing
and potential ground subsidence, areas of high ground water, floodplains,
drainage ways and areas subject to fire dangers existing on the subject
property.
      (2)    No subdivision application shall be approved by the Land Use
Authority, as applicable, until such hazard(s) have been removed, or the design
and layout of the proposed subdivision eliminates, or minimizes, any hazardous
or potentially hazardous conditions to the extent determined necessary by the
Land Use Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.020) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.262 DESIGN AND CONFIGURATION OF LOTS AND PARCELS.
   (A)   No subdivision lot or parcel may be divided by any municipal or county
boundary line, or by any road, street, alley or other lot.
   (B)   No wedge-shaped or pie-shaped lot or parcel may be less than 30 feet
in width measured at the front property line.
   (C)   All side lot lines shall be located to be generally at right angles or
radial to road and street rights-of-way lines.
   (D)   All subdivision lots and parcels shall front on a public road or
street, or on a private street, court or private driveway with direct access to
a public road or street, as approved by the Land Use Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.030) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.263 STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Streets to conform to official maps. The proposed subdivision road and
street layout shall conform to all city official maps, including the city's
transportation plan, as adopted.
   (B)   Street connections. All roads and streets shall provide connections to
existing or proposed roads and streets.
   (C)   Stub streets. Necessary stub streets shall be provided where required
by the Land Use Authority to connect to adjacent undeveloped land, and new
roads and streets shall connect to existing stub streets located in adjacent
subdivision areas. If the length of the stub street is greater than one lot
depth, but not to exceed 150 feet from the centerline of the connecting street,
the stub street shall provide the required temporary turn around radius as a
cul-de-sac street.
   (D)   Road and street right-of-way widths. All roads and streets shall
comply and provide the minimum road and street right-of-way widths as required
by the city's Public Works Standards for Development, Design and Construction.
   (E)   Road and street pavement widths. All roads and streets shall comply
and provide the minimum road and street pavement widths as required by the
city's Public Works Standards for Development, Design and Construction.
   (F)   Cul-de-sac streets. Only allowed as an exception, as provided by §
155.162(B) of this chapter. If allowed, cul-de-sac streets shall serve no more
than 20 lots or parcels or 30 dwelling units. No cul-de-sac shall exceed 650
feet in length, except when located in an industrial development and approved
by the City Fire Marshal, City Engineer, and City Public Works Director. All
cul-de-sacs intended to be temporary shall comply with the requirements above.
   (G)   Maximum number of roads and streets at an intersection.
      (1)   No more than four roads and streets may enter an intersection
unless designed as part of a roundabout.
      (2)   No more than five roads and streets shall enter a roundabout.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.040) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024; Ord. 24-16, passed 6-6-2024)
§ 155.264 STREET NAMING.
   (A)   All proposed subdivision roads and streets shall have the same road
and street coordinate reference and name as existing roads and streets that are
in alignment.
   (B)   There may be no duplication of any road or street coordinate reference
or names.
   (C)   All road and street names shall be approved by the Land Use Authority,
as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.050) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 24-03, passed 2-
1-2024)
§ 155.265 ROAD AND STREET CURVATURE AND ALIGNMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All roads and streets shall comply with the curvature and alignment
requirements of the city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and
Construction.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.060) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.266 FRONTAGE ON FREEWAYS OR MAJOR HIGHWAYS.
   When a subdivision abuts a freeway or highway, a frontage road may be
required by the Land Use Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.070) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.267 MINIMUM ROADBED AND PAVING.
   The minimum roadbed grading and paving for all roads and streets shall
comply with the city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and
Construction.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.080) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.268 MAXIMUM ROAD AND STREET GRADE.
   All subdivision roads and streets shall comply with the maximum grades as
required by the city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and
Construction.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.090) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.269 SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS REQUIRED.
   All subdivisions shall provide sidewalks, curbs and gutters, meeting the
requirements of the city’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design and
Construction.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.100) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.270 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   All proposed traffic-control devices shall conform to the standards of the
Manual of Uniform Traffic- Control Devices (MUTCD).
(Prior Code, § 25.14.110) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.271 PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS.
   When blocks exceed 1,000 feet in length, pedestrian rights-of-way not less
than ten feet wide may be required when determined necessary by the Land Use
Authority for adequate pedestrian circulation. Crosswalk improvements (paving)
not less than five feet wide shall be placed within the rights-of-way, as
required by the Land Use Authority.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.120) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.272 LOT SIZE STANDARDS.
   All lots and parcels shall meet the minimum area requirements or maximum
density requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is
located.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.130) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.273 EASEMENT STANDARDS.
   All required subdivision utility easements shall follow property lot lines,
where practical.
   (A)   Front property line easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet unless the
Land Use Authority makes an exception based on site conditions or design. In no
case shall the front property line easement be less than ten feet, unless
another standard is provided by the zoning district, as applicable.
   (B)   All required subdivision easements shall be located and designed to
provide efficient installation and maintenance of all utilities and subdivision
features. Public utility installations shall be located to permit multiple
facilities within all easements. The subdivision’s final grades shall be
established before any public utility installations.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.140) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.274 ALL UTILITIES TO BE UNDERGROUND.
   All power lines, telephone lines and other utility lines shall be provided
underground, unless otherwise approved by the Land Use Authority, supported by
the recommendation of the city’s utility and engineering staff.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.150) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.275 ALLEYS.
   The Land Use Authority may approve service accesses to the interior of
blocks. The location and dimensions of such service accesses (alleys) shall be
identified on the final subdivision plat.
(Prior Code, § 25.14.160) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
§ 155.276 SECONDARY IRRIGATION WATER; REQUIRED.
   The requirements for secondary irrigation water; required, as adopted by the
Council, are incorporated and provided in §
156.021.
(Ord. 24-28, passed 11-21-2024)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   As provided by the Act, a violation of any provision of this chapter
is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor, upon conviction, either:
      (1)   As a Class C misdemeanor; or
      (2)   Imposing an appropriate civil penalty as allowed under the
authority of the Utah Code.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.120)
   (B)   See division (A) above and §
155.010 of this chapter for enforcement and penalty provisions concerning
violation of any provision of §§
155.045 through
155.057 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25.03.180) (Ord. 20-03, passed 3-19-2020)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Short title
   
156.002   Purpose
   
156.003   Applicability
   
156.004   Minimum requirements
   
156.005   Conflict
   
156.006   Prohibitions
   
156.007   General plan mandate
   
156.008   Effect on previous titles and maps
   
156.009   State and federal property
   
156.010   Property owned by other governmental units
   
156.011   Building permit required
   
156.012   Occupancy permit required
   
156.013   Site plans required
   
156.014   Inspection
   
156.015   Completion of requirement improvements
   
156.016   Enforcement
   
156.017   Nuisance and abatement
   
156.018   Licensing
   
156.019   Fees
   
156.020   Definitions
   
156.021   Secondary irrigation water; required
Notices
   
156.035   Required notice
   
156.036   Applicant notice
   
156.037   Notice of intent to prepare a General Plan or comprehensive General
Plan amendment
   
156.038   Notice of public hearings and public meetings to consider General
Plan or modifications
   
156.039   Notice of public hearings and public meetings on adoption or
modification of land use ordinance
   
156.040   Third-party notice
   
156.041   Notice for a proposed a multiple-unit residential or commercial or
industrial development
   
156.042   Hearing and notice for proposal to vacate, alter or amend a public
street or right-of-way
   
156.043   Notice challenge
General Authority and Administration
   
156.055   Land use authority
   
156.056   Appeal authority
   
156.057   Administration of city’s land use ordinances
Zoning Districts
   
156.070   Establishment of zoning districts
   
156.071   Filing of ordinance and map
   
156.072   Rules for locating boundaries
Multiple Use, Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts
   
156.085   Purpose
   
156.086   Existing agriculture practices and keeping of animals and fowl
   
156.087   Codes and symbols
   
156.088   Uses
   
156.089   Uses not listed
   
156.090   Area regulations
   
156.091   Width regulations
   
156.092   Frontage regulations
   
156.093   Front yard regulations
   
156.094   Rear yard regulations
   
156.095   Side yard regulations
   
156.096   Height regulations
   
156.097   Keeping of animals and fowl
   
156.098   Animals and fowl units and density per parcel
Residential and Multiple Residential Districts
   
156.110   Purpose
   
156.111   Codes and symbols
   
156.112   Use regulations
   
156.113   Area regulations
   
156.114   Width regulations
   
156.115   Frontage regulations
   
156.116   Front yard regulations
   
156.117   Rear yard regulations
   
156.118   Side yard regulations
   
156.119   Height regulations
   
156.120   Coverage regulations
   
156.121   Special provisions
Commercial Districts
   
156.135   Purpose
   
156.136   Codes and symbols
   
156.137   Area, width, frontage, yard and coverage regulations
   
156.138   Height regulations
   
156.139   Protection of residential property
   
156.140   Landscaping
   
156.141   Special provisions
   
156.142   Uses not listed
Industrial Districts
   
156.155   Purpose
   
156.156   Codes and symbols
   
156.157   Area, width, frontage, yard and coverage regulations
   
156.158   Height regulations
   
156.159   Special provisions
   
156.160   Uses not listed
Planned District, P
   
156.175   Purposes
   
156.176   Standards and requirements
   
156.177   Preliminary development plan approval
   
156.178   Public hearing; optional
   
156.179   General Development Plan and schedule approval
   
156.180   Findings required
   
156.181   Planning Commission and governing body’s action
747 South Main Street Planned District
   
156.195   Purpose and intent
   
156.196   Planned district
   
156.197   Standards and regulations
   
156.198   Conflicts and severability
1100 South 1100 West Street Planned District
   
156.200   Purpose and intent
   
156.201   Planned district
   
156.202   Standards and regulations
   
156.203   Conflicts and severability
   
156.204   Exhibits
Tannevista Planned District
   
156.210   Origin
   
156.211   Purpose and intent
   
156.212   Planned district
   
156.213   Standards and regulations
   
156.214   Conflict and severability
   
156.215   Exhibits
Sensitive Areas Overlay Zones
   
156.230   Purpose
   
156.231   Regulations
   
156.232   Sensitive areas overlay map
   
156.233   All developments(s) to be considered a conditional use in sensitive
areas
   
156.234   Land classifications
   
156.235   Review of proposed development in sensitive areas
   
156.236   Floodplain corridor lands
   
156.237   Riparian preservation lands
   
156.238   Erosive and slope failure lands
   
156.239   Earthquake fault and hazard lands
   
156.240   Wildfire hazards lands
   
156.241   Severe constraint lands
   
156.242   Engineering geotechnical report
   
156.243   Disclosure of a natural hazard by an engineering geotechnical report
Airport Overlay Zones
   
156.255   Saving clause
   
156.256   Purpose and intent
   
156.257   General provisions
   
156.258   Definitions
   
156.259   Airport Zoning Commission
   
156.260   Airport appeal authority
   
156.261   Schedule of uses
   
156.262   Airport master plan
   
156.263   Airport overlay zones
   
156.264   Regulations
   
156.265   Notification
   
156.266   Airport development standards
West Forest Street Corridor Overlay
   
156.280   Purpose and intent
   
156.281   Overlay
North Shore Development Planned District
   
156.295   Establishment of the North Shore Development Planned District
   
156.296   Environmental criteria
   
156.297   Critical areas
   
156.298   Water and water supply
   
156.299   Sanitary sewer
   
156.300   Fire protection
   
156.301   Transportation infrastructure and access design
   
156.302   Special site design requirements
   
156.303   Lighting regulations
   
156.304   Conflicts and severability
900 North/Main Street Planned District
   
156.320   Purpose and intent
   
156.321   Planned district
   
156.322   Standards and regulations
   
156.323   Conflicts and severability
   
156.324   Exhibits
Supplementary and Qualifying Provisions
   
156.335   Effect of subchapter
   
156.336   Substandard lots at time of ordinance passage
   
156.337   Lot standards
   
156.338   Every dwelling to be on a lot; exception
   
156.339   Yard space for one building only
   
156.340   Sale or lease of required space
   
156.341   Sale of lots below minimum space requirements
   
156.342   Yards to be unobstructed; exceptions
   
156.343   Additional height allowed
   
156.344   Exceptions to height and story limitations
   
156.345   Cannabis production establishment and medical cannabis pharmacy
   
156.346   Fences and walls
   
156.347   Water and sewage requirements
   
156.348   Drinking water source protection requirements
   
156.349   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks
   
156.350   Effect of official map
   
156.351   Lots and dwellings on private streets; special provisions
   
156.352   Family swimming pools
   
156.353   Clear view of intersecting streets
   
156.354   Television satellite antennas
   
156.355   Uses not listed
   
156.356   Public utility installations exempt from certain zoning requirements
   
156.357   Bed and breakfast special conditions
   
156.358   Keeping of residential fowl
   
156.359   Vacation rental special conditions
   
156.360   Accessory dwelling units
   
156.361   Outdoor lighting standards
Uses
   
156.375   Uses
   
156.376   Prohibited uses
   
156.377   Permitted uses
   
156.378   Standards and criteria for permitted use
   
156.379   Conditional uses
   
156.380   Standards and criteria for conditional use
   
156.381   Revocation or modification of conditional use permit
   
156.382   Conditional use permit to run with the land
   
156.383   Temporary uses
   
156.384   Standards and criteria for temporary uses
   
156.385   Appeals of permitted use, conditional use or temporary use decision
   
156.386   Non-conforming use, lot or structure
   
156.387   Standards and criteria for non-conforming use, lot or structure
Design Review
   
156.400   Purpose
   
156.401   Application and review
   
156.402   Exceptions
   
156.403   Planning Commission approval
   
156.404   Considerations in review of applications
   
156.405   Conditions
   
156.406   Findings and decision
   
156.407   Notification of approval or denial
   
156.408   Time limitations on approval
   
156.409   Transfer of approval upon change in use
   
156.410   Conformance to approval
   
156.411   Modification
   
156.412   Supplemental provisions for historic downtown
Planned Unit Development
   
156.425   Purpose
   
156.426   Definition
   
156.427   Planned unit development permit
   
156.428   Required conditions
   
156.429   Uses allowed
   
156.430   General site plan
   
156.431   Review by Planning Commission
   
156.432   Scope of Planning Commission action
   
156.433   Construction limitations
Off-Street Parking Requirements
   
156.445   Purpose
   
156.446   General provisions for off-street parking and loading
   
156.447   Site, access and lighting plan required
   
156.448   Off-street parking schedules
   
156.449   Reduction of parking requirement
   
156.450   Maximum number of parking spaces
   
156.451   Design standards for off-street parking and loading spaces
   
156.452   Shared parking
   
156.453   Off-site parking
   
156.454   Parking and parking lot access
   
156.455   Stacking lanes, number of vehicles
   
156.456   Parking lot layout
   
156.457   Compact car design
   
156.458   Handicapped parking
   
156.459   Landscaping and screening
   
156.460   Reserved
   
156.461   Surfacing
   
156.462   Grading
   
156.463   Use of required parking spaces
   
156.464   Storage
   
156.465   Off-street loading space design standards
Sign Regulations
   
156.480   Definitions
   
156.481   Purpose
   
156.482   Interpretation
   
156.483   Appeals
   
156.484   Enforcement
   
156.485   General regulations
   
156.486   Sign permit fees
   
156.487   Digital signs (including digital billboards)
   
156.488   Digital billboards, non-conforming billboards, relocation of
billboards
   
156.489   Sign/district regulations
   
156.490   Sign/district regulations table
   
156.491   Images and examples
Natural Resource Excavation
   
156.505   Purpose
   
156.506   Application of subchapter
   
156.507   Definitions
   
156.508   Applications and approval of natural resource excavation activities
   
156.509   Required documents
   
156.510   Planning Commission review procedure
   
156.511   Conditional use permit format
   
156.512   Revocation or modification of permit
   
156.513   Transfer to successor operation
   
156.514   Permit term
   
156.515   Conditional use standards for natural resource excavation
   
156.516   Reclamation
   
156.517   Provision of surety
Residential Facilities for Elderly Persons and Persons with a Disability
   
156.530   Purpose
   
156.531   Scope
   
156.532   Permitted uses
   
156.533   Development standards
   
156.534   Reasonable accommodation required
Home Occupations
   
156.545   Purpose and intent
   
156.546   Standards for home occupations
   
156.547   Standards for home occupations using attached or detached garages,
accessory structures or yard space
Sexually-Oriented Business
   
156.560   Purpose
   
156.561   Location of businesses; restrictions
   
156.562   Signs
   
156.563   Definitions
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
   
156.575   Purpose and interpretation
   
156.576   Definitions
   
156.577   Policy statement
   
156.578   Industry site selection criteria
   
156.579   City site selection criteria
   
156.580   Priorities
   
156.581   Use of city-owned property
   
156.582   Co-location; use of public property
   
156.583   Design criteria
   
156.584   Other permitted uses
   
156.585   Inspection requirements
   
156.586   Landscaping/screening
   
156.587   Non-use/abandonment
   
156.588   Application requirements
   
156.589   Third-party review
   
156.590   Personal wireless telecommunications facilities zoning table
   
156.591   Severability
Junk Yards, Self-Service Enclosed Storage Facilities, Self-Service Outside
Storage Facilities, Towing and Impound Yards
   
156.605   Purpose and intent
   
156.606   Definitions
   
156.607   Licenses and permits
   
156.608   Standards and regulations
   
156.609   Application for a conditional use permit
   
156.610   Enforcement
Single-Family Dwellings
   
156.625   Codes and standards
   
156.626   Additional requirements
Performance Standards for Industrial and Other Uses
   
156.640   Purpose
   
156.641   General provisions
   
156.642   Performance standards procedure
   
156.643   Enforcement provisions applicable to all uses
   
156.644   Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of
performance standards
   
156.645   Dangerous and objectionable elements
Mobile Homes, Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Home Subdivisions
   
156.660   Purpose
   
156.661   Location and use
   
156.662   Approval
   
156.663   Application
   
156.664   Standards and requirements
Recreational Coaches and Recreational Coach Parks
   
156.675   Purpose
   
156.676   Location and use
   
156.677   Approval
   
156.678   Application
   
156.679   Standards and requirements
   
156.680   Temporary using of recreational coaches in multiple-use and
agricultural districts during recognized hunting, fishing or other sports
activity seasons
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Brigham City Zoning
Ordinance” and may be identified within this chapter and other documents as
“the ordinance”, “this chapter”, “this Zoning Ordinance” or “this Land Use
Ordinance”. This chapter shall be considered and may be identified as a city
land use ordinance, as defined by the Act.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the
present and future inhabitants of the city, including among other things, the
lessening of congestion in the streets, or roads, securing safety from fire and
other dangers, providing adequate light and air, classification of land uses
and distribution of land development and utilization, protection of the tax
base, securing economy in governmental expenditures, fostering the agricultural
and other industries and the protection of urban development. The land use
ordinance is intended to carry out the goals and policies of the General Plan.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.003 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to all private and public development
within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.004 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of this chapter represent the minimum requirements necessary
to advance its stated purposes. Unless otherwise specified within this chapter,
it does not preclude adding standards and requirements necessary to achieve the
policies of the General Plan, the purposes of thischapter or protect the public
health, safety, peace, morals and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.005 CONFLICT.
   (A)   Conflict with other local regulations. This chapter shall not nullify
the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements or other titles or
laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less
restrictive.
   (B)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the
more restrictive provision shall prevail, to the extent permitted by law.
   (C)   Conflict with private restrictions. It is not the intent of this
chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of
this chapter impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. If the provisions of a private
agreement impose a greater restriction than this chapter, the provisions of the
private agreement shall prevail. The city does not enforce private covenants.
   (D)   Conflict with development agreements. To the extent there is an
inconsistency between this chapter and a development agreement, the development
agreement shall prevail. If the provisions of the development agreement are
inconsistent with those of the state and federal government, the more
restrictive provision shall prevail, to the extent permitted by law.
      (1)   A development agreement may be negotiated and executed between a
developer and the city to set forth the specific requirements, elements and any
other aspects of a development, including vesting of zoning and uses, aesthetic
standards and requirements.
      (2)   The City Council has the sole authority to approve a development
agreement. The Council may request a review and recommendation from the
Planning Commission regarding the land use provisions of the development
agreement.
      (3)   All development agreements, upon proper execution, shall be
recorded with the County Recorder’s office, shall run with the land and shall
be binding on any subsequent owners, successors or assigns of the person
entering into the agreement.
   (E)   Severability. The subchapters, sections, paragraphs, divisions,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are hereby declared to be
severable. If any subchapter, section, paragraph, division, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or deleted through amendment or repeal, such invalidation or
deletion shall not affect the remaining parts of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 08-20, passed 11-
20-2008)
§ 156.006 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No lot may be sold, transferred, financed or otherwise exchanged
unless and until it has been created in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and stated law.
   (B)   No land, building or structure may be developed, used, occupied,
erected, moved or altered without conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and state law.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.007 GENERAL PLAN MANDATE.
   Land development shall be consistent with the General Plan. The city’s
administration and its departments shall carry out the mandate of the General
Plan when reviewing project proposals and development plans.
   (A)   Planning Commission implementation. The Planning Commission shall not
approve any project for which it cannot substantiate a finding that the project
is consistent with the goals, policies and implementation programs of the
General Plan.
   (B)   Appeal Authority implementation. The Appeal Authority shall not
approve any variance request for which it cannot substantiate a finding that
the project is consistent with the goals, policies and implementation programs
of the General Plan.
   (C)   Relationship of the General Plan to the Land Use Ordinance.
      (1)   (a)   The General Plan is the adopted policies of the City Council.
The General Plan represents a lengthy public participation process and
incorporates long range goals, identified polices and an implementation
program.
         (b)   The content of the General Plan may be cited as a basis for
making decisions or as a part of the finding to support actions initiated by
this Land Development Code. The General Plan is adopted as a part of this code
by reference.
         (c)   The General Plan provides the policies that enable the specific
regulations of the Land Development Code to be carried out. Implementation
measures in the General Plan provide direction for specific measures within the
Land Development Code.
      (2)   When there is a conflict between the General Plan and the Land
Development Code, if the General Plan provides precise development standards,
the General Plan is to be used. If the General Plan provides policy language
and no specific development standards, the Land Development Code’s specific
measures are to prevail.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.008 EFFECT ON PREVIOUS TITLES AND MAPS.
   The existing chapters or ordinances covering zoning, in their entirety, and
including the maps heretofore adopted and made a part of said chapter are
hereby superseded and amended to read as set forth herein; provided, however,
that this chapter, including the attached map, shall be deemed a continuation
of previous titles and not a new enactment, insofar as the substance of
revisions of previous titles is included in this chapter, whether in the same
or in different language; and this chapter shall be so interpreted upon all
questions of construction relating to tenure of officers and boards established
by previous titles and to questions of conforming or non-conforming uses and
buildings and structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such
uses, buildings or structures became conforming or non- conforming.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.080) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.009 STATE AND FEDERAL PROPERTY.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, and only to the extent required by U.C.A.
§ 10-9a-304 or successor law, shall be construed as giving the Planning
Commission or the City Council jurisdiction over properties owned by the state
or the United States government.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.090) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.010 PROPERTY OWNED BY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
   Each county, municipality, school district, charter school, special district
and political subdivision of the state shall conform to any applicable land use
ordinance of the city installing, constructing, operating or otherwise using
any area, land or building situated within the city only to the extent required
by U.C.A. § 10-9a-305, or successor law.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.100) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.011 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The construction, alteration, repair or removal of any building, structure,
or part thereof as provided or as restricted in this chapter shall not be
commenced or continued, except after the issuance of a zoning permit by the
Community Development Department and a written permit from the Building
Division. Work not started within one year will require a new permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.110) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.012 OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Land, buildings or premises in any district shall hereafter be used only for
a purpose permitted in such district and in accordance with district
regulations. A permit or occupancy shall be issued by the Building Division to
the effect that the use, building or premises will conform to provisions of
this chapter and related code titles prior to occupancy, for any building
erected, enlarged or altered structurally, or the occupancy or use of any land,
except for permitted agricultural uses. Such a permit is needed whenever use or
character of any building or land is to be changed. Upon written request from
the owner, a permit shall be issued covering any lawful use of buildings or
premises existing on the effective date of this amendment, including non-
conforming buildings and uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.120) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.013 SITE PLANS REQUIRED.
   A detailed site plan, with scale and sheet size determined by the Community
Development Department, shall be filed as part of any application, prior to
request for a zoning permit. It shall show, where pertinent:
   (A)   Scale of plan and direction of north point;
   (B)   Lot lines, adjacent streets, roads, rights-of-way;
   (C)   Location of all existing structures on subject property and adjoining
properties, with utility lines, poles and the like, fully dimensioned;
   (D)   Location of proposed construction and improvements, with location and
dimension of all signs;
   (E)   Motor vehicle access, circulation patterns, with individual parking
stalls, and curb, gutter and sidewalk locations;
   (F)   Necessary explanatory notes;
   (G)   Name, address, telephone number of builder and owner; and
   (H)   All other information required as determined by the Community
Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.130) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.014 INSPECTION.
   The Community Development Department is authorized to inspect or to have
inspected all buildings and structures in the course of their construction,
modification or repair, and to inspect land uses to determine compliance with
zoning chapter provisions. The Community Development Department or any
authorized employee of the city shall use the right to enter any building for
the purpose of determining the use, or to enter premises for the purpose of
determining compliance with the said chapter; provided that, such right of
entry is to be used only at reasonable hours. In no case shall entry be made to
any occupied building in the absence of an owner or tenant thereof without
written permission of an owner, or written order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.140) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.015 COMPLETION OF REQUIREMENT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   For uses subject to §§
156.375 through
156.387,
156.400 through
156.412 or
156.425 through
156.433 of this chapter, any improvements required under this chapter,
including, but not limited to, curb, gutter, sidewalk, fences, landscaping,
streets, parking and flood-control requirements shall be satisfactorily
installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Building
Division, or if a certificate of occupancy is not required, prior to the
issuance of a business license for the land being developed. In lieu of actual
completion of such improvements prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or business license, a developer may file with the City Council a
cash bond, surety bond, letter of credit or escrow agreement in an amount
specified by the City Engineer to ensure completion of such improvements within
one year. The bond may be extended by the City Council upon request.
      (2)   Upon completion of the improvements for which a bond or escrow
agreement has been filed, the developer shall call for inspections of the
improvements by the Community Development Department. Upon approval of the City
Council following a recommendation of the Planning Commission, and in lieu of
the bond requirements of this section, the builder or developer may be
permitted to execute an agreement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney’s
office, deferring any of the required improvements.
   (B)   Inspection shall be made within a reasonable time upon request. If the
inspection shows the city standards and specifications have been met in the
completion of such improvements, the bond or agreement shall be released within
a reasonable time from the time of inspection. If the bond agreement is not
released, refusal to release and the reasons therefor shall be given to the
developer in writing within a reasonable time from the time of the inspection.
The bond may be partially released based upon the percentage of completion of
the required improvements.
   (C)   If the City Council determines that the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or a business license prior to completion of any required
improvements may be injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the city or
its inhabitants, it may refuse to accept a bond or deferral agreement in lieu
of actual completion of required improvements or may limit the bond or
agreement to a period of less than one year.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.150) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.016 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Community Development Department is authorized as the enforcing
officer for this chapter, and shall enforce all provisions, entering actions in
court if necessary, and his or her failure to do so shall not legalize any
violations of such provisions.
   (B)   The governing body may, by resolution or title, from time to time
entrust administration of this chapter, in whole or in part, to another officer
of the local jurisdiction, without amendment to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.160) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.017 NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT.
   Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged,
converted, moved or maintained contrary to provisions of this chapter, and any
use of land, building or premises established, conducted or maintained contrary
to provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same hereby is, declared to be
unlawful and a public nuisance; and the local attorney shall, upon request of
the governing body, at once commence action or proceedings for abatement and
removal of enjoinment thereof in a manner provided by law, and take other steps
and apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will
abate and remove such building or structure, and restrain or enjoin any person,
firm or corporation from erecting, building, maintaining or using said building
or structure or property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The
remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.170) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.018 LICENSING.
   All departments, officials and public employees of the local jurisdiction
which are vested with duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit or license
for uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter and any such permit or license, if issued in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.190) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.019 FEES.
   (A)   Fees may be charged applicants for building, occupancy and conditional
use permits, design review and planned unit development approval, Planning
Commission and Board of Adjustment hearings, and such other services as are
required by this chapter to be performed by public officers or agencies.
   (B)   Such fees shall be established and amended by resolution by the
legislative body and be in amounts reasonably needed to defray costs to the
public.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.200) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.020 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific meanings for terms
as they are used in this chapter and to facilitate the understanding and
administration of the provisions of this chapter. Meanings shall apply to the
singular or plural and to any tense of a verb. Definitions of pertinent terms
provided in Utah Code are adopted as part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.010)
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the
word “structure”; the words “used” or “occupied” shall include arranged,
designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be
used or occupied; the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory, and the word
“may” is permissive; the word “person” includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an
individual; the word “lot” includes the words plot or parcel. Words used in
this chapter, but not defined herein shall have the meaning as defined in any
other chapter adopted by the local jurisdiction.
      ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING. A use or building on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principle use or
building.
      ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility that furnishes care, supervision and
guidance for three or more adults unaccompanied by a guardian for periods of
less than 24 hours per day.
      AFFECTED ENTITY. As defined by Utah Code pertaining to the applicable
land use provision. Note: there are several definitions of AFFECTED ENTITY in
the Utah Code.
      AGENT OF OWNER. Any person who can show written proof that he or she is
acting for the property owner and with the property owner’s knowledge and
permission.
      AGRICULTURE. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or
personal use of plants and animals useful to man, including crops and products
such as vegetables, fruit trees, harvestable and ornamental trees, hay, sod,
grain, honey, milk, cheese and any other agricultural or horticultural products
and their storage; the raising thereon of farm poultry and farm livestock and
animals, such as cattle, sheep, goats or animals of the Bovinae family; all
horses, mules or animals of the Equine family; all pigs, swine or animals of
the Suinae family; fur bearing animals, bees and ostriches, rhea and emu, trees
and forest products; wholesale fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and
berries; wholesale vegetables; wholesale nursery, floral, ornamental and
greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program.
      AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY OR BUSINESS. An industry or business involving
agricultural products in manufacturing, packaging, treatment, sales, intensive
feeding or storage, including, but not limited to, animal feed yards, fur
farms, food packaging or processing plants, commercial poultry or egg
production and similar uses as determined by the Planning Commission.
      AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in
supplying machinery, equipment, supplies and services to agricultural
producers.
      AIRPORT. Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing
and the taking off of aircraft.
      ALLEY. A public access-way less than 26 feet in width, which is designed
to give secondary access to lots or abutting properties; an alley shall not be
considered a street, for the purposes of this chapter.
      ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
      AMUSEMENT PARK. Any place of organized amusement activity not conducted
wholly within a completely enclosed building.
      APPEAL AUTHORITY. The person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by ordinance to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use
application and a variance.
      ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any building or structural projection which is
not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior
wall of a building or structure, but not including signs.
      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY.
         (a)   A residential facility, licensed by the state, with a homelike
setting that provides an array of coordinated supportive personal and health
care services, available 24 hours per day, to residents who have been assessed
under State Department of Health or State Department of Human Services rules to
need any of these services. Each resident shall have a service plan based on
the assessment, which may include:
            1.   Specified services of intermittent nursing care;
            2.   Administration of medication; or
            3.   Support services promoting resident’s independence and self-
sufficiency.
         (b)   An ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY does not include:
            1.   A residential facility for persons with a disability; or
            2.   Adult day care provided in conjunction with a residential
facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
      ATHLETIC CLUB. See HEALTH CLUB.
      AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A facility for automatic or self-service washing and
cleaning of automobiles and small trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons’
capacity.
      AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP. A retail business established for the display,
sale or lease of automobiles, pick-up trucks, vans, accessory trailers,
recreational vehicles, boats or motorcycles or other similar motorized
transportation vehicles. This definition does not include large transportation
vehicles, such as diesels, truck trailers, construction vehicles or equipment
and farm equipment. Incidental uses may also exist upon the same site as long
as the uses are directly associated with the licensed business for maintenance,
repair and service areas, parts storage areas and financial service areas.
Incidental service, repair or maintenance shall be conducted within an enclosed
building.
      AUTOMOBILE FUEL STATION. A place where gasoline, natural gas, propane,
diesel or other similar motor fuel and like product for operating motor
vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly
into motor vehicles. Repair services are not performed at this place.
      AUTOMOBILE PAINT SHOP. A facility for painting of automobiles, trucks,
trailers, boats or other travel or recreation vehicles or units.
      AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA. An open area used for display, sale or rental of
new or used motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational coaches or recreation
vehicles in operable condition.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, or any other motor
fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for
sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and
where services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging,
storage of merchandise, lubricating of automobiles, replacement of spark plugs,
lights, fans and other small parts, but not including major auto repair.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE AND REPAIR. The repair and maintenance of automobiles
and trucks. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, body shops,
transmission shops, lube centers, tire stores, car washes as a primary use and
auto glass shops. This definition does not include retail sales of auto parts
and supplies where no service or repair is performed on the premises.
      AVERAGE PERCENT OF SLOPE. An expression of rise or fall in elevation
along a line perpendicular to the contours of the land, connecting the highest
point of land to the lowest point of land within an area or within a lot. A
vertical rise of 100 feet between two points 100 feet apart, measured on a
horizontal plane is a 100% slope.
      AWNING. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a
building, constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework.
      BASEMENT. As defined by the current adopted International Building Code.
      BASEMENT HOUSE. A residential structure without a full-story structure
above grade.
      BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY. A dwelling meeting the requirements of §
156.357 of this chapter, which rooms are rented out by the day offering
overnight lodgings to travelers and where one or more meals are provided by the
host family, the price of which is included in the room rate.
      BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION. The pouring of concrete footings for a
building or structure.
      BLOCK. The land surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than
an alley or land which is designed as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
      BOARDER. A person living in a rented room in a boarding house. The
boarding house operator, or a member of his or her immediate family who resides
on the premises with the operator, shall not be deemed a BOARDER.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A building or portion thereof operated by a person
residing on the premises where, for compensation, rooms are rented together
with meals for not more than 15 boarders who generally do not directly utilize
kitchen facilities. “Compensation” shall include money, services or any other
thing of value. A BOARDING HOUSE does not include:
         (a)   A residential facility for the elderly or persons with a
disability; or
         (b)   Any non-residential facility, such as a rehabilitation/treatment
facility, where the primary purpose of the facility is to deliver
rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, medical, protective or other similar
services to the occupants thereof.
      BODY AND FENDER SHOP. A facility for major automobile, truck, mobile
home, recreational coach or recreation vehicle repairs to body, frame or
fenders, and including rebuilding.
      BODY ART. The practice of physical body adornment by the permitted
facilities, operators, and registered body art technicians with the Bear River
Health Department (BRHD) utilizing and limited to the following techniques:
body piercing, tattooing, and permanent cosmetics. This definition does not
include practices that are considered medical procedures by the state medical
board such as tattoo removal which shall not be performed in a body art
facility.
      BODY ART FACILITY. Any room, space, shop, or salon where the practices of
body art are performed and granted a permit by the Bear River Health Department
(BRHD) and a business license from Brigham City Corporation. For the purposes
of this definition, a mobile unit is not considered a facility.
      BODY PIERCING. The creation of an opening in the human body for the
purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. This includes but is not
limited to the piercing of the ear, eyebrow, lip, navel, nose, or tongue.
      BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have
been provided, except that land with an average grade exceeding 15% shall not
be considered BUILDABLE AREA unless it is approved by conditional use permit
for construction, after study by a geologist, soils engineer or sanitarian as
required by the Planning Commission.
      BUILDING. Any structure used or intended to be used for the shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals or property.
      BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building which is subordinate to, and the use of
which is incidental to, that of the main building or use on the same lot.
Examples include a private garage, carport, or other buildings not attached to
a main building.
      BUILDING, AGRICULTURAL. A structure used solely in conjunction with
agriculture use, not for human occupancy, and complying with the requirements
of Utah Code or successor law. To qualify as an AGRICULTURAL BUILDING, the
structure must be located outside of a residential area, as defined by Utah
Code or successor law.
      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the average finished
grade surface to the highest point of the building roof or coping.
      BUILDING, MAIN. One or more of the principal buildings upon a lot where
the incidental use upon that lot is performed. Private garages, carports or
other structures attached to a main building shall be considered as part of
that main building.
      BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL SERVICES. An establishment intended for the conduct
of, or service or administration by, a commercial enterprise or offices for the
conduct of professional or business service, but not including medical, dental,
chiropractor or other arts. Uses intended by this definition would include, but
not be limited to, business and professional offices, depository institutions
and other establishments performing financial services (including outside
drive-up facilities). This definition shall not include businesses that are
defined as a non-depository institution, nor businesses in which goods or
merchandise are sold or stored, nor sexually-oriented businesses.
      CAMPGROUND. A public area designated by a public agency for camping or a
private area licensed by the local governing body for camping.
      CAMPING. A temporary establishment of living facilities such as tents or
recreational coaches as regulated by this chapter.
      CANNABIS. All species of the genus cannabis and all parts of the genus,
whether growing or not; the seeds of it; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin.
         (a)   The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted from them, fiber, oil or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
         (b)   Any synthetic equivalents of the substances contained in the
plant cannabis sativa or any other species or the genus cannabis which are
chemically indistinguishable and pharmacologically active are also included.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY. A person, corporation, partnership,
association, company or other entity that:
         (a)   Possesses cannabis;
         (b)   Grows or intends to grow cannabis; and
         (c)   Sells or intends to sell cannabis to a cannabis cultivation
facility, a cannabis processing facility or, as defined in state law, a medical
cannabis research licensee.
      CANNABIS PROCESSING FACILITY. A person, corporation, partnership,
association, company or other entity that:
         (a)   Acquires or intends to acquire cannabis from a cannabis
production establishment or a holder of an industrial hemp processor license
under U.C.A. Title 4, Chapter 41, Hemp and Cannabinoid Act, or its successor;
         (b)   Possesses cannabis with the intent to manufacture a cannabis
product;
         (c)   Manufactures or intends to manufacture a cannabis product from
unprocessed cannabis or a cannabis extract; and
         (d)   Sells or intends to sell a cannabis product to a medical
cannabis pharmacy or, as defined by state law, a medical cannabis research
licensee.
      CANNABIS PRODUCT. A product that:
         (a)   Is intended for human use; and
         (b)   Contains cannabis or tetrahydrocannabinol.
      CANNABIS PRODUCTION ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis cultivation facility, a
cannabis processing facility or an independent cannabis testing laboratory.
      CANOPY. A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed
so as to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for
doors, windows and other openings supported by the building and supports
extending to the ground directly under the canopy.
      CARPORT. A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For
the purposes of this chapter, a CARPORT shall be subject to all the regulations
prescribed for a private garage.
      CATTERY. Land or buildings used in the keeping of three or more cats, six
months old or older.
      CELLAR. A room or rooms wholly under the surface of the ground or having
more than 50% of its floor to ceiling height under the average level of the
adjoining ground.
      CHECK CASHING. Cashing of checks for consideration or extending a
deferred deposit loan and shall include any other similar types of businesses
defined by the state, pursuant to the Check Cashing Registration Act, being
U.C.A. §§ 7-23-101 et seq., or its successor statute.
      CHILD NURSERY. An establishment for the care and/or the instruction of
five or more children, for compensation, other than for members of the family
residing on the premises, but not including a public school.
      CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses,
maintained and controlled by a duly-recognized religious organization where
persons regularly assemble for worship.
      CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE. The attorney employed by or officially
representing the city.
      CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR. The building inspector employed by or officially
representing the city’s Building Division.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Brigham City.
      CITY ENGINEER. The engineer employed by or officially representing the
city.
      CITY PLANNER. The Planner employed by or officially representing the
city’s Community Development Department.
      CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL. A building in which a group of dentists,
physicians and allied professional assistants are associated for the conduct of
their professions. The CLINIC may include a dental and/or a medical laboratory
and an apothecary, but it shall not include inpatient care or operating rooms
for major surgery.
      CLUB, SOCIAL. Any organization, group or association supported by its
members where the sole purpose is to render a service to said members and their
guests.
      COMMERCIAL SALES AND SERVICES. Any use involving the exchange, buying or
selling of goods or services for gain or economic profit, but excluding
automobile repair.
      COMMUNITY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. A facility licensed by or contracted by
the state to provide temporary occupancy for previously incarcerated persons
which assists such persons in making a transition from a correctional
institution environment to independent living. Such facility may also provide
ancillary, temporary occupancy for individuals placed as part of, or in lieu of
confinement, rehabilitation or treatment in a correctional institution.
      COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT. The Community Development Department of
the city.
      COMMUNITY LOCATION. A public or private school, a licensed child-care
facility or preschool, a church, a public library, a public playground or a
public park.
      COMPLETE APPLICATION. A submission that includes all information
requested on the appropriate form and payment of all applicable fees.
      CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. A prison, jail, juvenile detention facility or
juvenile secure facility.
      CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION. A lot or facility, as defined by
the administrative rules of the State of Utah, R317-8-3.6, as amended or
successor law, subject to the state’s pollutant discharge elimination system
(UPDES), but generally where the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Animals, other than aquatic animals, have been or will be
stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any
12-month period;
         (b)   Crops, vegetation forage growth or post-harvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility;
         (c)   Is designated by the executive secretary, State Water Quality
Board, as a concentrated animal feeding operation:
         (d)   Number only: if more than the numbers of animals confined
exceeds:
            1.   One thousand slaughter and feeder cattle;
            2.   Seven hundred mature dairy cattle, whether milked or dry cows;
            3.   Two thousand five hundred swine;
            4.   Five hundred horses;
            5.   Ten thousand sheep or lambs;
            6.   Fifty-five thousand turkeys;
            7.   One hundred thousand laying hens or broilers, if the facility
has continuous overflow watering;
            8.   Thirty thousand laying hens or broilers, if the facility has a
liquid manure handling system;
            9.   Five thousand ducks; or
            10.   One thousand animal units.
         (e)   Number and condition of discharge: if more than the numbers of
animals confined exceeds:
            1.   Three hundred slaughter and feeder cattle;
            2.   Two hundred mature dairy cattle, whether milked or dry cows;
            3.   Seven hundred fifty swine;
            4.   One hundred fifty horses;
            5.   Three thousand sheep or lambs;
            6.   Sixteen thousand five hundred turkeys;
            7.   Thirty thousand laying hens or broilers, if the facility has
continuous overflow watering;
            8.   Nine thousand laying hens or broilers, if the facility has a
liquid manure handling system;
            9.   One thousand five hundred ducks;
            10.   Three hundred animal units; and
            11.   Either one of the following conditions are met:
               a.   Pollutants are discharged into waters of the state through
a human-made ditch, flushing system or other similar manmade device; or
               b.   Pollutants are discharged directly into waters of the state
which originate outside of and pass over, across or through the facility or
otherwise come into direct contact with the animals confined in the operation.
      CONDITIONAL USE. A use of land for which a conditional use permit is
required, pursuant to this chapter.
      CONDOMINIUM. The ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project
together with an undivided interest in common in the common areas and
facilities of the property.
      CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING. Final action(s) by the city to physically take or
exact private real property that requires compensation to the owner because of
the mandates of the fifth or fourteenth amendments to the constitution of the
United States or of Article 1, § 29, of the Utah Constitution.
      CORRAL. A space, other than a building, less than one acre in area, or
less than 100 feet in width, used for the confinement of animals or fowl.
      COURT. An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with
a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two or more sides by
such building or buildings.
      COVERAGE, BUILDING. The percent of the total site area covered by
buildings.
      CRISIS NURSERY. A 24-hour group living facility which provides crisis/
respite care in a safe homelike atmosphere to a maximum of eight children ages
zero through 11 when there is a potential for abuse, neglect or an emergency.
Crisis care may include room and board for up to 72 hours. Each facility shall:
         (a)   Have an employed manager/house parent responsible for day-to-day
resident supervision and operation of the facility;
         (b)   Provide medical backup with a licensed physician;
         (c)   Have a staff person trained in first aid and CPR on duty at the
facility at all times;
         (d)   Be state licensed; and
         (e)   Have the option of providing the following service to parents/
guardians of client children or other parents who may benefit from such
services:
            1.   Parent counseling;
            2.   Parenting workshops; and
            3.   Have adequate parking as determined by the Planning
Commission. In making its determination and, at its discretion, the Planning
Commission may consider the availability of on-street parking, availability of
off-site parking, shared or other alternative parking arrangements or any other
information it deems valid and applicable.
      CROSSWALK or WALKWAY. A right-of-way to facilitate pedestrian access
through a subdivision block; designed for use by pedestrians and not for use by
motor vehicles; may be located within or without a street right-of-way, at
grade or separated from vehicular traffic.
      DAIRY. A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or
packaging of dairy products, and their sale; for purposes of this definition,
the production of milk on a farm for wholesale marketing off the premises shall
not classify the farm as a DAIRY.
      DAY CARE CENTER (NON-RESIDENTIAL). Any building or structure, other than
an occupied residence or a publicly assessable building (church, school and the
like) that is permitted in a single-family zoning district, furnishing care,
supervision and guidance for one or more children unaccompanied by parent or
guardian for periods of individual care giving for less than 24 hours per day.
The term DAY CARE CENTER (NON-RESIDENTIAL) is inclusive of kindergartens,
preschools, child day care, nursery schools and all other similar facilities
specializing in the education and/or care of children prior to their entrance
into the first grade, other than facilities owned and/or operated by the public
school system.
      DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION. A bank, savings and loan association, savings
bank, industrial bank, credit union or other institution that:
         (a)   Holds or receives deposits, savings or share accounts;
         (b)   Issues certificates of deposit; or
         (c)   Provides to its customers other depository accounts that are
subject to withdrawal by checks, drafts or other instruments or by electronic
means to effect third-party payments.
      DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one or more of a person’s major life activities, inducing a person having a
record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
DISABILITY does not include current illegal use of, or addition to, any
federally controlled substance, as defined in § 102 of the Controlled Substance
Act, 21 U.S.C. § 802, or successor law. As used in this definition:
         (a)   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT.
            1.   Includes:
               a.   Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic
disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body
systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory,
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive;
genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and edocrine; or
               b.   Any mental or physiological disorder, such as mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific
learning disabilities.
            2.   The term PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT includes, but is not
limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy,
multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency
Virus infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other
than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance) and
alcoholism.
         (b)   MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES. Functions such as caring for one’s self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning and working.
         (c)   HAS A RECORD OF SUCH AN IMPAIRMENT. Has a history of, or has
been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
         (d)   IS REGARDED AS HAVING AN IMPAIRMENT.
            1.   Has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one or more major life activities, but is treated by
another person as constituting such a limitation;
            2.   Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others
toward such impairment; or
            3.   Has none of the impairments defined in division (a) of this
definition, but is treated by another person as having such an impairment.
      DISTRICT. A portion of the territory of the local jurisdiction,
established as a zoning district by this chapter, within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of this chapter; also includes ZONE and ZONING DISTRICT.
      DOMESTIC STAFF. Persons employed or residing on the premises of a
dwelling or other residential facility to perform domestic services or to
assist residents in performing daily life activities.
      DRIVEWAY. A private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons
residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which the
driveway is located.
      DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the more or
less permanent residence or sleeping place of one or more persons or families,
but not including a tent, recreational coach, hotel, motel, hospital or nursing
home.
         (a)   DWELLING, FARM OR RANCH HOUSING. Dwelling units constructed to
provide housing for migratory or temporary farm workers; or for persons
permanently working on a farm or ranch.
         (b)   DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by four families, the structure having only four dwelling units.
         (c)   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. See MOBILE HOME.
         (d)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by more than four families, and having more than four dwelling units.
         (e)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
         (f)   DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by three families, the structure having only three dwelling units.
         (g)   DWELLING, TOWNHOME. A dwelling unit constructed in a group of
three or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to
roof, has its own front and rear exterior access, and is separated from any
other unit by fire separation walls.
         (h)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by two families, the structure having only two dwelling units.
      DWELLING GROUP. A group of two or more detached buildings used as
dwellings, located on a lot or parcel of land.
      DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling with shared access to
common living facilities, which include the provisions for sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation for not more than one family.
      EASEMENT. The portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal owner(s) of said property(ies). The
EASEMENT may be for use under, on, or above said lot or lots which may include
a utility easement.
      EASEMENT, UTILITY. An area on a recorded plat map or other recorded
document that is dedicated to the use and installation of utilities.
      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A public elementary or secondary school,
seminary, parochial school or private education institution having a curriculum
similar to that ordinarily provided in grades one through 12 in a public school
system. The term EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION, for the purpose of this chapter, does
not include post high school educational facilities or educational facilities
which include residential facilities for its students.
      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION WITH HOUSING. A public or private educational
institution with on-site residential facilities for its students and/or staff.
      ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 60 years old or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITIES. Utilities or sanitary and public safety
facilities provided by a public utility or other governmental agency for
overhead or surface or underground services, excluding any building, electrical
substation or transmission line of 50 KV or greater capacity, except by
conditional use permit.
      FAMILY.
         (a)   An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption or legal guardianship, and including up to two additional unrelated
persons; or a group of not more than four persons who are not related; or two
unrelated persons and any children related to either of them; living in a
dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and using common facilities.
         (b)   FAMILY does not exclude the care of foster children.
      FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION. The keeping of domestic animals and fowl for the
production of food for the sole use of the family occupying the premises.
      FLOOD HAZARD. A hazard to land or improvements due to inundation or
overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour
the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings or erode the banks of
watercourses.
      FLOOR AREA. Area included within surrounding walls of a building or
portion thereof, exclusive of vents, shafts and courts.
      FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE. A building occupied by and maintained
exclusively for students affiliated with an academic or professional college or
university or other recognized institution of higher learning, who are
associated together in a fraternity/sorority that is officially recognized by
such institution and who receive lodging and/or meals on the premises for
compensation.
      FOREST INDUSTRY. An industry which uses forest products, such as sawmill,
pulp or paper plant, wood products plant and similar uses.
      FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION SERVICE. Establishments primarily engaged in
undertaking the transportation or transferring of goods, merchandise, materials
and commodities of any kind for compensation, and which may in turn make use of
other transportation establishments in effecting delivery.
      FRONTAGE, BLOCK. All property fronting on one side of the street between
intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way,
waterway end of dead-end street, or political subdivision boundary, measured
along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary
of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts or that common
line between a lot and a public street.
      FRONTAGE, LOT. The lineal measurement of the front lot line.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building, or a portion of a main
building, used or intended to be used for the storage of motor vehicles,
recreational coaches, boats or other recreational vehicles.
      GARAGE, REPAIR. A structure or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the repair of self-propelled vehicles, trailers or boats,
including general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor
vehicles, recreational coaches and minor collision service, but not including
major body, frame or fender repairs or overall automobile or truck painting,
except by conditional use permit. A REPAIR GARAGE may also include incidental
storage, care, washing or sale of automobiles.
      GEOLOGICAL HAZARD. A hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or
artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life,
property or improvements, due to the movement, failure or shifting of the
earth.
      GOVERNING BODY. The elected legislative body of the city.
      GRADE. Includes the following:
         (a)   For buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the
sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street;
         (b)   For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the
elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets;
         (c)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average
level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the centers of all
exterior walls of the building; and
         (d)   Any wall parallel or nearly parallel to and not more than five
feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
      GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ARRAY. A solar energy system that is not attached to
any structure and is mounted directly on the ground.
      HEALTH CLUB. An establishment that provides exercise facilities such as
running, jogging, aerobics, weight lifting, court sports and swimming, as well
as locker rooms, showers, massage rooms, saunas and related accessory uses.
      HERITAGE. A use recognized as a practice that is handed down from the
past by tradition, or a building recognized for its use, history or
architectural significance in the community.
      HOMELESS SHELTER. Charitable lodging or sleeping rooms provided on a
daily or other temporary basis to persons lacking other safe, sanitary or
affordable shelter. May also include a kitchen and cafeteria.
      HOME OCCUPATION. The use of a portion of a dwelling customarily used for
dwelling purposes, or an attached or detached garage, accessory structure or
yard space as an office, studio, teaching or work room for occupations which
are conducted in the home, or an attached or detached garage, accessory
structure or yard space and which is clearly incidental and accessory to the
primary use of the dwelling or the attached or detached garage, accessory
structure or yard space and which also meets all the conditions and
requirements of §§
156.545 through
156.547 of this chapter.
      HOSPITAL. An institution licensed by the state which provides diagnostic,
therapeutic and rehabilitative services to individuals on both an inpatient and
outpatient basis by or under the supervision of one or more physicians.
         (a)   Any medical clinic or professional office which offers any
inpatient or overnight care or operates on a 24-hour basis shall be considered
to be a HOSPITAL.
         (b)   A HOSPITAL may include integral support service facilities such
as laboratories, outpatient units and training and central services, together
with staff offices necessary to the operation of the hospital.
      HOTEL. A building designed for or occupied as the more or less temporary
abiding place of 16 or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged, with
or without meals.
      HOUSEHOLD PETS. 
         (a)   Animals ordinarily permitted in Utah residences and kept for the
company or pleasure of Utah residents, such as domesticated dogs, domesticated
cats and domesticated birds. HOUSEHOLD PETS also include tropical fish,
amphibians, reptiles or invertebrates of a number that do not constitute a
health hazard or nuisance, and can be safely and humanely kept in aquariums,
cages, or enclosures, the cumulative size of which shall not exceed 50 cubic
feet per household.
         (b)   HOUSEHOLD PETS shall not include a sufficient number of dogs as
to constitute a kennel, nor sufficient cats as to constitute a cattery, nor
more than six birds. HOUSEHOLD PETS shall not include the keeping of “dangerous
animals”, “vicious animals”, “wild animals” or “livestock”, as defined in
Chapter 90 of this code of ordinances.
         (c)   Furthermore, HOUSEHOLD PETS shall not include exotic, pygmy or
dwarf variations of animals defined as either “wild animals” or “livestock” in
Chapter 90 of this code of ordinances, including, but not limited to, miniature
horses, pygmy goats and Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs, notwithstanding that such
animals may be kept as HOUSEHOLD PETS by residents of other communities.
      INDEPENDENT CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY. A person, corporation,
partnership, association, company or other entity that:
         (a)   Conducts a chemical or other analysis of cannabis or a cannabis
product; or
         (b)   Acquires, possesses and transports cannabis or a cannabis
product with the intent to conduct a chemical or other analysis of the cannabis
or cannabis product.
      INUNDATION. Ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth or
velocity to damage property, due to the presence of the water or to the deposit
of silt.
      JAIL. A facility established and operated by the county, either directly
or under a contract with a private provider, for confinement of persons in
lawful custody.
      JUNK. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash,
rubber debris or other waste or salvage materials; dismantled, junked or
wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; and old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous
metal materials.
      JUNK YARD. The use of any lot, portion of a lot or tract of land for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap
material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, or
other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided that, this definition
shall be deemed not to include such uses which are clearly accessory and
incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
      JUVENILE DETENTION FACILITY. A facility established and operated by the
state, either directly or under a contract with a private provider, for
temporary detention of delinquent juveniles.
      JUVENILE SECURE FACILITY. A facility established and operated by the
state, either directly or under a contract with a private provider, for
incarceration of delinquent juveniles.
      KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any place where three or more dogs older than six
months are kept for the primary purpose of sale or for the boarding, care or
breeding of which a fee is charged or paid.
      KENNEL, SPORTSMAN. A private kennel for three to five dogs for non-
commercial use, which is located on a lot of least one acre.
      LAND USE APPLICATION. An application required by the city’s land use
ordinances.
      LAND USE AUTHORITY. A person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by the local legislative body to act upon a land use application.
      LAND USE ORDINANCE. A planning, zoning, development or subdivision
ordinance of the municipality, but does not include the General Plan.
      LAND USE PERMIT. A permit issued by a Land Use Authority.
      LEGISLATIVE BODY. The Brigham City Council.
      LICENSED FAMILY GROUP CHILD CARE PROVIDER. A child care provider who
cares for nine to 16 children unrelated to the licensee for less than 24 hours
a day with a regularly scheduled, ongoing enrollment, for direct or indirect
compensation in the provider’s home and who meets all standards and
requirements of the state’s rules for licensed family child care. LICENSED
FAMILY GROUP CHILD CARE shall be a home occupation subject to the approval of
requirements of §§
156.545 through
156.447 of this chapter. LICENSED FAMILY GROUP CHILD CARE PROVIDERS shall
obtain conditional use approval, approval of the state and a business license
prior to operation. A conditional use approval for LICENSED FAMILY GROUP CHILD
CARE shall be issued to the applicant and shall expire upon lapsing of a
business license or state license, or at such time that the applicant is no
longer residing at the address at which approval is granted.
      LIVESTOCK. Any normally domesticated animal that is ordinarily kept on a
farm, such as cattle, swine, sheep, goats, mules, burros, horses, geese, ducks,
turkeys, llamas and the like.
      LOCAL GOVERNING BODY. See GOVERNING BODY.
      LOCAL HEALTH OFFICER. The health officer or department employed by the
Bear River Health Department.
      LOCAL JURISDICTION. Brigham City, Utah.
      LOT. A parcel or unit of land described by metes and bounds and held or
intended to be held in separate lease or ownership, or a parcel or unit of land
shown as a lot or parcel on a recorded subdivision map, or shown on a plat used
in the lease or sale or offer of lease or sale of land resulting from the
division of a larger tract into three or more smaller units.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the
same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot
lines measured in the main direction of the side lot lines.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT FRONTAGE REQUIRED. The length of the front lot line, which is
coterminous with the front street line.
      LOT LINES. The property lines bounding the lot.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. For an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street;
for a corner lot or through lot, the lot line adjoining either street, adjacent
to the architectural front or main entry. The LOT LINE, FRONT shall be used for
address designation.
      LOT LINE, REAR. Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most
distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of a triangular or gore-
shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the parcel parallel to and at a
maximum distance from the front lot line. In cases where these definitions are
not applicable, the Building Inspector shall designate the REAR LOT LINE.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. A
SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot
line; a SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a STREET SIDE LOT LINE.
      LOT, RESTRICTED. A lot having an average slope of 25% or more or which
does not contain a buildable area of at least 75 feet by 100 feet with an
average slope of less than 15%, such lot being prohibited as a building site,
or being required to be increased in area and width, and regulated and allowed
to be developed only as required by the Planning Commission.
      LOT RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land of not less than 16 feet in width
connecting a lot to a street for use as private access to that lot.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the required front yard setback line or rear yard setback line, whichever is
shorter.
      LOT, UNRESTRICTED. A lot having an average slope of less than 25% and
containing a buildable area of at least 75 feet by 100 feet with an average
slope of less than 15%, which buildable area is designated as such on the
subdivision plat in which the lot is located, if the average slope of the lot
is greater than 15%.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A transportable, factory built housing unit
constructed on or after 6-15-1976. According to the Federal Home Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (HUD Code), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.,
or its successor statute, in one or more sections, and when erected on site,
the home must be at least 20 feet in width at the narrowest dimension, have
exterior and roofing materials acceptable to the city building codes, have a
minimum roof pitch of two to 12 (2:12), and be located on a permanent
foundation and connected to the required utilities, including plumbing,
heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. A MANUFACTURED HOME shall be
identified as real property on the property assessment rolls of the county. All
MANUFACTURED HOMES constructed on or after 6-15-1976 shall be identified by the
manufacturer’s data plate bearing the date the unit was manufactured and a HUD
label attached to the exterior of the home certifying the home was manufactured
to HUD standards.
      MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials
supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
      MARTIAL ARTS STUDIO. A place for teaching, training or providing friendly
competition of any of the traditional forms of self-defense or combat that
utilize physical skill and coordination without weapons, such as karate,
aikido, judo, kung fu or tae kwon do.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS PHARMACY. A person, corporation, partnership,
association, company or other entity that:
         (a)   Acquires or intends to acquire:
            1.   Cannabis in a medical dosage form or a cannabis product in a
medicinal dosage form from a cannabis processing facility; or
            2.   A medical cannabis device.
         (b)   Possesses cannabis in a medicinal dosage form, a cannabis
product in a medicinal dosage form or a medical cannabis device; and
         (c)   Sells or intends to sell cannabis in a medicinal dosage form, a
cannabis product in a medicinal dosage form or a medical cannabis device to a
medical cannabis cardholder.
      MOBILE HOME. A detached, single-family dwelling unit of not less than 30
feet in length, designed for long-term occupancy, and to be transported on its
own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; containing a
flush toilet, sleeping accommodations, a tub or a shower bath, kitchen
facilities and plumbing and electrical connections provided for except for
connections to utilities and other minor work. Pre-sectionalized, modular or
prefabricated houses not placed on a permanent foundation shall be regarded as
MOBILE HOMES; if placed upon a permanent foundation, such structures which meet
all applicable building and housing codes shall not be considered as MOBILE
HOMES, but shall be regulated as conventional housing; and MOBILE HOMES which
are placed on permanent foundations and meet all applicable building and
housing codes shall be regulated as conventional housing.
      MOBILE HOME LOT. A lot within a mobile home subdivision, designed and to
be used for the accommodation of one mobile home.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A space designed and approved by the local jurisdiction
for occupancy by mobile homes, to be under a single ownership or management and
meeting all requirements of the zoning title and mobile home park title for
mobile home parks.
      MOBILE HOME SPACE. A space within a mobile home park, designed and to be
used for the accommodation of one mobile home.
      MOBILE HOME STAND. The part of the mobile home space which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home and its appurtenant structures or
additions.
      MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A subdivision designed and intended for
residential use where the lots are to be individually owned or leased and
occupied by mobile homes exclusively.
      MODEL HOME/TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE. A structure that is used for the
marketing of lots or structures in the subdivision or contiguous property in
which they are located, with the following criteria.
         (a)   The MODEL HOME/TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE must be reverted to a use
that complies with the current ordinances or removed when the subdivision is
more than 80% developed or has been occupied as a MODEL HOME/TEMPORARY SALES
OFFICE for three years, whichever comes first.
         (b)   Adequate off-street parking is provided.
         (c)   Front and side yards are landscaped in a manner conducive to the
neighborhood. The rear yard is maintained in a weed free manner.
         (d)   An exterior lighting plan is provided indicating the location,
direction and timing of all lighting on the site.
         (e)   A signage plan is provided indicating the size and location of
all signs. All signs shall be in conformance with the sign ordinance.
         (f)   The hours of operation must be approved by the Planning
Commission.
         (g)   The structure shall not be used as a personal residence, general
real estate office or construction management office for off-site development,
while serving as a MODEL HOME/ TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE.
         (h)   The structure is conducive to the neighborhood.
      MODULAR HOME. A permanent dwelling structure built in prefabricated
units, which are assembled and erected on the site, or at another location and
brought as a unit to the site; said MODULAR HOME is classed as a mobile home
until it is placed on a permanent foundation and complies with all governing
building codes.
      MOTEL. A building or group of buildings for the drive-in accommodation of
transient guests, comprising individual sleeping or living units and designed
and located to serve the motoring public.
      NON-COMPLYING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A structure that:
         (a)   Legally existed before its current land use designation; and
         (b)   Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes,
does not conform to the setback, height restrictions or other regulations,
excluding those regulations, which govern the use of land.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A use of land that:
         (a)   Legally existed before its current land use designation;
         (b)   Has been maintained continuously since the time the land use
ordinance governing the land changed; and
         (c)   Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes,
does not conform to the regulations that now govern the use of the land.
      NON-DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION. A financial business, other than a depository
institution such as a bank, credit union, mortgage tender or savings and loan
association, that is registered by the state pursuant to the Check Cashing
Registration Act or the Title Lending Registration Act. Specifically included
are the following.
         (a)   CHECK CASHING BUSINESS. A person or business that for
compensation engages in cashing a check for consideration or extending a
deferred deposit loan. CHECK CASHING BUSINESS does not include depository
institutions, as defined by the state. CHECK CASHING BUSINESS also does not
include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling goods or
services to retail buyers that cash checks or issue money orders for a minimum
flat fee not exceeding 1% of the check or as a service fee that is incidental
to its main purpose or business.
         (b)   DEFERRED DEPOSIT LENDER. A business that conducts transactions
where a person presents to a check casher a check written on that person’s
account or provides written or electronic authorization to a check casher to
effect a debit from that person’s account using an electronic payment and the
check casher provides the maker an amount of money that is equal to the face
value of the check or the amount of the debit less any fee or interest charged
for the transaction and agrees not to cash the check or process the debit until
a specific date.
         (c)   PAYDAY LOAN BUSINESS. An establishment providing loans to
individuals in exchange for personal checks or assignment of wages as
collateral.
         (d)   TITLE LOAN BUSINESS. An establishment providing short term loans
to individuals in exchange for the title of a motor vehicle, motor home, or
motorboat as collateral.
         (e)   OTHER. Also included are any other business that offers deferred
deposit loans, title loans, check cashing services and loans for payment of a
percentage fee exceeding 1% of the check or $1 as a service fee that is
incidental to its main purpose or business.
      NURSING HOME. An intermediate care/nursing facility or a skilled nursing
facility, licensed by the state, for the care of individuals who, due to
illness, advanced age, disability or impairment, require assistance and/or
supervision on a 24-hour per day basis. Such facility does not include an adult
day care facility or adult day care provided in conjunction with a residential
facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
      OFFICE, BUSINESS. A building or room where executive, management, or
administrative services are provided. Typical uses include, but are not limited
to, real estate brokers, insurance agencies, credit reporting agencies,
property management firms, investment firms, employment agencies, travel
agencies, advertising agencies, secretarial services, data processing and
business offices of private companies, utility companies, public agencies,
trade associations, unions and non-profit organizations.
      OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. A building or room where an individual or group of
individuals provide a service that involves either some skill or knowledge, or
that requires connections to other businesses not easily or readily available
to the general public (examples include, but are not limited to, physicians,
dentists, lawyers, architects, financial services, stockbrokers, consultants,
engineers, land use planners and the like). This definition includes medical,
dental and chiropractic offices.
      OFFICIAL MAP. A map or maps which has been adopted as the official map of
the local jurisdiction, showing existing public streets, streets on plats of
subdivisions which have been approved by the Planning Commission, and/or other
street extensions, widening, narrowing or vacations which have been accurately
surveyed and definitely located.
      OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. The space required to park one passenger
vehicle, which space shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
      OFF-SITE FACILITIES. Improvements not on individual lots, but generally
within the boundaries of the subdivision which they serve, and as further
outlined in this chapter.
      ON-SITE FACILITIES. Construction or placement of the dwelling and its
appurtenant improvements on a lot.
      OPEN SPACE. The area reserved in parks, courts, playgrounds, golf courses
and other similar open areas to meet the density requirements of planned unit
developments.
      OPEN SPACE, USABLE. Usable open space shall be any portion of a lot or
building which meets all the following conditions.
         (a)   The space shall be open to the sky or shall be open to view on
at least two sides.
         (b)   The space shall be readily accessible by foot traffic from the
dwelling unit to which it is accessory.
         (c)   The space is provided on a balcony, roof or other facility above
grade, it shall have such protective devices as are deemed necessary by the
Zoning Administrator to assure reasonably safe usage by children and adults.
         (d)   The space shall not be provided from any required front or side
yard, parking area or driveway space.
      OWNER. The holder of the fee title to land or buildings or to property,
whether a person, partnership, corporation or other entity recognized by law,
and his or her or its lessees, permittees, assignees or successors in interest.
      PACKAGE AGENCY. Any outlet authorized by the state’s Liquor Control
Commission to sell original packaged liquor or wine for consumption off the
premises.
      PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
      PARCEL OF LAND. See LOT.
      PARK AND RIDE FACILITIES. An off-street parking facility designed or
intended to accommodate commuter traffic into or out from the community. The
facility is designed to encourage transfer from a private vehicle to another
form of transportation mean whether public transit or carpooling.
      PAWN SHOP. Any person, firm, corporation or business which loans money on
deposit of personal property, or deals in the purchase, exchange or possession
of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger
or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel
mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property.
      PARKING LOT. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of
more than four automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for
compensation or accommodation for clients or customers.
      PEDESTRIAN-WAY. See CROSSWALK.
      PERMANENT COSMETICS. The application of pigments to or under the skin of
a human being for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other
appearance of the skin. This includes but is not limited to eyeliner, eyebrows,
eye shadow, or lip color.
      PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in providing
individual services generally related to personal needs of a frequent or
recurrent nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty and
barber shops, tanning and nail salons, shoe repair shops and tailor shops. The
term excludes tattoo establishment.
      PLANNED DISTRICT. A zoning district, the boundaries of which are to be
shown on the zoning map, but the regulations for which shall be determined by a
General Development Plan to be adopted by the governing body as part of this
chapter, after public hearing, as required for other zoning districts.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). An integrated design for development of
residential, commercial or industrial uses, or limited combinations of such
uses, in which the density and location regulations of the district in which
the development is situated may be varied or waived to allow flexibility and
initiative in site and building design and location, in accordance with an
approved plan and imposed requirements.
      PLOT PLAN. A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing its actual
measurements, the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to
be erected, the location of the lot in relation to abutting streets and such
other information as may be required by the Planning Commission.
      PRICE-POINT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. A retail establishment selling a
general variety of inexpensive items primarily priced at $1 to $5 or less.
      PRIMARILY RESIDENTIAL. For purposes of this chapter and any applicable
state law, means the following zoning districts:
         (a)   Rural Residential District RR-1;
         (b)   Rural Residential District RR-5;
         (c)   Rural Residential District RR-10;
         (d)   Residential District R-1-40;
         (e)   Residential District R-1-20;
         (f)   Residential District R-1-12;
         (g)   Residential District R-1-10;
         (h)   Residential District R-1-8;
         (i)   Residential District R-M-7;
         (j)   Residential District R-M-15; and
         (k)   Residential District R-M-30.
      PRISON. A facility for incarceration of persons convicted of crimes,
established and operated by the state or by a private provider pursuant to the
provisions of Utah Code or successor law.
      PRIVATE NON-PROFIT LOCKER CLUB. A social, recreational or athletic club,
or kindred association, incorporated under the provisions of the state’s Non-
Profit Corporation and Cooperation Act, being U.C.A. Title 16, Chapter 6a, or
its successor statutes, which maintains or intends to maintain premises upon
which liquor is or will be stored, consumed or sold.
      PRIVATE NON-PROFIT RECREATIONAL GROUNDS AND FACILITIES. Non-profit
recreational grounds and facilities operated by a nonprofit corporation,
association or group.
      PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY. A facility operated, licensed or contracted
by a governmental entity, or operated by a charitable, non-profit organization,
where, for no compensation, temporary, protective housing is provided to:
         (a)   Abused or neglected children awaiting placement in foster care;
         (b)   Pregnant or parenting teens;
         (c)   Victims of sexual abuse; or
         (d)   Victims of domestic abuse.
      PUBLIC BUILDINGS. Buildings which are under the ownership or control of
the United States Government, the State of Utah or any subdivision thereof, Box
Elder County or Brigham City Corporation, or any departments or agencies
thereof.
      REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. A change in a rule, policy, practice or service
necessary to afford a person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. As
used in this definition:
         (a)   EQUAL OPPORTUNITY. Achieving equal results as between a person
with a disability and a non-disabled person;
         (b)   NECESSARY. The applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an
equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice; and
         (c)   REASONABLE. A requested accommodation will not undermine the
legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit
that the accommodation would provide to the person with a disability.
      RECREATIONAL COACH. A vehicle, such as a travel trailer, tent camper,
camp car or other vehicle with or without motive power, designed and/or
constructed to travel on the public thoroughfare in accordance with the
provisions of the Utah Vehicle Code, and designed for use as human habitation
for a temporary and recreational nature.
      RECREATIONAL COACH PARK. Any area or tract of land or a separate
designated section within a mobile home park where lots are rented or held out
for rent to one or more owners or users of recreational coaches for a temporary
time not to exceed 180 days. The purpose of said park is to provide a seasonal
type of recreational living and not a permanent habitable living condition.
Such park may also be designated as OVERNIGHT PARK.
      RECREATIONAL COACH SPACE. A plot of ground within a recreational coach
park designated and intended for the accommodation of one recreational coach.
      REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY. A facility licensed by or contracted
by the state to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of adults or
juveniles in order to provide rehabilitation, treatment or counseling services.
Without limitation, such services may include rehabilitation, treatment,
counseling or assessment and evaluation services related to delinquent
behavior, alcohol and drug abuse, sex offenders, sexual abuse or mental health.
Associated education services may also be provided to juvenile occupants. A
REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY does not include a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building or facility which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities.
      REPAIR SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
repair services to households, rather than businesses. Typical services
include, but are not limited to, appliances, heating and air conditioning and
plumbing.
      RESIDENCE. A place where an individual is actually living at a given
point in time and not a place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
      RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATE CHILD CARE PROVIDER. A child care provider who
cares for one to eight children in the provider’s home, having a regular
scheduled, ongoing enrollment, for direct or indirect compensation. A
RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATE CHILD CARE PROVIDER may not care for more than eight
children including the provider’s own children under age four. The provider
also may not care for more than two children under age two, including the
owner’s own children under age two. RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATE CHILD CARE is a
home occupation subject to the approval requirements of §§
156.545 through
156.547 of this chapter. A RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATE CHILD CARE PROVIDER shall be
required to obtain approval of the state, if required by the state, and a
business license prior to operation. Home occupation approval for RESIDENTIAL
CERTIFICATE CHILD CARE shall be issued to the applicant and shall expire upon
lapsing of a business license or state license, or at such time that the
applicant is no longer residing at the address at which approval is granted.
      RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS. A dwelling unit owned by a
resident thereof or an immediate family member of a resident, or for which the
title has been placed in trust for a resident; and is voluntarily occupied on a
24 hour per day basis by eight or fewer elderly persons in a family-type
arrangement. A RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS does not include any
facility:
         (a)   Operated as a business; provided that, such facility shall not
be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is charged for
food or for actual and necessary costs of operation and maintenance of the
facility;
         (b)   Where persons are placed:
            1.   For alcoholism or drug abuse treatment; or
            2.   As part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation or
treatment in a correctional facility.
         (c)   Which is a health care facility as defined by Utah Code or
successor law; or
         (d)   Which is a residential facility for persons with a disability.
      RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY. See U.C.A. Title 10,
Chapter 9a, § 103, Definitions, or successor law.
      ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ARRAY. A solar energy system installed on the roof of
a structure.
      SCHOOL, CHARTER. A school approved by a chartering entity in accordance
with the Utah Charter Schools Act or successor law.
      SCHOOL, PRIVATE. A school which is operated by a quasi-public or private
group, individual or organization, and which has a curriculum similar to that
provided in any public school in the state of Utah. PRIVATE SCHOOLS may be non-
profit or profit-making establishments.
      SCHOOL, PUBLIC. A school operated by a school district or other public
agency in the state.
      SECONDHAND STORE. See THRIFT STORE.
      SELF-SERVICE ENCLOSED STORAGE FACILITY. A structure, or structures
commonly referred to as storage units, containing separate enclosed, individual
and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual
leases for varying periods of time. Such facilities are to be used for dead
storage only. The following activities are prohibited within any SELF-STORAGE
ENCLOSED STORAGE FACILITY:
         (a)   Commercial, wholesale or retail sales or miscellaneous or garage
sales;
         (b)   The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats,
trailers, small engine equipment or similar equipment;
         (c)   The operation of power tools, spray painting equipment,
compressors, welding equipment, kilns or similar equipment;
         (d)   The establishment of a transfer business; and
         (e)   Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust,
noise or vibrations.
      SELF-SERVICE OUTSIDE STORAGE FACILITY. The use of any lot, portion of a
lot or tract of land for outside storage of operative automobiles, trucks,
recreational vehicles, boats, trailers or non-motorized storage, containing
separate, individual and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or
rented on individual leases for varying periods of time. The following
activities are prohibited within any SELF-STORAGE OUTSIDE STORAGE FACILITY:
         (a)   Commercial, wholesale or retail sales or miscellaneous or garage
sales;
         (b)   The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats,
trailers, small engine equipment or similar equipment;
         (c)   The establishment of a transfer business;
         (d)   Junk yard or impound yard;
         (e)   Storage of non-motorized storage shall not exceed the height of
the screened fence; and
         (f)   Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust,
noise or vibrations.
      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Those land uses subject to regulation under
Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances and §§
156.560 through
156.563 of this chapter.
      SHELTERED WORKSHOP. A non-residential facility providing supervised
educational or vocational training facilities for persons with a disability.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A group of three or more commercial establishments that
is planned, developed and managed as a unit with common areas for off-street
parking and landscaping provided on the property.
      SITE PLAN. A plan required by, and providing the information required by,
§
156.013 of this chapter.
      SOLAR POWER GENERATION FACILITY. Any equipment, structure, or system
designed for the purpose of collecting, storing, or distributing solar energy
for electrical generation.
      SPA FITNESS CENTER. A place or building where active exercise and related
activities are performed utilizing weight control or muscle building equipment
or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness. Also, a place or building
that provides massage, exercise and related activities with or without such
equipment or apparatus.
      SPECIALTY RETAIL STORE. Establishments which engage in the sale of
specialty goods and incidental services. Businesses within this definition
include those which conduct sales and storage entirely within an enclosed
structure, with the exception of occasional outdoor on-site promotions.
Sidewalk (public right-of-way) sales require approval according to the city
code. typical uses include, but are not limited to, gift shops, hobby and craft
shops, jewelry, pottery, leather goods, art needlework, picture frames, china
and silver shops and interior decorating shops. Work conducted on the premises
includes handicraft production such as pottery, jewelry, picture frames or
leather goods. Goods assembled or produced on the premises must be for sale on
the premises. This is a broad definition which is intended to include all
specialty retail sales and services.
      SOCIAL HALL. A building, room or facility owned or maintained by an
association or organization for the social and/or recreational purposes of
certain groups. This may include a meeting hall, reception center, cooking and
dining facilities for large groups, but shall not provide overnight lodging.
      STABLE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses
owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for hire, remuneration or
sale.
      STABLE, PUBLIC. Any stable where horses are boarded and/or kept for hire.
      STATE STORE. An outlet for the sale of liquor located on the premises,
said premises owned or leased by the state.
      STORY. As defined by the current adopted International Building Code.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires fixed location
on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location upon the
ground; includes BUILDING.
      SUBDIVISION, CLUSTER. A subdivision of land in which the lots have areas
less than the minimum lot area of the district in which the subdivision is
located, but which complies with the cluster subdivision provisions of this
chapter and in which a significant part of the land is privately reserved or
dedicated as permanent common open space to provide low-density character for
the residential lots in the subdivision.
      SUPPORT STAFF. Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling
or other residential facility to assist residents in performing daily life
activities or to provide on-site treatment, rehabilitation or habilitation
services.
      SURGICAL CENTER. A medical office or facility designed and used
specifically for same day surgery.
      TATTOOING. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the
skin by aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin,
resulting in permanent coloration of the skin.
      TAXI HUB. A place or facility that stores and may include servicing,
repairing and fueling of taxi vehicles.
      TAXI SERVICE. A service that offers transportation in passenger
automobiles and vans to persons including those who are disabled in return for
remuneration.
      THRIFT STORE. A retail establishment that engages in the purchase and/or
resale of used goods such as clothing, furniture, appliances, books and other
household items.
      TOWING AND IMPOUND YARD. The temporary storage of vehicles that have been
towed, carried, hauled or pushed from public to private property for
impoundment in a public or private impound yard.
      TOWING SERVICES. The removing of a motor vehicle by towing, carrying,
hauling or pushing from public or private property when such vehicle has been
ordered to be impounded to a public or private impound lot. This shall not
include an automotive service use that has a tow truck and repairs vehicles on-
site.
      TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL. A post-high school educational or vocational
training facility.
      TRANSFER COMPANY. See FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION SERVICE.
      TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY.
         (a)   A facility owned, operated or contracted by a governmental
entity or a charitable, non- profit organization which provides free temporary
housing to homeless persons for at least 30 days while they obtain work, job
skills or otherwise take steps to stabilize their circumstances.
         (b)   A TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY does not include:
            1.   A homeless shelter;
            2.   A dwelling unit provided to a family for its exclusive use as
part of a transitional housing program for more than 30 days; or
            3.   A residential facility for persons with a disability.
      TRUCK STOP AND SERVICE FACILITIES.
         (a)   A facility intended to provide services to the trucking
industry, including, but not limited to, dispensing of fuel, servicing, repair,
automated washes and overnight parking.
         (b)   The facility may also include overnight accommodations, showers
or restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews.
      VACATION RENTAL. A dwelling meeting the requirements of §
156.359 of this chapter, or successor law, which is rented out by the day for a
period less than 30 consecutive days, for pay, offering overnight lodging to
vacationers where the owner(s) live within the city limits.
      VICINITY PLAN. A map or drawing, to scale, showing the physical
relationships of the proposed development to existing or proposed streets,
buildings and utilities; other relevant information such as special terrain or
surface drainage, and existing zoning classifications of all land within 300
feet of the property proposed for development.
      WATER ENTITLEMENTS. Approved or certificated water rights as documented
by the Utah Division of Water Rights or shares in a legally recognized
irrigation water company within the corporate jurisdiction of the city.
      YARD. A required open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as permitted elsewhere in this
chapter.
      YARD, FRONT. A space on the same lot with a building, between the front
line of the building and the front lot line, and extending across the full
width of the lot. The depth of the FRONT YARD is the minimum distance between
the front lot line and the front line of the building.
      YARD, REAR. A space on the same lot with a building, between the rear
line of the building and the rear lot line, and extending the full width of the
lot. The depth of the REAR YARD is the minimum distance between the rear lot
line and the rear line of the building.
      YARD, SIDE. A space on the same lot with a building, between the side
line of the building, and the side lot line and extending from the front yard
to the rear yard. The width of the SIDE YARD shall be the minimum distance
between the side lot line and the side line of the building.
      ZONE. See DISTRICT.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The Land Use Ordinance of Brigham City.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.020)
(Ord. 06-04, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 06-17, passed 7-7-2005; Ord. 07-13, passed
7-19-2007; Ord. 09-02, passed 2-19-2009; Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011; Ord. 12-
16, passed 12-6-2012; Ord. 14-10, passed 9-18-2014; Ord. 16-16, passed 11-3-
2016; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-18-2024; Ord. 24-26,
passed 9-19-2024; Ord. 24-28, passed 11-21-2024; Ord. 25-04, passed 2-6-2025;
Ord. 25-17, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 156.021 SECONDARY IRRIGATION WATER; REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon land use application, building permit application or culinary
connection application applicant shall provide as part of the application
process documentation to the city one of the following:
      (1)   Evidence that the applicant can physically and legally provide a
secondary irrigation system sufficient to service the proposed development; or
      (2)   Applicant shall provide to the city water entitlements that are
sufficient to allow the city to provide a secondary irrigation system to the
proposed development; or
      (3)   In the event applicant desires to have the city provide secondary
irrigation the applicant shall grant to the city the right of first refusal to
purchase additional water entitlements associated with the subject property; or
      (4)   On properties where no water entitlements are present the applicant
shall pay to the city a fee in lieu to provide the secondary irrigation system.
If the development property has existing water entitlements linked to it, the
applicant shall convey the required water entitlements to the city before the
fee in-lieu option is exercised.
   (B)   Water entitlements shall be conveyed to the city, or the fee in-lieu
paid within 90 days from the date that the culinary water connection is
approved, or where applicable, receipt of building permit, land use approval or
recording of the development plat.
   (C)   Water entitlement calculation method. Irrigated areas shall be defined
by the city-wide average of 58.7% of the property's gross acreage, or as
measured by a specific development plan approved by the City Engineer.
Residential, commercial, and industrial development shall provide three acre-
feet per irrigated acre per year. (See Examples)
      (1)   Example 1 - Calculation by citywide average method:
         (a)   Gross parcel area to be developed = 10 acres.
         (b)   Irrigated area estimated via city-wide average (58.7% x 10
acres) = 5.87 acres.
         (c)   Required water right/share volume (3 acre-feet x 5.87 acres) =
17.61 acre- feet.
         (d)   Total rights/shares to be conveyed to the city = 17.61 acre-feet
per year.
      (2)   Example 2 - Calculation by specific development plan method:
         (a)   Measured irrigated area on site plan (reviewed by City Engineer)
= 4.05 acres.
         (b)   Required water right/share volume (3 acre-feet x 4.05 acres) =
12.15 acre- feet.
         (c)   Total rights/shares to be conveyed to the city = 12.15 acre-feet
per year.
   (D)   Fee in-lieu calculation method. The fee in lieu calculation is made as
follows. At the time of approval of the land use application, building permit
or culinary connection application, the City Engineer shall determine the
current market rate per share and make a calculation based on a dollar per
acre-foot per year ($/acre-ft/year) basis. The fee shall be paid directly to
the city within 90 days from the date of land use approval, building permit
approval, or the culinary water connection approval or where applicable, prior
to the recording of the development plat. The fee shall be deposited into a
water entitlements purchase fund which shall be utilized by the city for the
purchase of water entitlement.
(Ord. 24-28, passed 11-21-2024)
NOTICES
§ 156.035 REQUIRED NOTICE.
   The city shall provide actual notice or the notice required by U.C.A. § 10-
9a-201, or successor law.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.036 APPLICANT NOTICE.
   (A)   For each land use application, the city shall:
      (1)   Notify the applicant of the date, time and place of each public
hearing and public meeting to consider the application;
      (2)   Provide to each applicant a copy of each staff report regarding the
applicant or the pending application at least three business days before the
public hearing or public meeting; and
      (3)   Notify the applicant of any final action on a pending application.
   (B)   If the city fails to comply with the requirements of divisions (A)(1)
or (A)(2) above, an applicant may waive the failure so that the application may
stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda and be considered as if the
requirements had been met.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.037 NOTICE OF INTENT TO PREPARE A GENERAL PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL
PLAN AMENDMENT.
   The city shall provide notice required by U.C.A. § 10-9a-203, or successor
law.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.038 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC MEETINGS TO CONSIDER GENERAL
PLAN OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The city shall provide:
      (1)   Notice of the date, time and place of the first public hearing to
consider the original adoption or any modification of all or any portion of a
General Plan; and
      (2)   Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
   (B)   Each notice of a public hearing under division (A)(1) above shall be
at least ten calendar days before the public hearing and shall be:
      (1)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area;
      (2)   Mailed to each affected entity; and
      (3)   Posted:
         (a)   In at least three public locations within the municipality; and
         (b)   On the city’s official website.
   (C)   Each notice of a public meeting under division (A)(2) above shall be
at least 24 hours before the meeting and shall be:
      (1)   Submitted to a newspaper of general circulation in the area; and
      (2)   Posted:
         (a)   In at least three public locations within the municipality; and
         (b)   On the city’s official website.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.039 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC MEETINGS ON ADOPTION OR
MODIFICATION OF LAND USE ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The city shall give:
      (1)   Notice of the date, time and place of the first public hearing to
consider the adoption or any modification of a land use ordinance; and
      (2)   Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
   (B)   Each notice of a public hearing under division (A)(1) above shall be:
      (1)   Mailed to each affected entity at least ten calendar days before
the public hearing;
      (2)   Posted:
         (a)   In at least three public locations within the municipality; and
         (b)   On the municipality’s official website.
      (3)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at
least ten calendar days before the public hearing; and
      (4)   Mailed at least three days before the public hearing to:
         (a)   Each property owner whose land is directly affected by the land
use ordinance change; and
         (b)   Each adjacent property owner within 300 feet of the property
line of the project.
   (C)   Each notice of a public meeting under division (A)(2) above shall be
at least 24 hours before the meeting and shall be posted:
      (1)   In at least three public locations within the municipality; and
      (2)   On the municipality’s official website.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.040 THIRD-PARTY NOTICE.
   (A)   The city requires notice to adjacent property owners, the municipality
shall:
      (1)   Mail notice to the record owner of each parcel within 300 feet; and
      (2)   Post notice on the property with a sign of sufficient size,
durability, print quality and location that is reasonably calculated to give
notice to passers-by.
   (B)   The city will mails notice to third-party property owners under
division (A) above, it shall mail equivalent notice to property owners within
an adjacent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.041 NOTICE FOR A PROPOSED A MULTIPLE-UNIT RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL OR
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The city shall provide notice of the date, time and place of a public
hearing that is:
      (1)   Mailed not less than three calendar days before the public hearing
and addressed to the record owner of each parcel within specified parameters of
that property; and
      (2)   Posted not less than three calendar days before the public hearing,
on the property proposed for subdivision, in a visible location, with a sign of
sufficient size, durability and print quality that is reasonably calculated to
give notice to passers-by.
   (B)   The city shall mail notice to each affected entity of a public hearing
to consider a preliminary plat describing a multiple-unit residential
development or a commercial or industrial development.
   (C)   The city shall provide notice as required by §
156.042 of this chapter for a subdivision that involves a vacation, alteration
or amendment of a street.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.042 HEARING AND NOTICE FOR PROPOSAL TO VACATE, ALTER OR AMEND A PUBLIC
STREET OR RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   For any proposal to vacate, alter or amend a public street or right-
of-way, the Land Use Authority shall hold a public hearing and shall give
notice of the date, place and time of the hearing by:
      (1)   Mailing notice as required in §
156.042 of this chapter;
      (2)   Mailing notice to each affected entity; and
      (3)   Publishing notice once a week for four consecutive weeks before the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the
land subject to the petition is located.
   (B)   If there is no newspaper of general circulation in the municipality,
posting the property and posting notice in three public places for four
consecutive weeks before the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.080) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.043 NOTICE CHALLENGE.
   If notice given under authority of this subchapter is not challenged under
U.C.A. § 10-9a-801, or successor law, within the specified number of days after
the meeting or action for which notice is given, the notice is considered
adequate and proper.
(Prior Code, § 29.03.090) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
GENERAL AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.055 LAND USE AUTHORITY.
   The decision making bodies and officials identified within this chapter
shall have responsibilities for implementing and administering the city’s
General Plan and the city’s Land Use Ordinance, which include the City Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance and other ordinances, as allowed by state law,
and as contained in U.C.A. Title 10, Chapter 9a, or successor law.
   (A)   City Council. The City Council (“Council”) shall have the following
powers and duties under this chapter:
      (1)   To adopt, and to initiate amendments to the city General Plan, and
all elements of the General Plan;
      (2)   To adopt, and to initiate amendments to the city’s Zoning
Ordinance;
      (3)   To adopt, and to initiate amendments to the city’s Subdivision
Ordinance;
      (4)   To appoint a hearing officer to render a recommendation to the
Council if an applicant asserts a deprivation of, or has been subject to, a
taking of property without just compensation, or asserts some other
constitutional invalidity, as provided by herein;
      (5)   To establish a fee schedule by resolution for all approvals,
permits and licenses required by this chapter, as provided herein; and
      (6)   To take such other action(s) not expressly delegated to the
Planning Commission, the Appeal Authority, or the Community Development
Department.
   (B)   Decisions final on meeting date; exceptions. All decisions of the
Council, made under this chapter, shall take effect on the date of the meeting
when the decision is made, unless a different date is designated at the time
the decision is made. The minutes of all meetings of the Council shall be filed
in the office of the City Recorder. All such records shall be available for
public review and access in accordance with the Government Records and Access
Management Act, per U.C.A. Title 63G, Chapter 2, or successor law.
   (C)   Planning Commission.
      (1)   There is hereby created a planning commission within and for the
city, to be known as the “Brigham City Planning Commission”. The Commission
shall consist of seven members and three alternate members to be appointed by
the Mayor, with the consent of the Council, from among residents of the city.
Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and shall
serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses as determined by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall have the power and duties in
accordance with the Land Use Development and Management Act, as per U.C.A. §
10-9a-302, or successor law, and the following: the Commission shall be an
advisory body to the Council on legislative matters pertaining to the General
Plan, the land use ordinances of the city. The Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
         (a)   To prepare, or cause to be prepared, the proposed city General
Plan, any proposed plan element, any amendments thereto and to submit the
proposed plan, element or amendments to the Council;
         (b)   To prepare or cause to be prepared the proposed City Zoning
Ordinance, any amendments thereto, and to submit the ordinance or amendments
thereto to the Council;
         (c)   To prepare or cause to be prepared the proposed City Subdivision
Ordinance, any amendments thereto, and to submit the Subdivision Ordinance or
amendments thereto to the Council;
         (d)   To hear, review and recommend approval or denial of all
applications for a General Plan amendment, Zoning Ordinance amendment or Zoning
Districts Map amendment (rezone);
         (e)   To hear, review and approve, approval with conditions, or denial
of a conditional use application, including a site plan for a conditional use;
         (f)   To hear, review and recommend approval or denial of subdivision
applications to the Council, as authorized by the City Subdivision Ordinance;
and
         (g)   Advise the Council on all other matters as the Council may
direct.
      (3)   The terms of office of the original appointive members shall be two
and four years; four shall be appointed for two years, and four shall be
appointed for four years. Thereafter, the terms of office for each appointive
member shall be four years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, with the
consent of the City Council. Members may be removed after public hearing by a
majority vote of the City Council for causes established within the rules of
the Planning Commission or by a recommendation of the Mayor.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall elect, annually, a Chairperson,
during the first regularly held meeting in each new calendar year. The
Chairperson will be elected from among the members of the Planning Commission
by a majority of the total membership. The Mayor shall appoint a Vice
Chairperson who will be named at the following regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting. A Chairperson shall serve for not more than two consecutive
terms and shall only vote in the event of a tie vote. In the event of a vacancy
of the Chairperson’s position, prior to the expiration of the Chairperson’s
term or any prior vacancy, a new Chairperson shall be elected whenever a
previously appointed Vice Chairperson position becomes vacant, the Mayor shall
appoint a new Vice Chairperson. The Planning Commission shall establish and
adopt bylaws or rules of procedure governing the conduct of meetings and
operation of the Planning Commission. Upon adoption of these rules, they shall
be submitted to the City Council for final approval and adoption by resolution.
The Planning Commission, upon its own initiative, may amend the bylaws or rules
of procedure and, thereafter, such amendments shall be submitted to the City
Council for final approval and adoption by resolution. It shall also keep a
public record of its proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 29.04.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.056 APPEAL AUTHORITY.
   The city’s Appeal Authority shall consist of five members and whatever
number of alternate members that the Mayor considers appropriate, each to be
appointed by the Mayor for the term of five years; provided that, the term of
one member shall expire each year. Any member or alternate member may be
removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a
public hearing if such public hearing is requested. Vacancy shall be filled for
the unexpired term of any member or alternate member whose term becomes vacant.
   (A)   Organization and meetings.
      (1)   The Appeal Authority shall adopt bylaws for the regulation of its
procedure and the conduct of its duties not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter or of the Utah Code. Such bylaws, to become effective, shall first
be approved by the City Council.
      (2)   Decisions of the Appeal Authority shall become effective at the
meeting in which the decision is made, unless a different time is designated in
the Appeal Authority’s rules.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Appeal Authority shall have the following
powers:
      (1)   Appeals. Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
determination or decision of the Land Use Authority and/or Community
Development Staff’s application of the city’s land use ordinances. An appeal
may not be used to waive or modify the terms or requirements of the city’s land
use ordinances;
      (2)   Special exceptions. Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms
of the zoning ordinance where the City Council has granted jurisdiction to the
Appeal Authority to do so. The Appeal Authority may hear and decide special
exceptions only if authorized to do so by the zoning ordinance and based only
upon the standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance;
      (3)   Variances. Hear and decide all applications for variance from the
terms of the zoning ordinance other than allowing a use variance. Such
decisions shall be made in accordance with state law, this section and the
rules adopted by the Appeal Authority; and
      (4)   Non-conforming use. Hear and make determinations regarding the
existence, expansion or modification of non-conforming uses.
   (C)   Community Development staff’s determinations. The Community
Development Staff may decide certain matters as designated by the Appeal
Authority Board, and consistent with guidelines established by this chapter,
the Utah Code and the rules adopted by the Appeal Authority. Pursuant to this
authority, the Community Development Director or designee may decide all cases
which are routine in nature, uncontested, do not impact on the character of the
neighborhood, are primarily brought about by recent changes in the Zoning
Ordinance creating a large number of non-conforming structures or uses, and
which the Appeal Authority has granted on an almost routine basis. The specific
types of decisions the Community Development Director or designee is authorized
to make shall include:
      (1)   Determination of a non-conforming use which can be verified by
substantial evidence. Substantial evidence, for the purpose of this section,
shall mean official documents, including any written correspondence, receipts,
permits or documents issued by a public body or agency thereof and the like
that may establish the truth of the matter asserted by the applicant;
      (2)   Consider additions or alterations to existing buildings and
structures which are non- conforming as to height, area or yard regulations;
provided, the addition follows the existing wall lines and no additional
dwelling units are added to the building or structure;
      (3)   Change in status of a non-conforming use to an equally intensive or
a less intense use than that immediately preceding the proposed use; and
      (4)   Final review and approval on plans where the Appeal Authority has
required that a final plan be submitted for special approval, showing that all
the requirements imposed by the Appeal Authority in granting the original
approval have been complied with. All decisions of the Community Development
Director or designee made under this section may be appealed to the Appeal
Authority.
   (D)   Appeals to the Appeal Authority. Appeals may be made to the Appeal
Authority by the city, the applicant, or any other person or entity adversely
affected by a zoning decision administering or interpreting a zoning ordinance.
All appeals shall be made as follows.
      (1)   The appeal shall be made within 30 days of the action or decision
being appealed from by filing a notice of appeal with the Appeals Authority
with the Community Development Department.
      (2)   The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal and
circumstances related thereto. The notice shall allege that there was error in
the order, requirement, decision or determination made by an official or
officials in the administration or interpretation of the zoning ordinance. A
notice failing to allege such error or specifying the grounds for appeal may be
summarily dismissed by the Appeals Authority with or without prejudice.
Response to the above requirements shall be set forth in detail in the notice
of appeal. The person or entity making the appeal shall have the burden of
proving that an error has been made.
      (3)   All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was made shall be transmitted to the Appeals Authority.
      (4)   The Appeals Authority shall set the appeal for hearing to be held
within a reasonable time from the date the appeal is received. Written notice
of the date set for hearing the appeal shall be mailed to the applicant at
least seven days before the appeal hearing date. After hearing the appeal, the
Appeals Authority may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that
end, shall have all the powers of the officer or body from which the appeal is
made.
      (5)   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings and actions in
furtherance of the matter appealed, pending a decision of the Appeals
Authority. Said stay shall exist unless the Planning Commission or Community
Development Director or designee certifies to the Appeals Authority, after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, the stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which
may be granted by the District Court on application, notice and due cause
shown.
      (6)   The concurring vote of three members of the Appeals Authority shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
any administrative official, Planning Commission or agency, or to decide in
favor of the appellant.
      (7)   The city, or any person adversely affected by any decision of the
Appeals Authority, may petition the district court for a review of the
decision, provided the petition is filed with the court within 30 days after
the Board’s decision is final. In the petition, the appealing party may only
allege that the Appeals Authority’s decision was arbitrary, capricious or
illegal. The Appeal Authority may, after finding that it is in the best
interest of the city to do so, stay its decision pending district court review.
   (E)   Variances.
      (1)   A variance is a device which grants a property owner relief from
certain provisions of the zoning ordinance when, because of the particular
physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the property,
compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to reduce financial
difficulties.
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the Appeals Authority
may grant a variance from the requirements of any provision of the zoning
ordinance to the extent that such a grant shall be consistent with the
provisions of this section. Notwithstanding, the spirit of this chapter must be
observed and substantial justice done. Further, a previous variance can never
set a precedent. Each case must be considered only on its individual merits.
The Appeals Authority may grant a variance only if:
         (a)   Literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause an
unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the
general purpose of the zoning ordinance;
         (b)   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district;
         (c)   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zoning
district; and
         (d)   The granting of the variance will not substantially affect the
General Plan and will not be contrary to the public interest; and the spirit of
the zoning ordinance is observed and substantial justice done.
      (3)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under this section, the Appeals Authority may
not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
         (a)   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
         (b)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
      (4)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under this section, the Appeal Authority may
not find unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic
      (5)   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under this section, the Appeal Authority may find that
special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
         (a)   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
         (b)   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties
in the same district.
      (6)   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      (7)   Variances, once granted, shall run with the land.
      (8)   Use variances may not be granted by the Appeal Authority, nor by
any other body.
      (9)   In granting a variance, the Appeal Authority may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will:
         (a)   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
         (b)   Serve the same or similar purpose of the standard or requirement
that is waived or modified.
(Prior Code, § 29.04.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.057 ADMINISTRATION OF CITY’S LAND USE ORDINANCES.
   This section shall establish duties and responsibilities of the Community
Development Department, and other city officials and agencies, with respect to
the administration of the city’s Land Use Ordinance. Such duties and
responsibilities are established to fulfill the purpose and intent hereof.
   (A)   Community Development Department. In addition to duties described in
Title 2, Brigham City’s Administrative Code, and elsewhere in this chapter, the
duties of the Community Development Department shall be as follows.
      (1)   Reviews and approvals. The Community Development Department shall
be authorized to undertake reviews, recommendations and approvals as described
in §§
156.400 through
156.412 of this chapter.
      (2)   General plan. The Community Development Department shall assist the
Planning Commission in the development and implementation of the General Plan
for the physical and economic growth of the city and shall prepare population
and growth studies in support of the General Plan.
      (3)   Administrative staff assistance and technical advice.
         (a)   The Community Development Department shall provide staff
assistance to the Planning Commission and Appeal Authority. Staff assistance
shall include attendance at regularly scheduled meetings and the preparation
and publication of agendas.
         (b)   The Community Development Department shall act as technical
advisor to the Mayor, City Council and other city departments upon request, and
other committees and commissions as the Council may designate.
   (B)   Delegate responsibility. The Community Development Director may
appoint authorized representatives to execute the responsibilities as described
above.
   (C)   Administrative reviews and permits.
      (1)   Review for building permits.
         (a)   All applications for building permits shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department for review. Such review shall assure
compliance with the regulations of this code.
         (b)   The application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
set of building plans, a plot plan showing lot lines and dimensions, locations
of structures and improvements, requirements, building height limitations and
all data necessary to show that all yard requirements and other provisions of
this code are met.
         (c)   No building permit shall be issued until the application is
approved for zoning compliance.
      (2)   Review for business licenses. The Community Development Department
shall also review and approve all applications for business licenses, or
renewal of such licenses, to assure compliance with this code.
      (3)   Site plan review. The Community Development Department shall
receive all applications for site plan review, as provided for in §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter. The Community Development Department shall receive all
submittals, assure completeness and prepare submittals for review.
      (4)   Conditional use permit. Applications for conditional use permit
shall be submitted to the Community Development Department as provided for in
§§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter. The Community Development Department shall receive all
submittals, assure completeness of submittals and prepare submittals for review
by the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Temporary use permit. Applications for temporary use permit shall
be received by the Community Development Department and follow the procedure as
described in §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter.
      (6)   Amendments. Requests for amendments or changes to the city’s land
use ordinances or zoning map shall be initiated with the Community Development
Department.
      (7)   Interpretation. The Community Development Department shall be
responsible for interpretation of the city’s land use ordinances and the zoning
map. An appeal of the Community Development Department interpretation may be
made to the city’s Appeal Authority as provided for elsewhere in §
156.056 of this chapter.
      (8)   Home occupation license review. The Community Development
Department shall review and make recommendations for home occupation license.
      (9)   Sign permit. As provided in §§
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter, the Community Development Department shall be
responsible for issuance of permits for signs, and for enforcement of sign
regulation.
(Prior Code, § 29.04.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 156.070 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the territory of the local jurisdiction to
which this chapter applies is divided into 21 zoning districts, as follows:
   (A)   Multiple Use District MU-40;
   (B)   Multiple Use District MU-80;
   (C)   Multiple Use District MU-160;
   (D)   Agricultural District A-1;
   (E)   Agricultural District A-5;
   (F)   Rural Residential District RR-1;
   (G)   Rural Residential District RR-5;
   (H)   Rural Residential District RR-10;
   (I)   Residential District R-1-40;
   (J)   Residential District R-1-20;
   (K)   Residential District R-1-12;
   (L)   Residential District R-1-10;
   (M)   Residential District R-1-8;
   (N)   Residential District R-M-7;
   (O)   Residential District R-M-15;
   (P)   Residential District R-M-30;
   (Q)   General Commercial District GC;
   (R)   Central Business District C-B-D;
   (S)   Manufacturing Distribution District M-D;
   (T)   General Industrial District M-G; and
   (U)   Planned District P.
(Prior Code, § 29.10.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 00-05, passed 1-
20-2000)
§ 156.071 FILING OF ORDINANCE AND MAP.
   This chapter and map shall be filed in the custody of the City Recorder and
may be examined by the public subject to the reasonable regulations established
by said City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 29.10.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.072 RULES FOR LOCATING BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district, the following
rules shall apply.
   (A)   Wherever the district boundary is indicated as being approximately
upon the center line of a street, alley or block, or along a property line,
then, unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the center line of such
street, alley, block or such property line, shall be construed to be the
boundary of such district.
   (B)   Whenever such boundary line of such district is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway, or
railroad right-of-way, or public park or other public land, or any section
line, then in such case the center of such stream, canal or waterway, or of
such railroad right-of-way, or the boundary line of such public land or such
section line shall be deemed to be the boundary of such district.
   (C)   Where such district boundary lines cannot be determined by the above
rules, their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the
map.
   (D)   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the district
boundary location, the Appeal Authority shall interpret the map.
(Prior Code, § 29.10.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
MULTIPLE USE, AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.085 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Multiple use districts. The purposes of providing a multiple use
district are to establish areas in mountain, hillside, canyon, mountain valley,
desert and other open and generally undeveloped lands where human habitation
would be limited in order to protect land and open space resources; to reduce
unreasonable requirements for public utility and service expenditures through
uneconomic and unwise dispersal and scatteration of population; to encourage
use of the land, where appropriate, for forestry, grazing, agriculture, mining,
wildlife habitat and recreation; to avoid excessive damage to watersheds, water
pollution, soil erosion, danger from brushland fires, damage to grazing,
livestock raising and to wildlife values; and, to promote the health, safety,
convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
community:
      (1)   MU-40 minimum lot size: 40 acres;
      (2)   MU-80 minimum lot size: 80 acres; and
      (3)   MU-160 minimum lot size: 160 acres.
   (B)   Agricultural districts. To promote and preserve in appropriate areas
conditions favorable to agriculture and to maintain greenbelt open spaces.
These districts are intended to include activities normally and necessarily
related to the conduct of agriculture and to protect the district from the
intrusion of uses inimical to the continuance of agricultural activity:
      (1)   A-1 minimum lot size: one acre;
      (2)   A-5 minimum lot size: five acres; and
      (3)   A-20 minimum lot size: 20 acres.
   (C)   Rural residential districts. To promote and preserve in appropriate
areas conditions favorable to large-lot family life, the keeping of limited
numbers of animals and fowl for personal use and home base agricultural
production and reduced requirements for public utilities. These districts are
intended to be primarily residential in character and protected from
encroachment by commercial and industrial uses:
      (1)   RR-1 minimum lot size: one acre; and
      (2)   RR-5 minimum lot size: five acres.
(Prior Code, § 29.11.010) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.086 EXISTING AGRICULTURE PRACTICES AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   Existing agriculture practices and keeping of animals and fowl that existed
lawfully prior to 8-11-2022, which is not allowed under this chapter, may be
continued as a non-conforming use; except that, if the non-conforming use
property is subdivided, the non-conforming use shall then be deemed abandoned
and any future agriculture practices and keeping of animals and fowl shall be
in conformity with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.11.015) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.087 CODES AND SYMBOLS.
   In following the sections of this chapter, uses of land or buildings which
are allowed in the various districts are shown as “permitted uses”, indicated
by a “P” in the appropriate column, or as “conditional uses”, indicated by a
“C” in the appropriate column. If a use is not allowed in a given district, it
is either not named in the use list or it is indicated in the appropriate
column by an “N”. If a regulation applies in a given district, it is indicated
in the appropriate column by a numeral to show the linear or square feet, or
acres required, or by the letter “A”. If the regulation does not apply, it is
indicated in the appropriate column by a dash, “-”.
(Prior Code, § 29.11.020) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.088 USES.
   (A)   No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or
maintained in the multiple use, agricultural or rural residential districts,
except as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   In the absence of a specific approval from the Planning
Commission to the contrary, public service structures shall be subject to yard
area requirements and setbacks.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may allow public service structures to be
located within the required yard areas specified in this subchapter upon the
following findings:
         (a)   The public service structure is needed for the efficient
delivery of public services to the subject property;
         (b)   Location of the public service structure in the required yard
area will be beneficial to the subject property and will not result in undue
public safety, aesthetic or functional impacts on the subject property or
surrounding properties;
         (c)   The public service structure is integrated functionally and
aesthetically into the overall design of the site; and
         (d)   Location of the public service structure outside of the required
yard area would be impossible or impractical due to functional considerations
or because of site specific limitations.
(Prior Code, § 29.11.030) (Ord. 00-13A, passed 5-4-2000; Ord. 22-16, passed 8-
11-2022)
§ 156.089 USES NOT LISTED.
   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to identify and categorize
unlisted uses within the listed permitted or conditional uses of this chapter,
based on a finding of substantial similarity of character, origin and impact
and the like, to a listed use, and when so categorized such use shall
thereafter be recognized and treated the same as a listed use.
 MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
                                                                        MU- MU- MU- A- A- A- RR- RR-
                                                                        40  80  160 1  5  20 1   5
Accessory buildings with an area less than or equal to 2 times the area
of the primary structure main floor and attached garage, which are      P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
customarily incidental to the permitted use, but in no case shall the
accessory buildings combined area be larger than 5,500 square feet
Accessory buildings with an area less than or equal to 2 times the area
of the primary structure main floor and attached garage, which are      C   C   C   C  C  C  C   C
customarily incidental to the conditional use, but in no case shall the
accessory buildings combined area be larger than 5,500 square feet
Accessory dwelling unit, subject to standards in §§
156.335 through                                                         P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
156.360 of this chapter
Adult day care facility                                                 N   N   N   C  C  C  P   P
Agriculture and forestry
   Agriculture, grazing, housing, corralling and pasturing of animalsP   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
   Agriculture, business or industry                                 C   C   C   C  C  P  N   N
   Animals and fowl for recreation or for family food production for P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
the primary use of persons residing on the premises
   Nursery or green house, wholesale or retail                       P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
   Tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and       P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
gardening
   Farms devoted to raising and marketing chickens, turkeys or other C   C   C   N  C  C  N   N
fowl or poultry, fish or frogs, including wholesale and retail sales
   Forestry, except forest industry                                  P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
   Forest industry, such as a sawmill, wood products, plant or othersC   C   C   N  N  C  N   N
Apiary (bee keeping)                                                    P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Assisted living center                                                  N   N   N   N  N  N  P   P
Aviary                                                                  P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Bed and breakfast facility subject to the conditions outlined in §§
156.335 through                                                         C   C   C   C  C  C  C   C
156.360 of this chapter
Boarding house                                                          N   N   N   N  C  C  N   C
Cannabis production establishment                                       N   N   N   N  P  P  N   N
Cluster subdivision of single-family dwellings, subject to §§
155.120 through                                                         N   N   N   P  P  P  P   P
155.128 of this code of ordinances
Dude ranch, family vacation ranch                                       C   C   C   N  C  C  N   C
Educational Institution                                                 N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Educational institution with housing                                    N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Home occupation                                                         C   C   C   C  C  C  C   C
Homeless shelter                                                        N   N   N   N  N  N  N   N
Hospital                                                                N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Household pets                                                          P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Kennel (parcel must be 1 acre or larger)                                N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Licensed family group child care provider/residential certificate child C   C   C   C  C  C  C   C
care provider
Medical cannabis pharmacy                                               P   P   P   P  P  P  N   N
Mine, quarry, gravel pit, rock crusher, concrete batching plant or      C   C   C   N  C  N  N   N
asphalt plant, oil wells or steam well
Nursing home                                                            N   N   N   N  N  N  C   C
Power generation (non-solar)                                            C   C   C   N  C  C  N   C
Power generation (solar)                                                P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Private park or recreational grounds or private recreational camp or
resort, including accessory or supporting dwellings or dwelling         C   C   C   N  C  C  N   N
complexes and commercial service uses which are owned or managed by the
recreational facility to which it is accessory
Private stables, horses for private use of persons residing or not      P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
residing on the premises
Protective housing facility                                             N   N   N   P  P  P  P   P
Public use, quasi-public use, essential services, including private
school, with a curriculum corresponding to a public school, church;     C   C   C   C  C  C  C   C
dams and reservoirs; radio and television transmitting stations or
towers, cemetery
Public parks                                                            P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Rehabilitation/treatment facility                                       N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Residential facility for elderly persons                                P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Residential facility for persons with a disability                      P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Sheltered workshop                                                      N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Signs, the type, size, height, location and other standards and
requirements for signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set
forth in §§                                                           A   A   A   A  A  A  A   A
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter
Single-family dwellings                                                 P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
Solar power generation facility as set forth in Chapter 50 Electricity.
Roof-mounted solar array only. The total surface area of the solar
array shall not exceed the surface area of the roof upon which it is    P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
mounted and shall not exceed the height limits of the applicable zoning
district.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, including
living quarters for a guard or night watchman, which building must be   P   P   P   P  P  P  P   P
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work
Trade or vocational school                                              N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Transitional housing facility                                           N   N   N   C  C  C  C   C
Veterinary clinic, animal hospital                                      N   N   N   C  P  P  N   C
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.040) (Ord. 00-11, passed 4-16-2000; Ord. 01-15, passed 2-
15-2001; Ord. 02-22, passed 6-27-2002; Ord. 02-27A, passed 9-19-2002; Ord. 03-
18, passed 5-1-2003; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 22-01, passed 2-17-
2022; Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022; Ord. 25-17, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 156.090 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The minimum lot area in acres for any use in the districts regulated by this
subchapter shall be:
 
MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
40    80    160    1   5   20   1    5
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.050) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.091 WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   The minimum width in feet for any lot in the districts regulated by this
subchapter, except as modified by planned unit developments or cluster
subdivisions, shall be:
 
MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
660   1,320 1,320  120 200 330  120  200
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.060) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.092 FRONTAGE REGULATIONS.
   The minimum frontage in feet for any lot in the districts regulated by this
subchapter on a public street or a private street approved by the governing
body shall be:
 
MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
60    60    60     25  50  50   25   50
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.070) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.093 FRONT YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum depth in feet for the front yard for main buildings in
districts regulated by this subchapter shall be:
 
MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
60    60    60     30  30  30   30   30
 
   (B)   Accessory buildings may have the same minimum front yard depth as main
buildings if they have the same side yard required for main buildings;
otherwise, they shall be set back at least six feet in the rear of the main
building:
 
MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
A     A     A      A   A   A    A    A
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.080) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.094 REAR YARD REGULATIONS.
   The minimum depth in feet for the rear yard in the districts regulated by
this subchapter shall be:
 
                                MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
For main buildings              60    60    60     30  50  50   30   50
For accessory buildings (public
utility easements may dictate   20    20    20     10  20  20   10   20
otherwise)
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.090) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.095 SIDE YARD REGULATIONS.
   The minimum side yard in feet for any dwelling or main buildings shall be:
 
                                      MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1 A-5 A-20 RR-1 RR-5
                                     60    60    60     15  20  20   15   20
Except on corner lots the side yard
in feet which faces on a street for   60    60    60     30  30  30   30   30
both main and accessory buildings,
shall be not less than
The minimum side yard in feet for any
accessory building shall be (public   20    20    20     10  20  20   10   20
utility easements may dictate
otherwise)
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.100) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.096 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height for all buildings and structures in districts regulated
by this subchapter, except as provided in §
156.344 of this chapter shall be:
 
                              MU-40 MU-80 MU-160 A-1   A-5   A-20  RR-1  RR-5
In feet                       35    35    35     35    35    35    35    35
In number of stories          2-1/2 2-1/2 2-1/2  2-1/2 2-1/2 2-1/2 2-1/2 2-1/2
No dwelling shall be erected
to a height less than 1 story A     A     A      A     A     A     A     A
above grade
 
(Prior Code, § 29.11.110) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.097 KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (A)   Any person or persons owning, possessing or using any parcel or
premises upon which any animals or fowl are kept shall:
      (1)   Provide adequate food, water, shelter, care and sanitation so that
animals or fowl will not anguish abuse or neglect; and
      (2)   Barns, coops, hutches or other facilities directly related to the
feeding and shelter of animals and fowl shall:
         (a)   Be located in the rear yard setback and at least 20 feet away
from the owner’s primary dwelling and 25 feet away from any dwelling located on
an adjacent lot.
         (b)   In no case shall they be located within the front yard setback.
On corner lots, the side yard which faces the street, they shall not be within
the side yard setback from the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Fenced areas for pasturing animals and fowl must be located at least
five feet from the public right-of-way when located by a public sidewalk, path
or trail, and provide adequate area surrounded by a secure, well-built fence of
sufficient height and strength to prevent their escape.
(Prior Code, § 29.11.120) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
§ 156.098 ANIMALS AND FOWL UNITS AND DENSITY PER PARCEL.
    The following table only applies to the A-1, RR-1 and RR-5 Zoning
Districts.
   (A)   Large animals and fowl units per parcel.
 
Type of       Density Per Acre                      Each Addit Available
Animal and                                          ional 0.5  Fenced Area
Fowl          0.5 0.75 1 1.5 2 2.5 3  3.5 4  4.5 5  Acre       Per Animal

Cow, horse,   0   2    3 4   6 8   10 12  14 16  18 +2         2,500 sq. ft.
llama, alpaca
Hog, pig      1   2    4 6   8 10  12 14  16 18  20 +2         500 sq. ft.
Sheep, goat   2   3    4 6   8 10  12 14  16 18  20 +2         500 sq. ft.
ostrich, emu
Total per     2   3    4 6   8 10  12 14  16 18  20
parcel
 
   (B)   Small animals and fowl units per parcel. The Planning Commission may
consider additional small animals and fowl units per parcel through a
conditional use permit application process. The Planning Commission must find
that no additional impact, nuisance (noise, smells, flies, pests) or hardship
would occur to the adjacent property owners and no additional impact on the
city’s transportation and infrastructure system. If an approved plan is
violated or causes a situation that becomes a nuisance to adjacent property
owners, the conditional use shall be subject to revocation.
 
Type of Animal and    Density Per Acre                    Each Additi onal 0.5
Fowl                  0.5 1  1.5 2  2.5 3  3.5 4  4.5 5   Acre

Apiary, goose, guinea 5   10 15  20 25  30 35  40 45  50  +5
hen, rabbit, turkey
Duck, chicken,
pheasant, pigeon,     10  20 30  40 50  60 70  80 90  100 +10
quail
Total per parcel      10  20 30  40 50  60 70  80 90  100
 
   (C)   Examples of large and small animals and fowl units and density formula
applied to varied parcel sizes.
 
Parcel Size Example of Total Animal Units Per Parcel
0.5 acre    2 large animals and 10 small animals
0.75 acre   3 large animals and 10 small animals
1 acre      4 large animals and 20 small animals
1.5 acres   6 large animals and 30 small animals
 
   (D)   Example of animals and fowl site layout on an interior and corner
parcel.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2971.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 29.11.130) (Ord. 22-16, passed 8-11-2022)
RESIDENTIAL AND MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.110 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Residential District R-1-40. To provide areas for large-lot
residential neighborhoods of essentially rural or estate character. Minimum lot
size: 40,000 square feet.
   (B)   Residential District R-1-20. To provide areas for very low density,
single-family residential neighborhoods of essentially spacious and uncrowded
character. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
   (C)   Residential District R-1-12. To provide areas for low density, single-
family residential neighborhoods of spacious and uncrowded character. Minimum
lot size: 12,000 square feet.
   (D)   Residential District R-1-10. To provide areas for medium low-density,
single-family residential neighborhoods where medium costs of development may
occur. Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.
   (E)   Residential District R-1-8. To provide areas for medium low-density,
single-family residential neighborhoods where low and medium costs of
development may occur. Minimum lot size: 8,000 square feet.
   (F)   Residential District R-1-6. To provide areas for medium residential
density, single-family residential neighborhoods where low and medium costs of
development may occur. Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet.
   (G)   Multiple Residential District R-M-7. To provide areas for medium
residential density with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character. Maximum density: seven dwelling units per acre.
   (H)   Multiple Residential District R-M-15. To provide areas for medium
residential density with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character. Maximum density: 15 dwelling units per acre.
   (I)   Multiple Residential District R-M-30. To provide areas for high
residential density with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character. Maximum density: 30 dwelling units per acre.
(Prior Code, § 29.12.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-
16-2021)
§ 156.111 CODES AND SYMBOLS.
   (A)   In following sections of this subchapter, uses of land or buildings
which are allowed in the various districts are shown as “permitted uses”,
indicated by a “P” in the appropriate column, as “conditional uses”, indicated
by a “C” in the appropriate column, or as “temporary license”, indicated by a
“T” in the appropriate column.
   (B)   If a use is not allowed in a given district, it is either not named in
the use list or it is indicated in the appropriate column by an “N”.
   (C)   If a regulation applies in a given district, it is indicated in the
appropriate column by a numeral to show the linear or square feet required, or
by the letter “A”. If the regulation does not apply, it is indicated in the
appropriate column by a dash, “-”.
(Prior Code, § 29.12.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-11, passed 5-
19-2011; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021)
§ 156.112 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building
or structure shall be hereafter, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained
in the residential and multiple-residential districts, except as provided in
this chapter.
   (B)   Exception to yard requirements for public service structures.
      (1)   In the absence of a specific approval from the Planning Commission
to the contrary, public service structures shall be subject to yard area
requirements and setbacks.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may allow public service structures to be
located within the required yard areas specified in this subchapter upon the
following findings:
         (a)   The public service structure is needed for the efficient
delivery of public services to the subject property;
         (b)   Location of the public service structure in the required yard
area will be beneficial to the subject property and will not result in undue
public safety, aesthetic or functional impacts on the subject property or
surrounding properties;
         (c)   The public service structure is integrated functionally and
aesthetically into the overall design of the site; and
         (d)   Location of the public service structure outside of the required
yard area would be impossible or impractical due to functional considerations
or because of site specific limitations.
 R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
                                                                          R-1- R- R- R- R- R- R- R- R-
                                                                          40   1- 1- 1- 1- 1- M- M- M-
                                                                               20 12 10 8  6  7  15 30
Accessory buildings, which are customarily incidental to the permitted    P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
uses is limited to 25% of the rear lot area
Accessory buildings, which are customarily incidental to the conditional  C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
use is limited to 25% of the rear lot area
Accessory dwelling unit, subject to standards in §§
156.335 through                                                           -    -  -  P  P  P  P  P  P
156.360 of this chapter
Adult day care facility                                                   C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Agriculture, the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture  P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
and gardening
Assisted living facility                                                  N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
Bed and breakfast, subject to the conditions outlined in §§
156.335 through                                                           C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
156.360 of this chapter
Beekeeping, subject to regulations outlined in                            P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Chapter 90 of this code of ordinances
Boarding house                                                            N    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Cannabis production establishment                                         N    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Child day care or nursery (non-residential)                               N    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Cluster subdivision of single-family dwellings; provided that, the
residential density is not increased to allow more than 1 dwelling for
each:
   30,000 sq. ft.                                                      C    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
   15,000 sq. ft.                                                      N    C  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
   8,000 sq. ft.                                                       N    N  C  N  N  N  N  N  N
   7,000 sq. ft.                                                       N    N  N  C  N  N  N  N  N
   6,000 sq. ft.                                                       N    N  N  N  C  C  N  N  N
   4,000 sq. ft.                                                       N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
   and that the total area of the subdivision cluster be not less than 5
acres, and that at least 1/3 of the total area of the subdivision be      A    A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
reserved or dedicated as permanent open space for common use of the
residents, under planned unit development approval
Crisis nursery                                                            C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Dwellings
   Single-family dwelling                                                �PS P  P  P  P  P  P  P
   Two-family dwelling                                                 N    N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P
   Three-family dwelling                                               N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  P
   Four-family dwelling                                                N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  P
   Multiple-family dwelling a single lot                               N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
   Groups of dwellings under one ownership on a single lot             N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
   Planned unit development                                            C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Educational institution                                                   C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Fowl, keeping of residential, subject to regulations outlined in §       P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
156.358 of this chapter.
Home occupation                                                           C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Homeless shelter                                                          N    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Hospital; medical or dental clinic accessory to a hospital and located on N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
the same premises
Household pets                                                            P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Licensed family group child care provider/residential certificate child   C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
care provider
Medical cannabis pharmacy                                                 N    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Model home/temporary sales office                                         C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Nursing home                                                              N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
Private education institution having a curriculum similar to that         C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
ordinarily given in public schools
Private recreational grounds and facilities, not open to the general      C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
public, and to which no admission charge is made
Protective housing facility                                               C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Public and quasi-public buildings and uses
   Cemetery                                                            C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
   Church                                                              C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
   Essential service facilities                                        C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C
   Golf courses                                                        C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
   Public buildings (existing buildings only). no outside storage of
equipment or materials that are normally prohibited by the regulating
zone, correctional or jail facilities, police, fire or ambulance          C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
stations, or similar type of uses. No multi-shift hours of operation. The
building(s) shall be used by the public for the transaction of public or
quasi-public business
   Substations or transmission lines of 50 KV up to 138 KV. Greater thaC    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
138 KV is not permitted in districts regulated by this chapter
   Social services building                                            N    N  N  N  N  N  C  C  C
   Solar power generation facility as set forth in Chapter 50
Electricity. Roof-mounted solar array only. The total surface area of the
solar array shall not exceed the surface area of the roof upon which it   P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
is mounted and shall not exceed the height limits of the applicable
zoning district.
   Public parks                                                        P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Recreational or ornamental structures such as gazebos, swimming pools,
bath houses, tennis courts and the like accessory to, on a lot adjacent   P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
to and sharing a lot line with a lot occupied by a primary use when both
lots are under the same ownership
Residential facility for elderly persons                                  P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Residential facility for persons with a disability                        P    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Signs. The type, size, height, location and other standards and
requirements for signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth
in §§
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter
Trade or vocational school                                                N    N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Transitional housing facility                                             C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
Vacation rental, subject to the conditions outlined in §§
156.335 through                                                           C    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
156.360 of this chapter
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.030) (Ord. 97-11, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 00-11, passed 4-
16-2000; Ord. 00-13A, passed 5-4-2000; Ord. 01-16, passed 2-15-2001; Ord. 01-
31, passed 8-16-2001; Ord. 02-27A, passed 9-19-2002; Ord. 03-06, passed 2-20-
2003; Ord. 03-25, passed 6-12-2003; Ord. 05-17, passed 7-7-2005; Ord. 07-13,
passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 10-15, passed 10-7-2010; Ord. 11-11, passed 5-19-2011;
Ord. 12-16, passed 12-6-2012; Ord. 13-09, passed 3-21-2013; Ord. 14-16, passed
12-18-2014; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021; Ord.
22-01, passed 2-17-2022; Ord. 25-02, passed 1-16-2025; Ord. 25-17, passed 8-21-
2025)
§ 156.113 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum lot area in square feet for any single-family dwelling
structure in the districts regulated by this chapter shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
40,000 20,000 12,000 10,000 8,000 6,000 7,000 8,000  8,000
 
   (B)   The additional lot area for each dwelling unit in a dwelling structure
shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
-      -      -      -      -     -     6,000 2,500  1,200
 
   (C)   For group dwellings, each separate dwelling structure after the first
dwelling structure and each additional dwelling unit in square feet shall have:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
-      -      -      -      -     -     5,000 2,500  1,200
 
   (D)   Minimum lot area for all main uses or buildings other than dwellings
shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8  R-1-6  R-M-7  R-M-15 R-M-30
40,000 20,000 12,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-
16-2021)
§ 156.114 WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum width in feet for any lot in the districts regulated by
this chapter except as modified by planned unit developments or cluster
subdivisions, shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6          R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
120    100    80     80     70    60 (corner 70) 70    70     70
 
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing regulations, for that area lying within
the following street boundaries or their extensions, 700 North Street, 700
South Street, 600 East Street 600 West Street, which comprises most of the
original platted areas of the city, as of 11-1-1986, any parcel existing under
common ownership containing an area of one acre or less, may be divided or
developed so as to create a lot with a minimum of 60 feet width, provided all
other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance are satisfied.
(Prior Code, § 29.12.050) (Ord. 568, passed 1-15-1987; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-
2007; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021)
§ 156.115 FRONTAGE REGULATIONS.
   The minimum frontage in feet for any lot in the districts regulated by this
subchapter on a public street or a private street approved by the governing
body shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
60     50     45     45     40    40    45    45     45
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-
16-2021)
§ 156.116 FRONT YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum depth in feet for the front yard for main buildings in
districts regulated by this chapter shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
30     30     30     30     25    25    25    25     25
 
   (B)   Or, the average of the existing buildings on the block where 50% or
more of the frontage is developed; however, in no case shall it be less than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
25     25     25     25     20    20    20    20     20
 
   (C)   Or, to be required to be more than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
30     30     30     30     30    25    25    25     25
 
   (D)   Provided, however, that, on corner lots the minimum depth in feet for
the front yard for main buildings in districts regulated by this chapter shall
be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
20     20     20     20     20    20    20    20     20
 
   (E)   Private garages and other accessory buildings shall not have a front
yard depth less than the main building(s).
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
A      A      A      A      A     A     A     A      A
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-
16-2021; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-8-2024)
§ 156.117 REAR YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum depth in feet for the rear yard in the districts regulated
by this subchapter shall be for main buildings:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
30     30     30     30     25    25    30    20     20
 
   (B)   For private garages and other accessory buildings: (not upon
easements):
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
5      5      5      5      5     5     5     5      5
 
   (C)   Except for private garages and other accessory buildings 200 square
feet or less: (not upon easements):
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
1      1      1      1      1     1     1     1      1
 
   (D)   Provided however, that, on corner lots the minimum depth in feet for
the rear yard for the residential buildings in the districts regulated by this
subchapter shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
15     10     10     8      6     6     6     6      6
 
   (E)   Provided that, on corner lots which rear on a side yard of another lot
accessory buildings in all such districts shall be located not closer than six
feet to such side yard:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
6      6      6      6      6     6     6     6      6
 
   (F)   Provided that, on corner lots which rear on a front yard of another
lot accessory buildings in all such districts shall be located not closer than
six feet to such side yard:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
6      6      6      6      6     6     6     6      6
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.080) (Ord. 05-02, passed 2-3-2005; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-
19-2007; Ord. 14-16, passed 12-18-2014; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021; Ord. 24-
02, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 156.118 SIDE YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum side yard in feet for any dwelling in districts regulated
by this subchapter shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
15     10     10     8      6     6     6     6      6
 
   (B)   And, the total width of the two required side yards:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
30     24     22     18     16    16    18    18     18
 
   (C)   Other main buildings shall have a minimum side yard of:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
20     20     20     15     15    15    20    20     20
 
   (D)   And, a total width of the two required side yards of not less than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
40     40     40     30     30    30    40    40     40
 
   (E)   Except that no main building (excluding dwellings) shall be located
closer to the side yard property line than: to a main building that is not a
dwelling on an adjacent lot.
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
10     10     10     10     10    10    10    10     10
 
   (F)   The minimum side yard for a private garage and other accessory
buildings shall be: or located by qualifying exceptions 1 or 2 below:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
15     10     10     8      6     6     6     6      6
 
   (G)   Exception 1. Except that, private garages and other accessory
buildings located 60 feet or more from the front property line may have a
minimum side yard of (not upon easements): See
Figure: 156.118.A Exception 1
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
5      5      5      5      5     5     5     5      5
 
   (H)   Exception 2. Except that private garages and other accessory buildings
with 200 square feet or less located 60 feet or more from the front property
line may have a minimum side yard of: (not upon easements): See
Figure: 156.118.B Exception 2
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
1      1      1      1      1     1     1     1      1
 
   (I)   Provided that, no private garage or other accessory buildings shall be
located closer than:
      (1)   To a dwelling on an adjacent lot:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
15     10     10     10     10    10    10    10     10
 
      (2)   On corner lots, the side yard in feet which faces on a street for
both main and accessory buildings shall not be less than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
20     20     20     20     20    20    20    20     20
 
      (3)   On corner lots, the side yard in feet which faces on a side yard
street shall not be less than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
15     15     15     15     15    15    15    15     15
 
      (4)   (a)   Or, the average of existing buildings, but in no case shall
the side yard be less than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
15     15     15     15     15    15    15    15     15
 
         (b)   Nor be required to be more than:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
25     25     25     25     25    25    25    25     25
 
Figure 156.118.A Exception 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3229.png]
 
Figure 156.118.B Exception 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3231.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.090) (Ord. 98-42, passed 9-17-1998; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-
19-2007; Ord. 14-16, passed 12-18-2014; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021; Ord. 24-
02, passed 1-18- 2024)
§ 156.119 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The maximum height for all main buildings and structures in districts
regulated by this subchapter shall be:
      (1)   In feet:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
35     35     35     35     35    35    35    65     95
 
      (2)   In number of stories:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
2      2      2      2      2     2     2     4      6
 
      (3)   For private garages and other accessory buildings in feet:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
20     20     20     20     20    20    20    20     20
 
      (4)   Private garages and other accessory buildings within five feet of
the property line, the maximum interior wall height shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
8      8      8      8      8     8     8     8      8
 
      (5)   In number of stories, exceptions:
 
                                                R- R- R- R- R-  R-  R-  R- R-M-
                                                1- 1- 1- 1- 1-8 1-6 M-7 M- 30
                                                40 20 12 10             15
Detached accessory dwelling units (see §§
156.335 through
156.360 of this chapter)                        1  1  1  1  1   1   1   1  1
Accessory buildings on sloping sites (see §§
156.335 through
156.360 of this chapter)
 
   (B)   No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one story above
grade.
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
A      A      A      A      A     A     A     A      A
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.100) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-
16-2021; Ord. 22-05, passed 3-17-2022; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 156.120 COVERAGE REGULATIONS.
   The maximum coverage in per cent for any lot in the districts regulated by
this subchapter shall be:
 
R-1-40 R-1-20 R-1-12 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-M-7 R-M-15 R-M-30
20     20     30     35     35    40    40    50     50
 
(Prior Code, § 29.12.110) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-16, passed 12-
18-2014; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021)
§ 156.121 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Protection of single-family residential uses. A six-foot solid fence
or masonry wall shall be provided along the adjoining property line where a
two-family, three-family, four-family, multi-family group or planned unit
development adjoins any single-family residential use. Chain link fencing with
slats is not considered a solid fence for purposes of this section, unless the
chain link has interlocking opaque vinyl, which is pre-inserted into the mesh.
A minimum 20-foot wide planting strip shall be required between the multi-
family dwelling and the property line. When a single-story height multi-family
building adjoins any single-family residential use the planting strip can be
reduced to ten feet after ensuring there is no negative effect on the single-
family residence. Evergreen or deciduous trees shall be planted in the planting
strip to provide a buffer between the two uses. A tree planting plan shall be
submitted to the city for review and approval by the City Forester. The minimum
tree size is two-inch caliper for deciduous trees and an eight-foot height for
evergreens. A fence or wall is not required along the adjoining property line
in the required front yard setback. If a fence or wall is installed along the
property line in the required front yard setback it shall comply with the
height and location standards as referenced in §
156.346 of this chapter.
   (B)   Recreation and playground areas. In any residential development with
four or more dwelling units on a single parcel of land, there shall be provided
usable recreation or playground areas outside of the front yard setback, with a
total minimum area of 2,000 square feet for three dwelling units and 250
additional square feet for each dwelling unit thereafter. The minimum width and
length of any usable recreation or playground area shall not be less than 20
feet unless a trail system is approved as part of the requirement by the
Community Development Manager or designee. The on-site, above grade storm
drainage detention basin may count toward a portion of the recreation area if
the applicant provides sufficient evidence that the basin is safe for
recreational purposes and usable pertaining to the area, slope and landscape.
All recreation and playground areas shall be accessible by all dwelling units
within the development. Pathways within the designated areas may be included in
the calculation (sidewalks which border a parking lot and/or buildings and
parking lots are not considered recreation area for the purposes of this
section).
   (C)   Landscaping. In multiple residential developments (two-family, three-
family, four-family, multiple-family, group or planned unit developments), all
areas not covered by buildings, structures and parking, shall be landscaped and
maintained using an underground automatic irrigation system. Areas not covered
by an approved building, required parking trees or shrubs shall be covered by
grass or another acceptable ground cover such as bark, wood chips or decorative
rocks. Dirt, weeds and similar materials are not considered acceptable ground
cover. Each project shall submit a complete landscaping plan to the city for
review and approval by the City Forester. The landscaping plan shall include at
least one tree per unit or as approved by the City Forester. The minimum tree
size is two-inch caliper for deciduous trees and eight feet in height for
evergreen trees. No species of trees or large shrub should be planted under
overhead lines or over underground utilities if its natural growth may
interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public or private
utility. Storm drainage facilities should be incorporated into the landscape
design and appear to be a part of the overall project.
(Prior Code, § 29.12.120) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-12, passed 5-
19-2011; Ord. 21-16, passed 12-16-2021)
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.135 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General Commercial (GC) Zone. The purpose of this zone is to establish
a district for a combination of commercial, office, entertainment, retail, and
service businesses and activities. The zone is designed to allow a range of
businesses with access from major streets. This zone is distinguished from the
Central Business District by the accommodation of uses that may generate a
lower level of pedestrian activity. A high level of quality is required in
project design.
   (B)   Central Business District (CDB) Zone. The purpose of this zone is to
establish a district for retail, entertainment, service and heritage related
businesses and activities that are intended to cultivate a high level of
pedestrian activity, and encourage both daytime and nighttime consumer
activity. This zone is also intended to protect the unique nature of the city’s
downtown area. Regulations of this zone are designed to provide a suitable
environment for those commercial and service uses which are vital to economic
life, with an emphasis on retail, service, entertainment and heritage
enterprises. A high degree of quality is required in project design.
Compatibility of new construction with existing architecture is required.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.010) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009)
§ 156.136 CODES AND SYMBOLS.
   In the following section of this subchapter, uses of land or buildings which
are allowed in the various districts are shown as “permitted uses”, indicated
by a “P” in the appropriate column, or as “conditional uses”, indicated by a
“C” in the appropriate column. If a use is not allowed in a given district, it
is either not named in the use list or it is indicated in the appropriate
column by an “N”. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or
maintained in the commercial districts, except as provided in this chapter:
 GC CBD
                                                                                       GC CBD
Accessory uses/buildings and temporary buildings
   Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses        P  P
   Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the conditional uses      C  C
   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, including living
quarters for a guard or night watchman, which buildings must be removed upon           C  C
completion or abandonment of the construction work
Automobile sales and services
   Automobile fuel or service station                                               P  N
   Automobile dealership, new or used; the parcel or lot shall be a minimum of 1 acre
in size with a minimum street frontage of 100 feet. Incidental service and repair are  P  N
to be conducted within an enclosed building
   Automobile lube and oil center                                                   P  N
   Automobile parts, new or reconditioned stored parts and business conducted withinP  N
enclosed building
   Automobile service and repair; provided, all work and storage is conducted withinPa N
completely enclosed building
   Car wash; automatic or manual; provided property not adjacent to residential     P  N
dwelling property line
   Motorcycle or scooter sales, new or used; display within the public right-of-way is
prohibited. Motorcycle or scooter sales located in the Central Business District (CBD) P  C
shall be within an enclosed building. Outside storage, display or on-site servicing is
prohibited in the CBD
   Parking lot incidental to a use conducted on the premises                        P  P
   Parking lot not incidental to a use conducted on the premises                    P  P
   Cannabis production establishment (see §                                        N  N
156.345 of this chapter)
Dwellings and other living quarters
   Accessory dwelling unit (subject to standards in §§
156.335 through                                                                        P  P
156.360 of this chapter)
   Assisted living facility                                                         P  N
   Bed and breakfast (see §§
156.335 through                                                                        C  C
156.360 of this chapter)
   Beekeeping (subject to regulations outlined in                                   P  N
Chapter 90 in this code of ordinances)
   Boarding house                                                                   N  N
   Dwellings existing only, no new or conversion to a greater number of residential
units. Any permitted modifications shall comply with the R-M-7 Zone standards
      Exceptions (R-M-7 standards apply):
         Existing dwelling(s) may be replaced with a new dwelling of the same or
lesser classification (i.e., single-family, two-family, three-family and the like)
         New dwelling(s) may be allowed on parcels fronting 100 East or 100 West
Streets between 100 North and 900 North Streets and between 300 South and 700 South
Streets                                                                                   P
         This exception also includes parcels fronting side streets (i.e., 600 North,
400 South and the like) between 100 East Street and Main Street and 100 West Street
and Main Street. A corner lot with a side yard fronting Main Street is not considered
an exception to this provision
         Any dwelling structure may not extend beyond the center of the block unless
it is a parcel fronting a side street. Where a property line extends beyond the center
of the block toward Main Street, the rear yard setback shall be from the center of the
block
   Homeless shelter                                                                 N  N
   Hotel; motels                                                                    P  P
   Multiple-family dwellings, part of a commercial development; dwellings may be stand
alone, not connected to or part of a commercial building, as long as it is integrated
into the overall project, subject to:
      Project area at least 40 acres
      Development agreement to establish landscaping, architectural and usable   C  C
recreation area standards
      A maximum of 30% residential development within project area
      R-M-30 Zone standards
      At least 50% of the residential units shall be recorded and constructed in a
manner to allow for home ownership
   Nursing home                                                                     P  N
   Protective housing facility                                                      P  N
   Recreational coach park within one-half mile (2,640 feet) of an interstate (subject
to §§                                                                                P  N
156.675 through
156.680 of this chapter)
   Residential facility for elderly persons                                         P  P
   Residential facility for persons with a disability                               P  P
   Single- or multiple-family dwellings located in the same building and located    C  C
above, behind or beneath a principal commercial use
   Transitional housing facility                                                    C  N
   Vacation rental (see §§
156.335 through                                                                        C  C
156.360 of this chapter)
   Medical cannabis pharmacy (see §                                                P  P
156.345 of this chapter)
Public and quasi-public
   Church; religious institution                                                    P  C
   College, private or public                                                       C  C
   Educational institution                                                          C  C
   Essential service facilities                                                     C  C
   Parks                                                                            P  P
   Golf courses; swimming pools and other recreation areas                          P  N
   Public buildings                                                                 P  P
   Public utility installations                                                     P  C
   School, charter                                                                  P  C
   School, private                                                                  C  C
   School, public                                                                   P  C
   School, trade or vocational                                                      C  C
   University, private or public                                                    C  C
Recreation and entertainment
   Art gallery; art museum                                                          P  P
   Archery shop and/or range, conducted within enclosed building                    P  P
   Athletic club; health club; spa fitness center; sports courts; windows facing MaiP  P
Street within CBD are not allowed to be blocked out with opaque covering
   Bicycle shop                                                                     P  P
   Bowling alley                                                                    P  N
   Dance studio                                                                     P  N
   Gymnasium                                                                        P  N
   Martial arts studio; karate studio; windows facing Main Street within CBD are notP  P
allowed to be blocked out with opaque covering
   Miniature golf course                                                            P  N
   Recreation center                                                                P  P
   Sexually-oriented business (see                                                  N  N
Chapter 118 of this code of ordinances)
   Social club; billiards or pool hall                                              C  C
   Swimming pool                                                                    P  N
   Skating rink                                                                     P  C
   Theater, indoor                                                                  P  P
Sales and related services
   Appliance and furniture store                                                    P  P
   Art shop and/or art supply                                                       P  P
   Bakery; candy making; confectionery; nut shop                                    P  P
   Beer retailer, as defined by Utah Code                                           P  P
   Bookstore                                                                        P  P
   Building material/hardware sales conducted within enclosed building              P  N
   Catering establishment                                                           P  P
   Clothing store                                                                   P  P
   Copy center; printing; publishing                                                P  P
   Delicatessen                                                                     P  P
   Department store                                                                 P  P
   Fast food establishment with drive-in or drive-up window                         P  P
   Fast food establishment without drive-in or drive-up window                      P  P
   Florist shop                                                                     P  P
   Greenhouse; nursery; plant materials                                             P  N
   Grocery store; health food store                                                 P  P
   Gunsmith                                                                         P  P
   Home improvement and garden store                                                P  N
   Mail service; private postal service                                             P  P
   Monument sales with outside display of product; primary retail use that includes
incidental activities relating to engraving of natural stone, cultured stone, glass    P  N
and wood, and casting of memorial foundations. All work and equipment must be enclosed
in a building. The retail use must be at least 50% of the property
   Music and/or movie store                                                         P  P
   Office supply; office machines, sales and repair                                 P  P
   Pawn shop                                                                        P  N
   Pet shop; pet grooming                                                           P  N
   Pharmacy; drugstore                                                              P  P
   Photographer or photography shop                                                 P  P
   Price-point retail establishment                                                 P  N
   Repair services (e.g., appliances, heating and air conditioning, plumbing)       P  N
   Restaurant; café; microbrewery; eating establishment with or without on premisesP  P
alcohol consumption sales
   Secondhand or thrift store conducted within enclosed building                    P  P
   Seed and/or feed store conducted within enclosed building, no outside bins       P  N
   Shopping center containing only permitted uses                                   P  N
   Specialty retail stores (e.g., gift, hobby, craft, jewelry, interior decorating, P  P
antiques)
   Sporting goods store                                                             P  P
   State liquor store                                                               P  P
   Tire store, sales and repair conducted within an enclosed building and no outsideP  N
storage
   Woodworking shop; manufacturing, compounding, assembling and woodworking of
articles in a small totally enclosed woodworking shop, not to exceed 2,000 sq. ft. in
size, and limited to the north end of Main Street between 600 North and 900 North. All P  N
work is to be conducted within the enclosed woodworking shop. No outside storage of
equipment, materials or product. The shop shall be constructed or insulated in a
manner to reduce noise
Service activities
   Animal hospital, small animals only; provided, all animals are maintained and kepP  N
within enclosed building
   Body art facility                                                                P  P
   Business or financial services                                                   P  P
   Clinic, dental or medical                                                        P  P
   Crisis nursery                                                                   C  C
   Day care center                                                                  C  N
   Depository institution (e.g., bank, credit union)                                P  P
   Hospital                                                                         P  N
   Key and lock service                                                             P  N
   Laboratories, dental or medical                                                  P  P
   Laundry cleaning, automatic self-help (laundromat)                               P  P
   Laundry cleaning, drop-off off-site drying cleaning and/or pressing              P  P
   Laundry cleaning, drop off on-site dry cleaning and/or pressing                  P  N
   Mortuary; funeral home                                                           P  N
   Non-depository institution                                                       P  N
   Office, business or professional                                                 P  P
   Personal services (e.g., barber and beauty shop, tanning salon, tailor shop, shoeP  P
repair)
   Physical therapy; sports therapy; message therapy                                P  P
   Reception center; social hall                                                    P  P
   Rehabilitation/treatment facility                                                C  N
   Rental shops, no outside display or storage                                      P  P
   Rental equipment, including moving equipment and vehicles, excluding truck-tractoP  N
or semi-trailer
   Solar power generation facility as set forth in Chapter 50 Electricity. Roof-
mounted solar array only. The total surface area of the solar array shall not exceed   P  P
the surface area of the roof upon which it is mounted and shall not exceed the height
limits of the applicable zoning district.
   Surgical center                                                                  P  N
   Tattoo establishment, including body art, body piercing, scarification and brandiNg N
   Taxidermist                                                                      P  N
   Travel bureau                                                                    P  P
Transportation
   Bus stops                                                                        P  P
   Freight transportation service                                                   N  N
   Park and ride facilities                                                         P  N
   Taxi hub                                                                         N  N
   Taxi service                                                                     P  P
   Towing service                                                                   N  N
   Transfer company                                                                 N  N
   Truck stop and service facilities within 1,000 feet of an interstate interchange P  N
 
(Prior Code, § 29.13.020) (Ord. 01-17, passed 2-15-2001; Ord. 03-46, passed 10-
30-2003; Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009; Ord. 11-16, passed 6-1-2011; Ord. 11-27,
passed 10-6-2011; Ord. 12-01, passed 1-19-2012; Ord. 12-03, passed 1-19-2012;
Ord. 12-16, passed 12-6-2012; Ord. 13-09, passed 3-21-2013; Ord. 14-11, passed
10-2-2014; Ord. 15-12, passed 7-16-2015; Ord. 16-06, passed 5-19-2016; Ord. 17-
09, passed 3-16-2017; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 21-02, passed 3-18-
2021; Ord. 22-01, passed 2-17-2022; Ord. 23-08, passed 4-6-2023; Ord. 24-26,
passed 9-19-2024; Ord. 25-17, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 156.137 AREA, WIDTH, FRONTAGE, YARD AND COVERAGE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The area, width, frontage and yard standards shall be regulated by
design review or by planned unit development approval, except the following:
      (1)   Commercial buildings adjacent to any residential district boundary
or an existing residential use shall have the following setbacks (see following
figure):
         (a)   Fifteen feet from a side or rear property line; and
         (b)   Twenty feet from the front property line or property line along
a street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2994.jpg]
      (2)   The minimum setback for commercial buildings within the General
Commercial District along West Forest Street shall be 30 feet.
      (3)   No building shall be located within a 20-foot by 20-foot view
triangle located at the intersecting front and side property lines as shown in
the figures below, unless an existing adjacent commercial building has a lesser
setback, then the new construction may match its setback as shown below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2996.jpg]
      (4)   Building size, height, location and orientation within the Central
Business District shall be in harmony with the Historic Downtown Guidelines.
   (B)   The maximum building or structure coverage of a lot or parcel shall be
50%, unless otherwise permitted by planned unit development approval.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.030) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009; Ord. 14-06, passed 5-
1-2014; Ord. 15-04, passed 3-29-2015)
§ 156.138 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The maximum height for all buildings and structures shall be 75 feet
or seven stories.
   (B)   No building which is accessory to a one-family, two-family, three-
family or multi-family dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than one
story or 20 feet.
   (C)   No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one story above
grade.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.040) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009)
§ 156.139 PROTECTION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Where a commercial development adjoins any residential zone or
residential use, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a
six-foot solid fence or masonry wall. Chain link fencing with slats is not
considered a solid fence for purposes of this section. A fence or wall is not
required along the adjoining property line in the required front yard setback.
If a fence or wall is installed along the property line in the required front
yard setback, it shall comply with the height and location standards as
referenced in §
156.346 of this chapter.
   (B)   Where a multiple-family residential development adjoins any single-
family residential use, there shall be provided along the adjoining property
line a six-foot solid fence or masonry wall. Chain link fencing with slats is
not considered a solid fence or wall for purposes of this section, unless the
chain link has interlocking opaque vinyl, which is pre-inserted into the mesh.
A fence or wall is not required along the adjoining property line in the
required front yard setback. If a fence or wall is installed along the property
line in the required front yard setback, it shall comply with the height and
location standards as referenced in §
156.346 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.050) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009)
§ 156.140 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Landscaped areas are used to frame and soften structures, to define
site functions, to enhance the quality of the environment and to screen
undesirable views. Landscaping should complement the buildings and surroundings
to make a positive contribution to the aesthetics and function of both the
specific site and the area.
   (B)   The following characteristics will need to be addressed in the design
of each commercial project:
      (1)   (a)   Landscaped areas should generally incorporate planting
utilizing a three tiered system:
            1.   Grasses and ground cover;
            2.   Shrubs and vines; and
            3.   Trees.
         (b)   Landscape design and construction should emphasize drought
tolerant landscaping where possible.
      (2)   All areas not covered by approved buildings and structures or
required parking must be completely landscaped and maintained using an
automatic irrigation system. All areas not covered by an approved building,
required parking, trees or shrubs shall be covered by grass or another
acceptable ground cover such as bark, wood chips or decorative rocks. Dirt,
weeds and similar materials are not considered acceptable ground cover.
      (3)   All required landscaping must be properly maintained.
      (4)   Plant materials will be placed in a manner that avoids interference
with project lighting or restriction of access to emergency apparatus such as
fire hydrants or fire alarm boxes. Landscaping should preserve the clear view
area defined in this chapter.
      (5)   Planting areas will be protected from vehicular and pedestrian
encroachment by raised planting surfaces, bumper guards or the use of curbs.
      (6)   Plants in containers or planter boxes are encouraged for areas
adjacent to store fronts along walkways; provided that, the containers or
planter boxes do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.
      (7)   Vines and climbing plants integrated upon buildings, trellises and
perimeter walls are not only attractive, but also help discourage graffiti and
are encouraged in appropriate areas.
      (8)   Existing mature trees, riparian corridors and view sheds should be
preserved and incorporated into the project landscaping.
      (9)   Storm drainage facilities should be incorporated into the landscape
design and appear to be a part of the overall project.
      (10)   No species of trees or large shrub should be planted under
overhead lines or over underground utilities if its natural growth may
interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public or private
utility.
      (11)   A complete landscaping plan is considered part of an application
for site plan review and shall include the types and sizes of all planting
materials. A minimum of one evergreen tree no less than five feet in height or
deciduous tree with no less than two-inch caliper for every 1,000 square feet
of land not covered by an approved building or required parking. Each plan
should include a variety of planting materials and a mixture of evergreen and
deciduous trees.
         (a)   For the purposes of this section, if a fractional number is
obtained in calculating the tree requirement, the fraction will either be
rounded up to a whole number if at point-five (0.5) or greater or disregarded
if at point-four (0.4) or less.
         (b)   1.   The Planning Commission, upon receiving a recommendation by
the City Forester, may approve a modification to the number of required trees
if the property owner seeking development approval presents substantial
evidence demonstrating that the modification, as determined by the Planning
Commission, should be approved based on one of the following reasons:
               a.   The strict application of the number of trees will result
in an unreasonable hardship as the result of shallow lot depth, irregular lot
shape, unusual topography or other similar factors including soil condition,
tree spacing or utility conflict; or
               b.   The proposed modification constitutes an innovative
landscaping design which is superior to the landscaping that would result from
application of required standards.
            2.   If the Planning Commission grants a modification under this
section, it shall make specific findings justifying the modification.
         (c)   Existing trees on the said property m ay count toward the
requirement upon the City Forester’s inspection and approval. Consideration
includes the size, type, location and condition of the tree(s).
      (12)   Refer to 1100 South Corridor Design Guidelines, West Forest Street
Design Guidelines and West Forest Street Corridor Overlay and the Historic
Downtown Design Guidelines for specific landscape requirements.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.060) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009)
§ 156.141 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any area outside of a building used for any activity other than off-
street parking and loading shall be completely enclosed within a solid fence or
wall of a height sufficient to completely screen such activity from the street
or from adjoining parcels (chain link fencing with slats is not considered a
solid fence or wall for purposes of this chapter).
   (B)   All uses shall be conducted from enclosed buildings except automobile
fuel or service stations, carwashes, automobile and recreational vehicle sales,
rental or lease, off-street parking and loading, plant material nurseries,
outdoor restaurants and commercial recreation, unless otherwise permitted by
planned unit development or conditional use permit.
   (C)   All uses shall be free from objectionable noise, hazards or nuisances.
   (D)   Properties located within the 1100 South Corridor, West Forest Street
and Historic Downtown areas of the community are subject to established design
guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.070) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009)
§ 156.142 USES NOT LISTED.
   The Community Development Director or designee shall have the authority to
identify and categorize unlisted uses within the listed permitted or
conditional uses of this chapter, based on a finding of substantial similarity
of character, origin and impact and the like to a listed use and, when so
categorized, such use shall thereafter be recognized and treated the same as a
listed use.
(Prior Code, § 29.13.080) (Ord. 09-03, passed 2-19-2009)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.155 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Manufacturing-Distribution District (M-D) Zone. The purpose of this
zone is to provide area in appropriate locations where light manufacturing,
industrial processes and warehousing not producing objectionable effects may be
established, maintained and protected. The regulations of this district are
designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas.
   (B)   General Industrial District (M-G) Zone. The purpose of this zone is to
provide for areas in appropriate locations where heavy industrial processes
necessary to the economy may be conducted. The regulations of this district are
designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas.
(Prior Code, § 29.14.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.156 CODES AND SYMBOLS.
   In the following sections of this subchapter, uses of land or buildings
which are allowed in the various districts as shown as “permitted uses”,
indicated by a “P” in the appropriate column, or as “conditional uses”,
indicated by a “C” in the appropriate column. If a use is not allowed in a
given district, it is either not named in the use list or it is indicated in
the appropriate column by a dash, “-”. If a regulation applied in a given
district, it is indicated in the appropriate column by a numeral to show the
linear or square feet, or by the letter “A”. If the regulation does not apply,
it is indicated in the appropriate column by a dash, “-”. No building,
structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected structurally altered, enlarged or maintained in the commercial and
industrial districts except as provided in the ordinance contained herein.
 M-D M-G
                                                                                    M- M-
                                                                                    D  G
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses           P  P
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the conditional uses         C  C
   Residential use as an onsite manager, caretaker or worker’s dwelling for
operational or security purposes accessory to a bonafide permitted or conditional   C  C
use
   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, including living
quarters for a guard or night watchman, which buildings must be removed upon        C  C
completion or abandonment of the construction work
Agriculture and forestry
   Agriculture, except grazing and pasturing of animals                          P  P
   Agriculture, including grazing and pasturing of animals                       P  P
   Agriculture, business or industry not to include rendering of fats, offal or  P  P
animal by-products
   Animals and fowl for recreation or for family food production for the primary P  P
use of persons residing on the premises
   Nursery or green house, wholesale or retail                                   P  P
   The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and gardening     P  P
   Farms devoted to raising and marketing chickens, turkeys or other fowl or     P  P
poultry, fish or frogs, including wholesale and retail sales
   Forestry, except forest industry                                              P  P
   Forest industry, such as a saw mill, wood products, plant or others           P  P
Automobile sales and services
   Automobile service                                                            P  P
   Automobile or recreation vehicle sales, service, lease, rental and repair, newP  P
or used
   Parking lot incidental to a use conducted on the premises                     P  P
   Parking lot not incidental to a use conducted on the premises                 P  P
   Automatic car wash; automobile and recreation vehicle sales, lease, rental or P  P
repair, new or used, conducted outdoors; automobile repair garage
   Body and fender shop; motor vehicle, bicycle and recreation vehicle assemblingP  P
painting, upholstering and rebuilding
Cannabis production establishment                                                   N  P
   Exceptions to M-D:
      A cannabis cultivation facility that submitted a complete application for
land use approval prior to enactment of Ord. 19-20 (11-7-2019) may add a cannabis
processing facility as a permitted use; provided that, the cannabis processing
facility shall comply in all respects with Ord. 19-20, except for zoning district
restrictions
      A cannabis cultivation facility that submitted a complete application for
land use approval prior to enactment of Ord. 19-20 (11-7-2019) may add greenhouses
as phase development on the same parcel of land as a permitted use; provided that,
the cannabis cultivation facility shall comply in all respects with Ord. 19-20,
except for zoning district restrictions
Medical cannabis pharmacy                                                           P  P
Processing and manufacturing
   Baking, ice cream making and/or candy making                                  P  P
   Blacksmith shop                                                               P  P
   Boiler works                                                                  P  P
   Bookbinding                                                                   P  P
   Bottling works                                                                P  P
   Breweries                                                                     C  C
   Cement mortar, plaster or paving materials central mixing plant, related to   -  C
construction industry
   Concrete mini mix batch plant for self hauling, using mixer trailers up to 2  C  C
cubic yards in size
   Construction of building to be sold and moved off the premises                P  P
   Dairy                                                                         P  P
   Egg handling, sales or processing                                             P  P
   Fertilizer and soil conditioner manufacture, processing and/or sales, providinC  C
only non-animal products and by-products are used
   Forge plant                                                                   P  P
   Foundry, casting lightweight non-ferrous metal                                P  P
   Hatchery                                                                      P  P
   Honey extraction                                                              P  P
   Incinerator, non-accessory                                                    C  C
   Knitting mill                                                                 P  P
   Laboratories                                                                  P  P
   Laundry                                                                       P  P
   Machine shops                                                                 P  P
   Micro breweries                                                               P  -
   Mobile lunch agency                                                           P  P
   Monument works                                                                P  P
   Motion picture studio                                                         P  P
   Planing mill                                                                  C  P
   Plastic molding injection of products parts of no more than 6 pounds          P  P
   Printing - convenience for drop-in customers                                  P  P
   Publishing and contract printing                                              P  P
   Rock crusher                                                                  -  C
   Sandblasting                                                                  C  C
   Saw mill                                                                      -  C
   Solar power generation facility as set forth in
Chapter 50 Electricity. Roof-mounted and ground-mounted array.
      Roof-mounted solar array, the total surface area of the solar array shall not
exceed the surface area of the roof upon which it is mounted and shall not exceed
the heights of the applicable zoning district.                                      P  P
      Ground-mounted solar array shall not exceed one-acre and shall be fully
screened on all sides. Fencing shall be in compliance with NESC (National
Electrical Safety Code) Section 110. Chain link with slates is not considered
privacy fencing for the purpose of this provision.
   Tire retreading or vulcanizing                                                P  P
   Upholstering, including mattress manufacture, rebuilding or renovating        P  P
   Weaving                                                                       P  P
   Welding shop                                                                  P  P
   Manufacture, curing, compounding, processing, packaging and treatment of the
following
      Bakery goods, batteries, candy, cereal, cosmetics, dairy products, food
products, (excluding fish, sauerkraut, pickles, vinegar, yeast and rendering of     C  P
fat), lubricating grease, meat products, oil, pharmaceuticals, toiletries
   Manufacture, curing, compounding, processing, packaging and treatment of fish,-  C
sauerkraut, pickles, vinegar and yeast
   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and treatment of articles of merchandisC  C
from the following previously prepared materials
      Bone
      Cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork
      Feathers
      Hair, horn
      Leather
      Paper, paint, plastics, precious or semi-precious stones or metals
      Rubber
      Shell, straw
      Textiles, tobacco
      Wood, wool
      Yard
   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and woodworking of articles in small   P  P
totally enclosed woodworking shops of not more than 5 employees
   Manufacturing, processing, packaging and distribution of the following: all-
purpose cleaners, tire shines, degreasers, glass cleaner, windshield washer fluid,  P  P
interior carpet shampoo and other similar product
   Manufacture/maintenance of the following                                      P  P
      Boats, business machines
      Cameras, photo equipment
      Electric or neon signs, billboards, and/or commercial advertising structures
      Light sheetmetal products including heating and ventilation ducts and
equipment, cornices and eaves, Venetian blinds, window shades awnings
      Musical instruments, novelties, rubber and metal stamps
      Toys
   Manufacture fabrication, assembly, canning, compounding, packaging, processing-  C
treatment, storage, and/or maintenance of the following
      Airplane and parts, automobiles and parts
      Alcohol
      Brass
      Candles, cans, cameras, photo equipment including film, cast
      Stone products, celluloid, cement and cinder products
      Copper
      Dyestuffs
      Emery cloth, excelsior
      Glass, glucose, gypsum
      Hair, hardware
      Ink, iron
      Lampblack, linoleum, lime
      Machinery, malt, matches, meats, musical instruments
      Novelties
      Oilcloth, oiled rubber goods, oxygen
      Paper, paint, pulp, pickles, pottery, incidental plaster, plaster of paris,
plastics
      Salt, sheet metal, shellac, shoddy, shoe polish, soap, detergents, soda,
starch, steel
      Terracotta, tile, toys, turpentine
      Varnish, vinegar
      Yeast
   Manufacture of brick, clay, ceramic, cinder, concrete, synthetic cast stone,
plastic and pumice stone products, including, in addition, manufacture or
fabrication of building blocks, tile or pipe from raw materials for use in building
construction or for sewer or drainage purposes, and excluding rock or gravel        C  C
crushing of raw materials except that which is incidental to the manufacture or
fabrication of the above-described products, and provided that such crushing
facilities be located not closer than 200 feet to any property line
   Uses which follow, provided they are located at least 300 feet from any distri-t C
boundary
      Animal by-products, not to include rendering of fat, or animal offal or by-
products
      Plants
      Blast furnace
      Fertilizer and soil conditioner, foundry
      Garbage or refuse maintenance or disposal site, gravel pits, quarries
   Manufacturing, processing, refining, treatment, distilling, storage or        -  C
compounding of the following
      Acid, ammonia, asphalt, acetylene gas
      Bleaching powder and chlorine, bones
      Chemicals of an objectionable or dangerous nature, coal, creosote
      Disinfectants, explosives, fireworks, firs
      Gas, gelatin or size, glue, grease or lard
      Hides, insecticides, metals crushing, ore
      Petroleum, plastics, potash, pryoxylin
      Roofing or water-proofing material, rubber or guttapercha
      Tallow, tar, wood
Observation and assessment program                                                  C  C
Public and quasi-public
   Airport
(The adopted City Municipal Airport Master Plan and the adopted City Regional       P  P
Airport Rules, Regulations, and Minimum Standards shall serve as the governing land
use regulations for the Brigham City Regional Airport)
   Cemetery                                                                      C  -
   Community correctional facility                                               C  C
   Correctional facility                                                         C  C
   Educational institution                                                       C  -
   Jail                                                                          C  C
   Juvenile detention facility                                                   C  C
   Juvenile secure facility                                                      C  C
   Parks, golf courses, swimming pools and other recreation areas                P  P
   Public buildings                                                              P  P
   Public transportation facilities                                              P  P
   Public utility installations                                                  P  P
   Radio/television transmitting towers                                          C  P
   Rehabilitation/treatment facility                                             C  C
   Sheltered workshop                                                            P  P
   Trade or vocational school                                                    P  P
Recreation
   Archery shop/range, if conducted in enclosed building                         P  -
   Athletic club; health club; athletic goods store                              P  -
   Swimming pool, commercial; skating rink, commercial                           C  -
   Bowling alley, boxing arena                                                   P  -
   Bicycle shop                                                                  P  -
   Campground                                                                    P  -
   Dance hall, dancing                                                           C  -
   Drag strip racing                                                             C  C
   Go-cart racing                                                                C  C
   Gymnasium                                                                     P  -
   Miniature golf course, commercial                                             P  -
   Night club/social club; billiards or pool hall                                C  -
   Private non-profit locker club                                                C  -
   Recreation center; commercial                                                 P  -
   Recreation vehicles rental-lease, sales and service outdoor                   P  -
   Recreation vehicles rental, sales and service (indoor)                        P  -
   Recreation vehicles rental-lease, sales and service, manufacturing sales      C  -
distributor with a recreational coach park as a secondary use
   Theater, indoor                                                               P  -
   Theater, outdoor, providing a solid fence or masonry wall with the minimum
height of 6 feet shall be constructed on all sides. Driveways and parking areas
shall be provided with properly maintained dustless surfaces. Automobile off-street P  P
storage areas for automobiles awaiting entrance to theater shall have capacity of
at least 15% of the number of auto parking spaces provided inside the theater
      Minimum area for single screen                                          P  P
      Theater shall be 10 acres. Minimum area for 2-screen theater shall be 12
acres
Sales and related services
   Air conditioning, ventilating equipment, sales/repair                         P  P
   Art shop and/or art supply                                                    P  -
   Awning sales/repair                                                           P  -
   Beer retailer, as defined by Utah Code                                        P  P
   Building material sales enclosed                                              P  P
   Building material sales yard with sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as an
incidental part of the main business, but excluding concrete mixing, except as such C  P
concrete mixing is necessary in preparation and manufacture of any products
specified in this section, roofing sales
   Café; cafeteria; catering establishment                                      P  P
   Carbonated water sales                                                        P  -
   Delicatessen                                                                  P  -
   Drive-ins; refreshment stand; eating and/or drinking place                    P  P
   Electrical, heating appliances and fixtures, sales/repair/service             P  -
   Floor coverings sales and storage                                             P  -
   Florist shop                                                                  P  -
   Fountain equipment supply                                                     P  -
   Fur sales, storage, repair                                                    P  -
   Furniture sales and/or repair                                                 P  -
   Gift shop; hobby or crafts shop                                               P  -
   Greenhouse; nursery; plant materials; soil-lawn service                       P  -
   Gunsmith                                                                      P  -
   Hardware store, not including sale of powered vehicles using motor greater thaP  -
1 horse-power and not including sale of lumber
   Hardware store, including sale of lumber; providing, all lumber storage is in P  -
completely enclosed building
   Hobby and/or craft shop; gift shop                                            P  -
   Hospital supplies                                                             P  -
   Ice sales                                                                     P  -
   Ice manufacture, storage and retail/wholesale sales                           P  P
   Ice vendor units and/or reach-in ice merchandise units, electric ice-maker; icP  P
storage, not more than 5 tons’ capacity
   Insulation sales                                                              P  P
   Laundry, automatic self-help; laundry agency                                  P  -
   Liquor and beer sales; places for the drinking of liquor or beer              C  -
   Lumber yard                                                                   P  P
   Military store (surplus)                                                      P  -
   Milk distributing station; sale of dairy products, excluding processing/bottliPg -
   Monument sales, retail                                                        P  P
   Ornamental iron, sales only                                                   P  -
   Package agency                                                                P  -
   Painter/paint store                                                           P  -
   Plumbing shop                                                                 P  -
   Radio and television sales and repair                                         P  -
   Radio and television station                                                  P  P
   Restaurant                                                                    P  -
   Second-hand shop, antiques, conducted within a building or enclosure          P  -
   Seed/feed store                                                               P  P
   Sexually-oriented business (subject to
Chapter 118 of this code of ordinances and §§                                     P  P
156.560 through
156.563 of this chapter)
   Tire shop, sales only                                                         P  P
   Wallpaper store                                                               P  -
   Wholesale business                                                            P  P
Service activities
   Animal hospital                                                               C  -
   Baby formula service; baby diaper service; baby diaper service                P  -
   Bank                                                                          P  -
   Blueprinting, photostating, duplicating                                       P  -
   Body art facility                                                             P  P
   Carpet and/or rug cleaning                                                    P  -
   Clothes cleaning, dyeing, pressing                                            P  -
   Costume rental                                                                P  -
   Dressmaking                                                                   P  -
   Electric appliances and/or electronic instruments service                     P  -
   Employment agency or employment office                                        P  -
   Fix-it shop; repair shop, household items                                     P  -
   Frozen food lockers                                                           P  -
   Hospital                                                                      P  P
   Interior decorating store                                                     P  -
   Janitorial service                                                            P  -
   Kennel, conducted entirely within a sound-proofed and air-conditioned buildingP  P
   Kennel                                                                        P  P
   Key and lock service                                                          P  -
   Lithographing, including engraving, photo engraving, printing                 P  -
   Medical/dental clinic, laboratories                                           C  -
   Mortuary                                                                      P  -
   Office, business or professional                                              P  -
   Office building higher than 3 stories and/or 50 feet                          P  -
   Office supply; office machines sales, repair                                  P  -
   Pest extermination business                                                   P  P
   Reception center and/or wedding chapel                                        P  -
   Sign painting shop                                                            P  -
   Taxidermist                                                                   P  -
   Towel and linen supply service                                                P  -
   Travel bureau                                                                 P  -
   Upholstery shop                                                               P  -
   Veterinary                                                                    C  -
Storage and warehousing
   Coal, fuel and wood yards and offices                                         P  P
   Rental of equipment                                                           P  P
   Garage, public                                                                C  C
   Junk yard (see §§
156.605 through                                                                     C  C
156.610 of this chapter)
   Self-service enclosed storage facility (see §§
156.605 through                                                                     C  C
156.610 of this chapter)
   Self-service outside storage facility (see §§
156.605 through                                                                     C  C
156.610 of this chapter)
   Towing and impound yard (see §§
156.605 through                                                                     C  C
156.610 of this chapter)
   Warehouse                                                                     P  P
Transportation
   Airport                                                                       C  C
   Bus terminal                                                                  P  -
   Freighting, trucking yard or terminal                                         P  P
   Drive-it yourself agency                                                      P  -
   Express office                                                                P  -
   Taxi stand                                                                    P  -
   Terminal, parking and maintenance facilities                                  C  P
   Transfer company                                                              P  P
   Truck stop and service facilities                                             C  P
 
(Prior Code, § 29.14.020) (Ord. 98-26, passed 6-11-1998; Ord. 04-03, passed 1-
15-2004; Ord. 04-10, passed 3-4-2004; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 10-08,
passed 7-29-2010; Ord. 12-10, passed 8-2-2012; Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2012;
Ord. 14-05, passed 5-1-2014; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 20-05, passed
4-2-2020; Ord. 22-25, passed 12-1-2022; Ord. 23-09, passed 4-6-2023; Ord. 24-
26, passed 9-19-2024; Ord. 25-17, passed 8-21-2025)
§ 156.157 AREA, WIDTH, FRONTAGE, YARD AND COVERAGE REGULATIONS.
 M-D M-G
                                                                               M- M-
                                                                               D  G
Regulations as may be required by conditional use permit, design review, or by
planned unit development approval; except that, no industrial building shall
be located closer than 15 feet (unless in compliance with exception noted      A  A
below), to any residential district boundary line or to any public right-of-
way that continues as frontage into a residential district within the same
city block, not including Main Street and West Forest Street
The minimum setback in feet for all buildings located along West Forest Street 30 30
shall be
Except as may be allowed through planned unit development approval buildings   50 50
and structures may cover no more percentage of the lot than
Exception: an industrial building that meets all of the following requirements
   Not greater than 2,000 square feet in area
   Less than 20 feet in height
   Built with materials that are aesthetically compatible to a residential  C  C
district
   Located adjacent to residential lots rear or side yard
   In the opinion of the Planning Commission, does not adversely affect the
residential district due to noise, odor or similar nuisances
 
(Prior Code, § 29.14.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-12, passed 10-
2-2014)
§ 156.158 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height for all buildings and structures in districts regulated
by this subchapter shall be:
 
                     M-D M-G
In feet              75  75
In number of stories 7   7
 
(Prior Code, § 29.14.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.159 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
 
                                                                        M-D M-G
Any area outside of a building used for any activity other than off-
street parking and loading shall be completely enclosed within a solid
fence or wall of a height sufficient to completely screen such activity A   A
from the street or from adjoining parcels unless otherwise approved by
the Planning Commission
All uses shall be free from objectionable noise, hazards or nuisances   A   A
All uses shall be conducted from enclosed buildings, except automobile
service stations, automatic car wash, automobile and recreational coach
or vehicle sales, lease, rental or repair, off-street parking and       A   A
loading, plant material nurseries, outdoor restaurants and commercial
recreation, unless otherwise permitted by planned unit development or
conditional use permit
 
(Prior Code, § 29.14.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.160 USES NOT LISTED.
   The Community Development Director designee shall have the authority to
identify and categorize unlisted uses within the listed permitted or
conditional uses of this subchapter, based on a finding of substantial
similarity of character, origin and impact and the like to a listed use and,
when so categorized, such use shall thereafter be recognized and treated the
same as a listed use.
(Prior Code, § 29.14.060) (Ord. 97-08, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-
19-2007)
PLANNED DISTRICT, P
§ 156.175 PURPOSES.
   (A)   To encourage and provide a means for effectuating desirable
development through the use of variations in siting, mixed land uses and/or
varied dwelling or other buildings;
   (B)   To preserve the amenities and compatibility of P Districts by adoption
of a General Development Plan, showing proper orientation, desirable design
character and compatible land uses;
   (C)   To provide for the orderly pre-planning and long-term development for
a variety of uses of large tracts of land which are under unified ownership or
development control, so as to ensure that the entire tract will provide an
environment of stable and desirable character;
   (D)   (1)   To give the developer reasonable assurance that sectional
development plans prepared in accordance with an approved General Development
Plan will be acceptable to the local jurisdiction.
      (2)   Sectional development plans shall include subdivision plans and/or
planned unit development plans as provided for in this subchapter; and
   (E)   To enable the adoption of measures providing for development of the
surrounding area in character compatible with the Planned District.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
§ 156.176 STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The following provisions shall apply in a P District, which district shall
also be subject to other provisions of this chapter; except that, where
conflict in regulations occurs, the regulations specified in this subchapter,
or on a development plan approved pursuant to this chapter, shall apply.
   (A)   P Districts may be established on one or more contiguous parcels of
land which are suitable for, and of sufficient size, to be planned and
developed in a manner consistent with the purposes and objectives of this
chapter as determined by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   No ordinance establishing a P District shall be adopted unless and
until there is on file with the local jurisdiction written consent of every
property owner within such District at the time of adoption of the ordinance,
agreeing:
      (1)   The owner will be bound by the conditions and regulations proposed
and which will be effective within the district; and
      (2)   To record such written agreement with the County Recorder.
   (C)   Before detailed studies of any P District development plans shall be
undertaken by the planning staff or the Planning Commission, there shall be on
file with the local jurisdiction the written request of all property owners
within the proposed district that such detailed studies be made.
   (D)   (1)   Standards for area, coverage, density, yard requirements,
parking and screening for P District uses shall be governed by the standards of
the residential, commercial or industrial zoning districts most similar in
nature and function to the proposed P District use(s), as determined by the
Planning Commission, and as modified by the approved General Development Plan.
      (2)   Standards for public improvements shall be governed by applicable
ordinances and laws.
      (3)   Exceptions to these standards by the Planning Commission and by the
governing body are possible, when these bodies find that such exceptions
encourage a desirable living environment and are warranted in terms of the
total proposed development or unit thereof.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
§ 156.177 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of a formal P District rezoning application, the
applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan for an approval in
principle thereof by the Planning Commission and the governing body.
   (B)   The preliminary development plan and text shall be prepared and
endorsed by a qualified urban planner, with other professional assistance as
required, and shall include the following information presented in a general
schematic fashion:
      (1)   The topographic character of the land, and any major grading
intended;
      (2)   Proposed land uses, population densities and building intensities;
      (3)   Proposed circulation pattern indicating both public and private
streets;
      (4)   Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites and other open spaces;
      (5)   A market analysis of proposed uses, if required by the Planning
Commission, if the property is not zoned for commercial purposes at the time of
submittal of the preliminary development plan;
      (6)   Delineation of the units to be constructed in progression, if any;
and
      (7)   Relation of the proposed development to future land use in
surrounding area(s) and as shown on the master plan.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
§ 156.178 PUBLIC HEARING; OPTIONAL.
   A public hearing on the preliminary development plan may be held by the
Planning Commission and governing body. Approval in principle of the
preliminary development plan shall be limited to the general acceptability of
the land uses proposed and their interrelationships, and shall not be construed
to endorse precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering
feasibility, and such approval shall not be construed as or deemed to be in any
form or sense a commitment to approve any subsequent formal rezoning
application.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
§ 156.179 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SCHEDULE APPROVAL.
   Together with the application for rezoning classification, the applicant
shall submit the following General Development Plan consisting of documents and
supporting evidence, prepared and endorsed by a qualified professional team, as
required by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   A sepia map with ten prints of a survey of the property, showing
existing features of the property including specimen trees, structures,
streets, easements, drainage channels, utility lines and existing land uses;
   (B)   A sepia map with ten prints of a General Development Plan which shall
be in reasonable conformance with the approved preliminary plan, showing as
appropriate, all the information required on the preliminary development plan;
the approximate location and proposed density of dwelling units; non-
residential building uses and intensities; and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;    
   (C)   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of total number of acres in the proposed project and
the per cent thereof designated for the various uses; the number of dwelling
units proposed by type of dwelling unit of the P District; estimated non-
residential population; proposed retail sales area and economic justification;
anticipated timing for construction of each unit; and standards for height,
open space, building intensity, population density and public improvements
proposed for each unit of development whenever the applicant proposes an
exception from standard zoning district or other ordinance regulations
governing development;
   (D)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land to
effectuate the proposed plan;
   (E)   Engineering and other feasibility studies, as necessary; and
   (F)   If the development or plan is to be approved in stages, each stage of
development shall be completed prior to proceeding to the next stage, or
adequate performance guaranties be posted to ensure completion of each approved
stage.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
§ 156.180 FINDINGS REQUIRED.
   The Planning Commission, after public hearing, may recommend the
establishment of a P District, and the governing body, after public hearings,
may by ordinance establish a P District; provided that, both find that the
facts submitted with the application and presented at the hearings establish
that:
   (A)   The proposed P District or a given unit thereof, can be substantially
completed within two years of the establishment of the P District;
   (B)   Each individual unit of development as well as the total development,
can exist as an independent unit capable creating an environment of sustained
desirability and stability, or that adequate assurance will be provided that
such objective will be attained; and that the uses proposed will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect which could not be achieved under other zoning districts;
   (C)   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the P District;
   (D)   Commercial development can be justified economically at the locations
proposed to provide commercial facilities;
   (E)   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
   (F)   Any exception from standard ordinance requirements is warranted by the
design and amenities incorporated into the General Development Plan, in
accordance with adopted policy of the Planning Commission and the governing
body;
   (G)   The P District is in conformance with the Master Plan; and
   (H)   Existing or proposed utility services are adequate for the population
and use densities proposed.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
§ 156.181 PLANNING COMMISSION AND GOVERNING BODY’S ACTION.
   (A)   If, from the facts presented, the Planning Commission, or the
governing body is unable to make the necessary findings, the application shall
be denied.
   (B)   In taking action, the Planning Commission may deny the General
Development Plan and general development schedule as submitted, or may
recommend approval of said plan and schedule to the governing body, subject to
specified amendments.
   (C)   Upon application for rezoning of an area to a P District and
recommendation of such rezoning by the Planning Commission, the governing body
shall hold a public hearing thereon as required by other amendments to the
zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Changes of use or density of an approved General Development Plan
shall be considered the same as a change in the zoning map, and shall be made
in accordance with the provisions for amendments of the zoning ordinance.
   (E)   If no development has occurred to effectuate a P District development
within two years after the district is created, the Planning Commission shall
review the action and determine whether or not the continuation of a given P
District is in the public interest. If the Planning Commission so recommends,
the governing body may order the area reverted to the original district from
which it was created, without a public hearing.
   (F)   At the time of adoption of any ordinance establishing a P District,
the governing body shall make appropriate arrangements with the applicant to
insure the accomplishment, at the scheduled times, of the public improvements,
public dedications and grants of easement shown on the approved General
Development Plan. The P District shall be given an appropriate name, number of
letter to identify it; and the approved General Development Plan shall be
adopted by reference and become a part of the zoning ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 29.15.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 10-
4-2018)
747 SOUTH MAIN STREET PLANNED DISTRICT
§ 156.195 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of establishing the 747 South Main Street Planned
District is to address a very specific area of the city which is located
between 700 South and 800 South encompassing the old Shopko site. The Planned
District is intended to facilitate the redevelopment of the site, while giving
the city needed input and guarantees in the planning process. It will help to
bring additional housing to the city and assist in revitalizing the immediate
area.
(Prior Code, § 29.16.010) (Ord. 22-22, passed 10-6-2022)
§ 156.196 PLANNED DISTRICT.
   The 747 South Main Street Planned District shall apply to certain properties
located within the corporate limits of Brigham City on the east side of Main
Street between 700 South and 800 South, specifically as shown in Exhibit “A”,
attached to the ordinance codified herein:
   (A)   Zoning district established. P-R-M-30 (Planned Residential Multiple
30);
   (B)   Uses. Uses allowed in the P-R-M-30 District are the same as those
allowed in the underlying R-M-30 District; and
   (C)   General Development Plan. The submitted site plan and elevations
incorporated as Exhibit “B” shall serve as the general development guidelines
for the 747 South Main Street Planned District. Any significant revision to the
general development guidelines requires an amendment to this Chapter. The
applicable land use application for final design and construction plans shall
be submitted for Planning Commission review and approval. The number of units
may differ from the submitted site plan based upon site design adjustments and
parking requirements, but in no case shall exceed the density per the R-M-30
District.
   (D)   Concept plan/map. The 747 South Main Street Planned District shall be
as pictured below, subject to Planning Commission and City Council review and
approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3002.jpg]
   (E)   Parcel descriptions/map. The 747 South Main Street Planned District
legal description and site maps accompany the following parcel descriptions.
Parcel No. 03-146-0152
LT 01 AMENDMENT TO LT 01 BID PLT E BCS.
LESS: BEG AT SE COR SD LT 01, N89*25`18"W 60.00 FT ALG S/L OF LT 01,
N01*02`21"E 51.67 FT,
S88*57`39"E 32.00 FT, N01*02`21"E 237.93 FT, N28*57`39"W 46.66 FT, N61*02`21"E
28.00 FT, S28*57`39"E 54.17 FT TO E/L OF SD LT 01, S01*02`21"W 296.62 FT ALG SD
E/L TO POB.
CONT 6.83 AC M/L.
Parcel No. 03-146-0156
BEG AT SE COR OF LT 01 BID PLT E, N89*25`18"W 60.00 FT ALG S/L OF SD LT 01,
N01*02`21"E 51.67 FT, S88*57`39"E 32.00 FT, N01*02`21"E 237.93 FT, N28*57`39"W
46.66 FT, N61*02`21"E 28.0 FT, S28*57`39"E 54.17 FT TO E/L OF SD LT 01,
S01*02`21"W 296.62 FT ALG SD E/L TO POB. [THIS IS TO CREATE A PRIVATE RD.]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3122.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3120.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 29.16.020) (Ord. 22-22, passed 10-6-2022; Ord. “Exhibit 29.22”
passed - -)
§ 156.197 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   The following provisions shall apply in this P-R-M-30 District, which
district shall also be subject to other provisions of the city code, except
where conflict in regulations occur, the regulations specified in this
subchapter, or on the development guidelines approved pursuant to this chapter
shall apply.
   (A)   Standards for area, coverage, density, yard requirements (setbacks),
height regulations, parking, lighting and signage shall be governed by the
standards of the R-M-30 District.
   (B)   Standards for public improvements shall be governed by applicable
adopted city ordinances and laws including adopted Public Work Standards.
   (C)   (1)   Plantings shall include drought tolerant designs, where
appropriate;
      (2)   Missing trees along the Main Street park strip shall be replaced
with reasonably identical species; and
      (3)   The landscape and screening plan shall be submitted with the final
design and construction plans for Planning Commission review and approval.
   (D)   There shall be provided usable recreation or playground areas outside
of the front yard setback, with a total minimum area of 2,000 square feet for
three dwelling units, 250 additional square feet for each dwelling unit up to
50 total units, and 125 additional square feet for each dwelling unit above 50.
The minimum width and length of any usable recreation or playground area shall
not be less than 20 feet unless a trail system is approved as part of the
requirement by the Planning Commission. The on-site, above grade storm drainage
detention basin may count toward a portion of the recreation area if the
applicant provides sufficient evidence that the basin is safe for recreational
purposes and usable pertaining to the area, slope and landscape. All recreation
and playground areas shall be accessible by all dwelling units within the
development. Indoor recreational facilities shall count toward the required
square footage. Indoor recreational facilities may include, club rooms, fitness
areas, spas, game rooms and other similar facilities approved by the Planning
Commission. Pathways within the designated areas may be included in the
calculation (sidewalks which border a parking lot and/or buildings and parking
lots are not considered recreation area for the purposes of this section).
   (E)   The architecture of the project shall follow the thematic elevations
provided in this subchapter. Where unspecified by the thematic elevations, the
underlying R-M-30 code shall apply.
   (F)   The fencing plan shall be submitted with the final design and
construction plans for Planning Commission review and approval.
   (G)   The elevation requirements shall meet the standards of the image
below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3004.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 29.16.030) (Ord. 22-22, passed 10-6-2022)
§ 156.198 CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Conflict. Whenever regulations in this subchapter conflict with other
provisions of the city code, the provisions of this subchapter shall govern.
Whenever regulations of other provisions of the city code address matters that
are not addressed by this subchapter, then said other provisions shall govern.
   (B)   Severability. This subchapter and the various parts, sections and
clauses are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is
hereby declared that the remainder of the subchapter shall not be affected
thereby. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
subchapter on each part, section, paragraphs, sentence, clause or phrase
hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more portions thereof be
declared invalid.
(Prior Code, § 29.16.040) (Ord. 22-22, passed 10-6-2022)
1100 SOUTH 1100 WEST STREET PLANNED DISTRICT
§ 156.200 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of establishing the 1100 South 1100 West Street
Planned District is to address a very specific area of the city which is
located at the crossroads of 1100 South Street/SR-91 and 1100 West Street. The
Planned District is intended to create a zoning district that can be a
productive and vibrant location to allow the orderly and beneficial development
of the 1100 South 1100 West Street Planned District, promote the economic
benefit of Brigham City and Box Elder County by bringing additional dwelling
units to the city as well as promoting businesses and jobs. The general
development plan for the 1100 South 1100 West Street Planned District provides
general guidance as to the approximate location and proposed density of
dwelling units, non-residential building uses and intensities and land use
considered suitable for adjacent properties and to ensure that appropriate
infrastructure and services are available to support the development of the
1100 South 1100 West Street Planned District. The Planned District site is
located northwest of the intersection of 1100 West Street and 1100 South
Street/SR-91 (see Exhibit "A" legal description and site map/development plan,
as referenced in §
156.204).
(Ord. 24-12, passed 5-2-2024)
§ 156.201 PLANNED DISTRICT.
   The 1100 South 1100 West Street Planned District shall apply to certain
properties located within the corporate limits of Brigham City northwest of the
1100 South Street and 1100 West Street intersection as shown in Exhibit "A".
   (A)   Zoning district established. P-GC (Planned - General Commercial).
   (B)   Uses. The following uses are allowed within the P-GC District, which
otherwise may not be listed in the underlying General Commercial zoning
district:
      (1)   The underlying zone is General Commercial - all uses allowed under
the same permitted or conditional use designation as in other General
Commercial districts are hereby allowed in this Planned District.
      (2)   Subject to the limitations in division (D) of this section,
additional permitted uses allowed and incorporated in the P-GC District, as
defined, as applicable, in division (C) of this section.
         (a)   Pet kennel (overnight boarding, daycare, spa, hotel);
         (b)   Handgun shooting range (indoor);
         (c)   Boat sales and/or indoor service;
         (d)   RV sales and indoor service;
         (e)   Car rental;
         (f)   Linen supply or laundry service;
         (g)   Commercial kitchen, sales and service;
         (h)   HVAC/air conditioning, sales and service;
         (i)   Distribution retail;
         (j)   Flex commercial;
         (k)   Multiple family dwellings substantially as laid out in the
attached development plan;
         (l)   Facilities for preparation, assembly, distribution, or sale of
food, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, or other consumer-oriented services or
products;
         (m)   Electronics facility;
         (n)   Greenhouse, nursery, or other plant or gardening oriented uses;
         (o)   Light sheet metal facility;
         (p)   Dance, gymnastics, martial arts, cross fit, yoga, golf
simulator, gym, and other similar athletic instructions or services or
facilities;
         (q)   Axe-throwing, laser-tag, and other similar retail entertainment
facilities;
         (r)   Convenience store or market;
         (s)   Office;
         (t)   Pharmacy;
         (u)   Restaurant or bakery;
         (v)   Salon;
         (w)   Ceramics facility;
         (x)   Machine shop; and
         (y)   Maker's space.
   (C)   Definitions. The following terms used in division (B)(2) of this
section have these meanings, all subject to the limitations in division (D) of
this section:
      (1)   PET KENNEL. A shelter or housing service for the breeding or
boarding of household animals such as cats or dogs, consisting mostly of indoor
space with only incidental or relatively small outdoor pet areas.
      (2)   LINEN SUPPLY OR LAUNDRY SERVICE. An establishment that customizes,
mends, cleans, stores, supplies, and/or delivers linen, clothing, and/or
uniforms.
      (3)   COMMERCIAL KITCHEN. Either (i) a kitchen designed to prepare food
in large volumes, generally meaning sufficient to serve more than one or two
households, or (ii) a kitchen where customers can participate in educational
instruction relating to cooking or preparation of food.
      (4)   DISTRIBUTION RETAIL. A facility for the receipt, storage, sorting,
labeling, light assembly, and/or preparation of goods or products for delivery
to the end user.
      (5)   FLEX COMMERCIAL. An establishment containing a mixture of office,
warehouse, and/or retail space.
      (6)   MACHINE SHOP. A workshop with tools or equipment and related
materials and inventory relating to the production, repair or customization of
mechanical items by CNC, 3D printing, or other similar technology.
      (7)   ELECTRONIC FACILITY. A workshop with tools or equipment and related
materials and
inventory relating to electronic goods and services, including electronic goods
repair and service, and including renewable energy products like solar panels,
batteries, and related items.
      (8)   LIGHT SHEET METAL FACILITY. A workshop with tools or equipment and
related materials and inventory relating to sheet metal fabrication and
customization.
      (9)   CERAMICS FACILITY. An establishment (i) for the creation of
ceramics products, and/or (ii) where customers can participate in ceramics
creation, painting, or customization.
      (10)   MAKER'S SPACE. A workshop of tools, equipment and related
materials and inventory where self-directed makers can individually or
collaboratively create, produce, repair, or customize creative or artistic
projects.
   (D)   Limitations (nuisance/indoor use/size/compatibility).
      (1)   No use is permitted if a reasonable person would find the use to
produce vibration, noise, fumes or other nuisances that is reasonably expected
to be unpleasant, offensive, or disturbing or pose safety or environmental
hazards to the public or any neighboring property. The definition of any use
may be interpreted more restrictively than Brigham City code. Further, the
definition may also be interpreted by a homeowner association established in
the P-District to address vibration, noise, fumes or other nuisance as defined
in their governing area. All machinery, equipment, materials, and inventory
must be stored indoors. No outdoor operations will be permitted. No workshop or
facility will be more than 15,000 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   In any building/structure that includes residential use (i.e. live/
work unit, townhome or apartment above a commercial space), the permitted non-
residential use is limited to compatible residential uses of retail, studio,
services, or office and the hours of operation of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
daily.
   (E)   Development plan. The submitted site plan and elevations incorporated
as Exhibits "A" and "B"
respectively, shall serve as the general "development plan" for the 1100 South
1100 West Street Planned District. Any significant revision to the development
plan requires an amendment to this Planned District. The applicable land use
application for final design and construction plans shall be submitted for
Planning Commission review and approval. The exact layout and number of units
may differ from the submitted site plan based upon site design adjustments and
parking requirements.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 5-2-2024)
§ 156.202 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   The following provisions shall apply in this Planned District, which
district shall also be subject to other provisions of the City Code, except
where conflict in regulations occurs, the regulations specified in these
sections, or on the development plan approved pursuant to these sections shall
apply.
   (A)   Standards for area, coverage, density, yard requirements (setbacks),
height regulations, parking, lighting, and signage shall be governed by (i) for
all residential parcels as depicted in the development plan the standards of
the R-M-30 District, and (ii) for all commercial parcels as depicted in the
development plan, the standards of the GC District, City Code sections on sign
regulations and off-street parking requirements.
   (B)   Standards for public improvements shall be governed by applicable
adopted city ordinances and laws, including the current adopted edition of the
Brigham City Public Work Standards.
   (C)   Landscaping and screening.
      (1)   Landscaping shall be governed by the standards of the development
plan and (i) for all residential parcels and uses, the R-M-30 District, and
(ii) for all commercial parcels and uses, as defined in the GC District.
      (2)   Plantings shall include drought tolerant designs where appropriate.
      (3)   The landscape and screening plan shall be submitted with the final
design and construction plans for Planning Commission review and approval.
      (4)   Trees adequately spaced and separated throughout the residential
areas of the Planned District, according to a final landscaping plan approved
by the City Forester.
      (5)   Loading docks/bays in the commercial areas.
   (D)   Architectural controls. New building construction is intentionally
allowed to be flexible and creative. The architecture shall substantially
follow the thematic elevations in Exhibit "B". Where the thematic elevations do
not provide specificity then (i) for all residential parcels, the standards in
the R-M-30 District shall apply, and (ii) for all commercial parcels, the
standards in the GC District shall apply.
   (E)   Fencing plan. The fencing plan shall be submitted with the final
design and construction plans for Planning Commission review and approval.
Fencing shall be required only along perimeters of the Planned District, and
not within any interior of the Planned District; provided, however, the
property owner may elect to provide certain interior fencing within the Planned
District subject to Planning Commission review and approval of the fencing
plan.
   (F)   Phasing plan. Phasing shall be permitted. Phasing plans shall be
submitted with the final design and construction plans for Planning Commission
review and approval.
   (G)   Recreation and playground areas. Usable recreation area standards for
the residential parcels will be as required under the R-M-30 District, subject
to the following superseding clarifications: (i) any on-site, above grade storm
drainage detention basin may count toward a portion of the recreation area if
the applicant provides sufficient evidence that the basin is safe for
recreational purposes and usable pertaining to the area, slope and landscape,
(ii) indoor recreational facilities shall count toward the required square
footage and may include club rooms, fitness areas, spas, game rooms and other
similar facilities, (iii) pathways or trails within the designated areas may be
included in the calculation (although portions of sidewalks which border a
parking lot and/or building are not considered recreation area).
   (H)   Trail alignment. All alignments of trails within the development will
be substantially as depicted in the site plan attached as Exhibit "A".
   (I)   Cross access with neighboring parcel. The development must have one or
more cross access easement agreements with the parcel located adjacent to the
southwest corner of the development.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 5-2-2024)
§ 156.203 CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Conflict. Whenever regulations in these sections conflict with other
provisions of the Brigham City Code, the provisions of these sections shall
govern. If there is a conflict in these sections with the development plan, the
development plan shall prevail. Whenever regulations of these sections conflict
with address matters that are not addressed by the development plan, then said
provisions of these sections shall govern. Whenever regulations of other
provisions of the Brigham City Code address matters that are not addressed by
these sections, then said other provisions of Brigham City Code shall govern.
   (B)   Severability. These sections and the various parts, subsections, and
clauses are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is
hereby declared that the remainder of the sections shall not be affected
thereby. The City Council of Brigham City, Utah, hereby declares that it would
have passed these sections on each part, subsection, paragraphs, sentence,
clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more portions
thereof be declared invalid.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 5-2-2024)
§ 156.204 EXHIBITS.
Exhibit "A" Legal Description and Site Map/Development Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3358.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3356.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3354.png]
 
1100 South 1100 West Planned District Development Plan (PDF)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3352.png]
 
Exhibit "B" 1100 South 1100 West Planned District Elevations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3350.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3348.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3346.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3344.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3342.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3340.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3338.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3336.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3334.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3332.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3330.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3328.png]
 
TANNEVISTA PLANNED DISTRICT
§ 156.210 ORIGIN.
   The Tannevista Planned District was established by Ord. 97-22, as an
ordinance creating a Planned District “P” at the Tannevista Development
Property. The development property with the exception of the “access area” from
State Highway 89-91 are properties within the Tannevista Subdivision, recorded
3-27-1998. The Tannevista Subdivision, four buildable lots and one non-
buildable lot on 33.44 acres, replaced Tannevista, A planned unit development
subdivision platted in 1977, which contained three lots on 6.41 acres. Ord. 97-
22, included and attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit “A”,
which contains the planned unit development agreement, remains a binding
document with the exception of the amendments made to Lot 4 as outlined in §
156.214 of this chapter. Standards and regulations and the amendment to
Tannevista Planned Unit development agreement are included and attached to the
ordinance codified herein as Exhibit “B”.
(Prior Code, § 29.17.010) (Ord. 97-22, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. passed 4-12-
2019; Ord. 19-15, passed 6-6-2019)
§ 156.211 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of the Tannevista Planned District is to provide for
the orderly and comprehensive development of a hillside property that is
located in a highly visible sensitive hillside location and affects the
identity and image of the city. The intent is to promote a high quality,
limited rural residential development alternative for the subject property.
(Prior Code, § 29.17.020) (Ord. 97-22, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. passed 4-12-
2019; Ord. 19-15, passed 6-6-2019)
§ 156.212 PLANNED DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Tannevista Planned District shall apply to all properties located
within the Tannevista Subdivision shown as Exhibit “C”, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
   (B)   Zoning district: P-MU-160 (Planned – Multiple Use District – 160
acres).
(Prior Code, § 29.17.030) (Ord. 97-22, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. passed 4-12-
2019; Ord. 19-15, passed 6-6-2019)
§ 156.213 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All lots within the Tannevista Subdivision are subject to the
requirements of the Tannevista Planned Unit development agreement as outlined
and described in Ord. 97-22 and the executed agreement dated 2-8-1977, both
included and attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit “A”.
   (B)   Lot 4, Tannevista Subdivision, shall be subject to the following
additional requirements:
      (1)   One single-family residential unit;
      (2)   A maximum of four accessory buildings with a combined footprint
area not exceeding 12,000 square feet, all to be congregated within a
designated building area or limit of disturbance;
      (3)   (a)   The location of building area, or limit of disturbance, is
designated on the 2005 approved site plan for the dwelling building permit on
Lot 4 shown as Exhibit “D”, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
         (b)   An updated site plan showing the building area, or limit of
disturbance, is to be submitted with the building plans for the proposed
detached two-story garage addressing the current status of Lot 4, and to be
included as Exhibit “E”, attached to the ordinance codified herein; and
      (4)   Accessory building colors are to be earth tone in order to blend in
with hillside. The exterior of the buildings are to be of non-reflective
materials.
   (C)   An accessory building rear yard and side yard regulation (minimum
setback from property line) is ten feet unless a public utility easement
dictates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 29.17.040) (Ord. 97-22, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. passed 4-12-
2019; Ord. 19-15, passed 6-6-2019; Ord. 21-08, passed 6-17-2021)
§ 156.214 CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Conflict. Whenever regulations in this subchapter conflict with other
provisions of the city code, the provisions of this subchapter shall govern.
Whenever regulations of other provisions of the city code address matters that
are not addressed by this subchapter, then said other provisions shall govern.
   (B)   Severability. This subchapter and the various parts, sections and
clauses are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is
hereby declared that the remainder of the subchapter shall not be affected
thereby. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
subchapter on each part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more portions thereof be
declared invalid.
(Prior Code, § 29.17.050) (Ord. 97-22, passed 10-16-1997; Ord. passed 4-12-
2019; Ord. 19-15, passed 6-6-2019)
§ 156.215 EXHIBITS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3172.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3170.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3168.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3166.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3164.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3162.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3160.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3158.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3156.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3154.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3152.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3150.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3148.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3146.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3144.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3142.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3140.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3138.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3136.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3134.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3132.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3130.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3126.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3128.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3124.png]
SENSITIVE AREAS OVERLAY ZONES
§ 156.230 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for safe, orderly and
beneficial development of property within areas characterized by diversity of
physiographic conditions and shown on the City Zoning Map as “Sensitive Areas
Overlay Zone”; to limit alteration of topography and reduce encroachment upon,
or alteration of, such areas.
   (B)   Physiographic conditions can be considered to include, but are not
limited to, slope of the land, natural drainage ways, wetlands, soil
characteristics, potential landslide areas, faults zones and wildfire hazard
areas.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.010) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.231 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The type of regulation applicable to the land depends upon the
classification in which the land is placed, as provided in §
156.234 of this chapter.
   (B)   If those regulations conflict with other regulations of the city’s
municipal code, the more stringent of the two regulations shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.020) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.232 SENSITIVE AREAS OVERLAY MAP.
   (A)   A map showing the sensitive areas overlay which specifies critical
areas within the city which, when proposed for development, must go through the
process outlined in this subchapter.
   (B)   Properties within this overlay may not be suitable for development or
may only be suitable after mitigation of the hazards associated with the
specific site.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.030) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.233 ALL DEVELOPMENTS(S) TO BE CONSIDERED A CONDITIONAL USE IN SENSITIVE
AREAS.
   Because of the environmental conditions existing within sensitive areas, all
developments proposed within an area determined to be a sensitive area shall be
considered a conditional use and shall be reviewed and considered consistent
with the procedures for the review of a conditional use as provided in §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.040) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.234 LAND CLASSIFICATIONS.
   The following factors shall be used to determine the classifications of
various lands and their constraints to building and development on them:
   (A)   Floodplain corridor lands. Lands with potential stream flow and flood
hazard. The following lands are classified as floodplain corridor lands:
      (1)   All land contained within the 100-year floodplain as defined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, in maps adopted by the city municipal
code;
      (2)   All land within the area defined as floodplain corridor land in
maps adopted by the City Council as provided for in §
156.236 of this chapter;
      (3)   All lands which have physical or historical evidence of flooding in
the historical past; and
      (4)   All areas within 20 feet (horizontal distance) of any creek
designated for riparian preservation in division (B) below and depicted as such
on maps adopted by the Council as provided for in §
156.236 of this chapter.
   (B)   Riparian preservation and wetland areas. The lands shown on the
official maps as riparian areas. These areas are identified as 75 feet from the
stream centerline for streams draining a basin of greater than one square mile,
and 25 feet from a stream that drain areas of one square mile or less. It also
includes any areas identified as wetlands or riparian in a Federal Section 404
Permit Process;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3021.jpg]
   (C)   Erosive and slope failure lands. Lands with potential erosion hazards.
Erosive lands and slope failure lands are lands that are subject to damage from
erosion and slope failure, or defined as erosion and slope failure lands on the
sensitive area overlay map (see §
156.232 of this chapter) and have a slope of 25% or greater;
   (D)   Earthquake fault and hazard lands. Lands with identified earthquake
faults and areas prone associated earthquake hazards such as debris flows,
landslides, liquefaction and rock falls, as defined on the sensitive area
overlay map (see §
156.232 of this chapter);
   (E)   Wildfire hazard lands. Lands with potential of wildfire, as defined on
the sensitive area overlay map (see §
156.232 of this chapter);
   (F)   Sever constraint lands. Lands with severe development limitations
which generally limit normal development. The following lands are classified as
severe constraint lands:
      (1)   All areas which are within the floodway channels; and
      (2)   All lands with a slope greater the 25%.
   (G)   Classifications cumulative. The above classifications are cumulative
in their effect and, if a parcel of land falls under two or more
classifications, it shall be subject to the regulations of each classification.
Those restrictions applied shall pertain only to those portions of the land
being developed and not necessarily to the whole parcel.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.050) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.235 REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT IN SENSITIVE AREAS.
   The Community Development Department, prior to scheduling any application
for a development proposed to be located wholly or partially, within any
sensitive area as identified by this subchapter, shall receive comments and
recommendations from city departments and other reviewing agencies, as
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.060) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.236 FLOODPLAIN CORRIDOR LANDS.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
      (1)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
         (a)   Protect human life and health;
         (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
         (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
         (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
         (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
         (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and
         (g)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area.
      (2)   Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its
purposes, this section uses the following methods:
         (a)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
         (b)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
         (c)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;
         (d)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
         (e)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
      (3)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
         APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.
         AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
         AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The
area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After
detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A-1-99, VO, V1-30, VE
or V.
         BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
         BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
         CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
         DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
         ELEVATED BUILDING.
            1.   A non-basement building:
               a.   Built, in the case of a building in Zones A-1-30, AE, A,
A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the
case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground
level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to
the floor of the water; and
               b.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In the case of Zones A-1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, ELEVATED
BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters.
            2.   In the case of Zones V1-30, VE or V, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of ELEVATED BUILDING, even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway
walls met the standards of § 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations.
         EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
         EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
         EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
         FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
            1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
            2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
         FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
         FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface
elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.
         FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
         FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but
not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works and
floodplain management regulations.
         FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
         FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
         FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
         FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
         FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
         HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
         HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
            1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
            2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
            3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
            4.   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
               a.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
               b.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
         LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
         LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
         LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq.
         MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
         MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
         MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
         NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after 12-31-1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
         NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
         RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
            1.   Built on a single chassis;
            2.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
            3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and
            4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
         START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law No. 97-348)),
being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued; provided, the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
         STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
         SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
         SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
            1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
            2.   Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
         VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of the
ordinance contained herein when specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship. A VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this section. (For full
requirements, see § 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
         VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program, which is
codified in § 60.03 of C.F.R. Title 44, is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
         WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
      (4)   General provisions.
         (a)   Lands to which this section applies. The section shall apply to
all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
         (b)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The
areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance
Study” for Brigham City, dated 9-29-2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions
thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
section. The city automatically adopts all effective FEMA Flood Insurance Rate
Studies, and all FEMA effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
         (c)   Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall
be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this section.
         (d)   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
section and other applicable regulations.
         (e)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section is not
intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this section and another ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
         (f)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
section, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements; liberally
construed in favor of the governing body; and deemed neither to limit nor
repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
         (g)   Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare
occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased
by human-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside
the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on
the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
      (5)   Administration.
         (a)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Mayor’s
appointee is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this section and other appropriate sections of 44
C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
         (b)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
            1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this section;
            2.   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed
building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
            3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development
permits required by adoption of this section;
            4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344) from which prior approval is
required;
            5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;
            6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
State Coordinating Agency which is the Utah NFIP Coordinator, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
            7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
            8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance herewith, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division (B)(6) below;
            9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zones A-1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community; and
            10.   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A-1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot; provided
that, the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(Conditional Letter of Map Revision).
         (c)   Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be
presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations,
existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured
homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood
hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
            1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
            2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be flood-proofed;
            3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the non- residential flood proofed structure shall meet the
flood-proofing criteria hereof;
            4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
            5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
division (B)(3) above.
         (d)   Approval or denial of a development permit. Approval or denial
of a development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all
of the provisions of this section and the following relevant factors:
            1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
            3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
            4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
            7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
            8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
            10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan for that area.
      (e)   Variance procedures.
            1.   The Appeal Authority as established by the community shall
hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
this section.
            2.   The Appeal Authority shall hear and render judgment on an
appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision
or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this section.
            3.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal
Authority may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
            4.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
            5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
            6.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in division (B)(3)(b) above have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
            7.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this section, the Appeal Authority may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this section.
            8.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
            9.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
            10.   Prerequisites for granting variances.
               a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
               b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
                  i.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
                  ii.   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
                  iii.   A determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
               c.   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
            11.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided that:
               a.   The criteria outlined in divisions (B)(4)(a) through (B)(4)
(i) above are met; and
               b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety.
      (6)   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
         (a)   General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the
following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements.
            1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
            2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
            3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
            4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
            5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
            6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
            7.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
         (b)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where
base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in divisions (B)(3)
(b), (B)(4)(h) or (B)(5)(c) above, the following provisions are required.
            1.   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (B)(6)(b),
as proposed herein, is satisfied.
            2.   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one foot above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
               a.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this section.
               b.   A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood
proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
            3.   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements,
with fully-enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria.
               a.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
               b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
               c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and
exit of flood waters.
            4.   Manufactured homes.
               a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within
Zone A on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces;
               b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or
substantially improved within Zones A-1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM
on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage”
as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; and
               c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with
Zones A-1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions hereof be elevated so that either:
                  i.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above
the base flood elevation; or
                  ii.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement.
            5.   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles
placed on sites within Zones A-1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM either:
               a.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
               b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
               c.   Meet the permit requirements of division (B)(4)(a) above,
and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” herein. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
         (c)   Standards for subdivision proposals.
            1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with divisions (B)
(2), (B)(3) and (B)(4) above.
            2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
development permit requirements of divisions (B)(3)(c), (B)(4)(c) and (B)(6)
above.
            3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to divisions (B)
(3)(b) or (B)(4)(b)8. above.
            4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
            5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
         (d)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located
within the areas of special flood hazard established herein are areas
designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply.
            1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one
foot above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified).
            2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures:
               a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one
foot above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified); or
               b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy:
                  i.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of
this section, as proposed herein, are satisfied; and
                  ii.   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from
proposed structures.
         (e)   Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood
hazard established in division (B)(3) above are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply.
            1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted
regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
            2.   If division (B)(5)(e)1. above is satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this division (B)(6).
            3.   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations; provided that, the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.070) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.237 RIPARIAN PRESERVATION LANDS.
   All development in areas identified for riparian preservation, as defined in
§
156.235 of this chapter, shall comply with the following standards.
   (A)   Development shall be subject to all development standards for
floodplain corridor lands. (See §
156.236 of this chapter.)
   (B)   Within these areas in addition to the standards for undeveloped
floodplains, no land disturbing activity is allowed, except as permitted in
this section.
   (C)   (1)   Up to 10% of the area may be disturbed for private yard
structures including, but not limited to, storage sheds, gardens, yards, trails
and clearings, except no disturbance is permitted for Section 404 Permit
identified areas;
      (2)   Repair, replacement or improvement of utility facilities where:
         (a)   The disturbed portion of the riparian preservation lands is
restored; and
         (b)   Non-native vegetation is removed from the riparian preservation
lands and replaced with natural vegetation.
      (3)   Additions, alterations, rehabilitation or replacement of existing
structures that do not increase existing structural footprint in the riparian
preserve lands where the disturbed portion of the area is restored using native
vegetative cover;
      (4)   Stream, wetland, riparian and upland enhancement or restoration
projects;
      (5)   Farming practices and farm uses, excluding buildings and
structures, and the pasturing of livestock within 25 feet of the stream;
      (6)   Routine repair and maintenance of existing structures, roadways,
driveways, utility facilities, accessory uses and other development; and
      (7)   Measures to remove or abate nuisances, or any other violation of
state statute, administrative agency rule or city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.080) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.238 EROSIVE AND SLOPE FAILURE LANDS.
   (A)   All development that removes vegetation or disturbs topsoil and leaves
the disturbed soil at a slope of 50% or more shall comply with the following
standards.
      (1)   (a)   Any exposed soil shall be revegetated in a manner to
reestablish a vegetative community within a one-year period from issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
         (b)   If irrigation is not provided, then the exposed soil must be
planted with species that can survive without irrigation.
      (2)   Vegetative cover, rock, dry or conventional masonry, or other
permanent cover must be maintained on areas that have been disturbed.
      (3)   These restrictions shall not apply to areas of exposed bedrock
which exhibit no erosion potential.
   (B)   (1)   In addition, any cuts and/or fills greater than 250 cubic yards
must be designed by an engineer to comply with current Building Code. Such cuts
and/or fills shall be designed in such a manner that they will be stable for
the use intended.
      (2)   If the excavation is not a dedicated street or a public right-of-
way, the engineer shall declare to the city, after the cut and/or fill is
completed, that it was constructed to plans and meets all standards set forth
in the plans approved.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall abridge the city’s right to inspect
work in progress or in its completed state, to make appropriate measurements
and tests to determine if the cut and fill was made according to plan and to
require alterations prior to final approval of the cut and/or fill.
   (C)   (1)   Any development that is proposed in erosive and slope failure
lands must be shown on a master site plan at the time the final plan or plat is
filed.
      (2)   All development must comply with the master site plan. Any
improvements necessary for the implementation of the master plan (e.g., storm
drains, gutters and the like), which involve two or more parcels of land must
be constructed by the applicant prior to any development occurring on the
parcels.
   (D)   All structures in erosive and slope failure lands shall have
foundations that have been designed by an engineer or architect.
   (E)   All newly created lots or lots modified by a lot line adjustment must
include a building envelope on all lots that contains a buildable area of
sufficient size to accommodate the uses permitted in the underlying zone
without including erosive and slope failure land, unless the division or lot
line adjustment is for open space or conservation purposes.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.090) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.239 EARTHQUAKE FAULT AND HAZARD LANDS.
   For those areas identified as an active or potential mapped earthquake fault
and landslide areas, development may be permitted by the city upon the review
and approval of an engineering geotechnical report (see § 156.241 of this
chapter) identifying the following:
   (A)   Accurately identifying the location of earthquake faults and landslide
areas;
   (B)   The location and description of proposed changes to the site,
including any grading and excavation, vegetation removal, the location and
profiles of proposed roadways, the location of proposed utility lines, the
location of existing and proposed buildings and structures, and the location of
all other proposed site features;
   (C)   The identification of measures and actions proposed to mitigate the
risks from earthquake, landslides and soil disturbance including a schedule of
the sequence for the installation of planned mitigation actions, including
anticipated starting and completion dates; and
   (D)   No critical facility (excluding transportation lines or utilities
which by their nature) may cross active faults or structures designed for human
occupancy shall be built astride an active fault. No structure designed for
human occupancy shall be built on a fault scarp. Footing setbacks from a fault
scarp shall meet the requirements of the International Uniform Building Code.
The Planning Commission may increase footing setback requirements where
information from a geotechnical report indicates a slope condition warrant a
greater setback distance.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.100) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.240 WILDFIRE HAZARDS LANDS.
   (A)   Requirements for subdivisions or planned developments.
      (1)   A Fire Prevention and Control Plan shall be required with the
submission of any application for plan approval of a planned unit development
or preliminary plat of a subdivision, which contains areas designated wildfire
hazard areas.
      (2)   The Community Development Department shall forward the Fire
Prevention and Control Plan to the Director of Emergency Services within three
days of the receipt of a completed application. The Director of Emergency
Services shall review the Fire Prevention and Control Plan, and submit a
written report to the Community Development Department no less than seven days
before the scheduled hearing. The Director of Emergency Services report shall
be a part of the record of the planning action.
      (3)   The Fire Prevention and Control Plan shall include the following
items:
         (a)   An analysis of the wildfire hazards on the site, as influenced
by existing vegetation and topography;
         (b)   A map showing the areas that are to be cleared of dead, dying or
severely diseased vegetation;
         (c)   A map of the areas that are to be thinned to reduce the
interlocking canopy of trees;
         (d)   A tree management plan showing the location of all trees that
are to be preserved and removed on each lot. In the case of heavily forested
parcels, only trees scheduled for removal shall be shown;
         (e)   The areas of primary and secondary fuel breaks that are required
to be installed around each structure, as required by this section; and
         (f)   Roads and driveways sufficient for emergency vehicle access and
fire suppression activities, including the slope of all roads and driveways
within the wildfire lands area.
      (4)   The Land Use Authority shall approve the Fire Prevention and
Control Plan when, in addition to the findings required by this chapter, the
additional finding is made that the wildfire hazards present on the property
have been reduced to a reasonable degree, balanced with the need to preserve
and/or plant a sufficient number of trees and plants for erosion prevention,
wildlife habitat and aesthetics.
      (5)   The Land Use Authority may require, through the imposition of
conditions attached to the approval, the following requirements as deemed
appropriate for the development of the property:
         (a)   Delineation of areas of heavy vegetation to be thinned and a
formal plan for such thinning;
         (b)   Clearing of sufficient vegetation to reduce fuel load;
         (c)   Removal of all dead and dying trees; and
         (d)   Relocation of structures and roads to reduce the risks of
wildfire and improve the chances of successful fire suppression.
      (6)   (a)   The Fire Prevention and Control Plan shall be implemented
during the public improvements required of a subdivision or planned unit
development, and shall be considered part of the subdivider’s obligations for
land development. The plan shall be implemented prior to the issuance of any
building permit for structures to be located on lots created by partitions and
for subdivisions or planned unit development not requiring public improvements.
         (b)   The Director of Emergency Services, or designee, shall inspect
and approve the implementation of the Fire Prevention and Control Plan, and the
plan shall not be considered fully implemented until the Director of Emergency
Services has given written notice to the Community Development Department that
the plan was completed as approved by the Land Use Authority.
      (7)   In subdivisions or planned unit developments, provisions for the
maintenance of the Fire Prevention and Control Plan shall be included in the
covenants, conditions and restrictions for the development, and the city shall
be named as a beneficiary of such covenants, conditions and restrictions.
   (B)   Requirements for construction of all structures.
      (1)   All new construction and any construction expanding the size of an
existing structure, shall have a “fuel break”, as defined below.
      (2)   A FUEL BREAK is defined as an area which is free of dead or dying
vegetation, and has native, fast-burning species sufficiently thinned so that
there is no interlocking canopy of this type of vegetation. Where necessary for
erosion control or aesthetic purposes, the fuel break may be planted in slow-
burning species. Fuel breaks do not involve stripping the ground of all native
vegetation.
      (3)   A primary fuel break will be installed, maintained and shall extend
a minimum of 30 feet in all directions around structures, excluding fences on
the property. The goal within this area is to remove ground cover that will
produce flame lengths in excess of one foot. Such a fuel break shall be
increased by five feet for each 10% increase in slope over 10%.
      (4)   A secondary fuel break will be installed, maintained and shall
extend a minimum of 100 feet beyond the primary fuel break where surrounding
landscape is owned and under the control of the property owner during
construction. The goal of the secondary fuel break is to reduce fuels so that
the overall intensity of any wildfire is reduced through fuels control.
      (5)   All structures shall be constructed or re-roofed with Class B or
better non-wood roofing materials, as determined by the current Building Code.
All re-roofing of existing structures in the wildfire lands area shall be done
under approval of a zoning permit. No structure shall be constructed or re-
roofed with wooden shingles, shakes, wood-product material or other combustible
roofing material, as defined in the current Building Code.
      (6)   Fuel breaks in areas which are also erosive or slope failure lands
shall be included in the erosion control measures outlined in §
156.238 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.110) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.241 SEVERE CONSTRAINT LANDS.
   (A)   Severe constraint lands are extremely sensitive to development,
grading, filling or vegetation removal and, whenever possible, alternative
development should be considered.
   (B)   Development of floodways is not permitted, except for bridges and road
crossings. Such crossings shall be designed to pass the 100-year flood without
raising the upstream flood height more than six inches.
   (C)   New structures are not allowed on severe constraints lands.
   (D)   Other development of land or approval for a planning action shall be
allowed only when the following study has been accomplished. An engineering
geologic study approved by the City Engineer, Public Works Department and
Community Development Department establishes that the site is stable for the
proposed use and development. The study shall include the following:
      (1)   Index map;
      (2)   Project description to include location, topography, drainage,
vegetation and discussion of previous work and discussion of field exploration
methods;
      (3)   Site geology, based on a surficial survey, to include site geologic
maps, description of bedrock and surficial materials, including artificial
fill, locations of any faults, folds and the like, and structural data
including bedding, jointing and shear zones, soil depth and soil structure;
      (4)   Discussion of any off-site geologic conditions that may pose a
potential hazard to the site, or that may be affected by on-site development;
      (5)   Suitability of site for proposed development from a geologic
standpoint;
      (6)   Specific recommendations for cut slope stability, seepage and
drainage control or other design criteria to mitigate geologic hazards;
      (7)   If deemed necessary by the engineer or geologist to establish
whether an area to be affected by the proposed development is stable,
additional studies and supportive data shall include cross-sections showing
subsurface structure, graphic logs with subsurface exploration, results of
laboratory test and references;
      (8)   Signature and registration number of the engineer and/or geologist;
and
      (9)   Additional information or analyses as necessary to evaluate the
site.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.120) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.242 ENGINEERING GEOTECHNICAL REPORT.
   (A)   The engineering geotechnical report shall be prepared by a licensed
geotechnical engineer and licensed geologist. The report shall be signed and
dated by the preparer and shall also include the qualifications of the
preparer.
   (B)   The report shall be site-specific and identify all known or suspected
potential geotechnical or natural hazards, originating on-site or off-site,
affecting the particular property.
   (C)   The report shall include a detailed site map (scale: one inch equals
200 feet or larger) showing the location of the hazard(s) with delineation of
the recommended setback distances from such hazards(s) and the recommended
location for proposed structures.
   (D)   The report shall address the potential effects of the hazard(s) on the
proposed development and occupants, thereof, in terms of risk and potential
damage.
   (E)   (a)   The report shall contain recommendations for avoidance or
mitigation of the effects of the hazard(s). The evidence on which the
recommendations and conclusions are based shall be clearly stated in the
report.
      (b)   Trench logs (scale: one inch equals five feet or larger), aerial
photographs, references with citations and other supporting information as
applicable, shall also be included in the report.
   (F)   All engineering geotechnical report submitted to the city shall be
reviewed by the Utah Geological Survey for completeness, accuracy and
appropriate recommendations.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.130) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
§ 156.243 DISCLOSURE OF A NATURAL HAZARD BY AN ENGINEERING GEOTECHNICAL REPORT.
   Whenever a potential natural hazard is identified by a required geotechnical
report under this subchapter, the owner of such parcel shall record a
restrictive covenant running with the land in a form satisfactory to the city
prior to the approval of any development or subdivision of such parcel which
shall include the following:
   (A)   Notice of the existence and availability of the engineering
geotechnical report that identifies the natural hazards for public inspection
in the city’s Community Development office; and
   (B)   An agreement by the owner of the parcel and any successor in interest
to comply with any conditions set by the city’s Planning Commission to minimize
potential adverse effects of the natural hazard(s).
(Prior Code, § 29.18.140) (Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007)
AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 156.255 SAVING CLAUSE.
   (A)   The repeal of the prior existing subchapter, in its entirety, shall
not:
      (1)   Affect suits pending or rights existing immediately prior to the
effective date of this subchapter; or
      (2)   Impair, avoid or affect any grant or conveyance made or right
acquired or cause of action now existing under any repealed provision or
amendment thereto.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter, insofar as they are the same or
substantially the same as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not as a new enactment.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.010)
§ 156.256 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and
property of users in the Brigham City Airport and of occupants of land or to
property in its vicinity. Such hazard also reduces the size of the area
available for landing, taking off and maneuvering of aircraft, and it tends to
destroy or impair the utility of the Brigham City Municipal Airport and the
public investment therein.
   (B)   Accordingly, it is declared:
      (1)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Brigham City Municipal
Airport;
      (2)   It is necessary in the interest of public health, public safety and
general welfare that the creation or establishment of an airport hazard be
prevented; and
      (3)   The prevention of those hazards should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation.
   (C)   It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or
establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration,
mitigation or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public
purposes for which political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds and
acquire lands or interests in land.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.020)
§ 156.257 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   These regulations reinforce specific provisions in the city’s
municipal airport master plan, as amended and the city’s General Plan, as
amended.
   (B)   The boundary of any officially recognized “airport overlay zones”
shall be as it appears on a map and/or other documents approved by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.030)
§ 156.258 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. The Brigham City Municipal Airport or any area of land designated
and used for the landing and taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet from mean sea level (MSL). This elevation is 4,225.5 MSL as of
the date of this subchapter.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or use of land which actually or potentially
obstructs the airspace required for the safe flight of air craft in landing or
taking off at an airport.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
156.263 of this chapter. In plan, the perimeter of the APPROACH SURFACE
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones are set
forth in §
156.263 of this chapter.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet.
   F.A.R. PART 77. Federal Aviation Administration regulations pertaining to
height and obstruction criteria within prescribed distances from an airport as
these regulations currently exist and as may be amended from time to time. PART
77 REGULATIONS may also affect lands located outside the boundaries of the
defined airport influence area.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in §
156.264(G) of this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be the
mean sea level (MSL) elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   LDN. Yearly day-night average sound level.
   MSL. Mean sea level.
   NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-
precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. It also
means a runway for which a non-precision approach system is planned and is so
indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
156.264(G) of this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver,
an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.
      (1)   A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing
an instrument landing system (ILS), a precision approach radar (PAR), a global
positioning system (GPS), a transponder landing system (TLS) or other systems
providing both horizontal and vertical guidance.
      (2)   It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is
planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
      (1)   When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the PRIMARY
SURFACE extends 500 feet beyond each side of the runway and 200 feet beyond the
end of that runway.
      (2)   The elevation of any point on the PRIMARY SURFACE is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks,
earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES.
      (1)   These surfaces extend outward at ninety degree angles to the runway
centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet
horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
      (2)   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the precision approach
surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface,
extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the
approach surface and at ninety degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.040)
§ 156.259 AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The city’s Planning Commission is designated as the “Airport Zoning
Commission”, as prescribed in Utah Code.
   (B)   In this subchapter and state law, any references to the “Airport
Zoning Commission” shall mean the Brigham City Planning Commission.
   (C)   If the Planning Commission is empowered in this subchapter to take
actions that are duties of the Airport Zoning Commission as prescribed in state
law, the Planning Commission shall be presumed to be functioning as the Airport
Zoning Commission.
   (D)   The Airport Zoning Commission shall recommend boundaries of the
various zones to be established and the regulations to be adopted pertaining to
any airport hazard area and to perform such other duties as may be assigned to
it by the City Council or state law.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.050)
§ 156.260 AIRPORT APPEAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The City Appeal Authority is designated as the “Airport Appeal
Authority”, as prescribed in Utah Code.
   (B)   In this subchapter and state law, any references to the “Airport
Appeal Authority” shall mean the Brigham City Appeal Authority.
   (C)   If the Appeal Authority is empowered in this subchapter to take
actions that are duties of the Airport Appeal Authority as prescribed in state
law, the Appeal Authority shall be presumed to be functioning as the Airport
Appeal Authority.
   (D)   The Airport Appeal Authority shall hear issues pertaining to any
airport hazard area and to perform such other duties as may be assigned to it
by the City Council or state law.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.060)
§ 156.261 SCHEDULE OF USES.
   The following table indicates the uses and conditions required of those uses
within the five designated zones for the airport.
Table of Uses
 Airport         Traffic Pattern Outer Approach Inner Approach 65 Ldn Noise
 Influence Area  Zone (TPZ)      Zone (OAZ)     Zone (IAZ)     Area (NA)
 (AIA)
Table of Uses
                                                                         Airport   Traffic Outer    Inner    65
                                                                         Influence Pattern Approach Approach Ldn
                                                                         Area      Zone    Zone     Zone     Noise
                                                                         (AIA)     (TPZ)   (OAZ)    (IAZ)    Area
                                                                                                             (NA)
Agricultural and recreational
   Amphitheaters                                                      C         C(3)    X        X        X
   Cropland                                                           P         P       P        P        P
   Livestock breeding, parks, playgrounds, zoos, golf courses, riding P         P       P        P        C(2)
stables, water recreation
   Open space                                                         P         P       P        P        P
   Outdoor spectator sports                                           P         C(3)    C(3,4)   X        X
Commercial and industrial
   Offices, retail trade, service commercial, wholesale trade,
warehousing, light industrial, general manufacturing, utilities,         P         C(6)    C(4)     C(1)     C(1)
extractive industry
Public
   Parking, cemeteries                                                P         P       P        C(5)     C
                                                                                                             (2,5)
   Schools, libraries, churches                                       C(6)      C(4)    C(3,4)   X        X
Residential
   Single-family, multi-family, accessory apartments, residential     C(6)      C(4)    C(3,4)   X        X
facilities for elderly/handicapped
NOTES TO TABLE:
(1) If allowed, avigation easements and disclosure must be required as a condition of development.
(2) Any structures associated with uses allowed in the 65 Ldn noise contour must be located outside the 65 Ldn
noise contour.
(3) If no reasonable alternative exists, use should be located as far from extended centerline as possible.
(4) If allowed, disclosure of airport proximity must be required as a condition of development. An avigation
easement should be considered based on proximity to runway centerline.
(5) Transportation facilities in the 65 Ldn noise contour (i.e., roads, railroads, waterways) must be configured
to comply with Part 77 requirements.
(6) Disclosure of airport proximity should be required as a condition of development.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.070)
§ 156.262 AIRPORT MASTER PLAN.
   All uses and regulations pertaining to the Airport Overlay Zone shall be in
compliance with and subject to the provisions of the airport master plan,
airport layout plan, and noise contour map as adopted by the City Council or as
amended and is incorporated into this subchapter by reference as it pertains to
airport land uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.080)
§ 156.263 AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONES.
   In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and
conical surfaces as they apply to the Brigham City Municipal Airport. An area
located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the
zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
   (A)   Airport Influence Area (AIA). An area which is recognized by the City
Council as containing lands which might be affected by noise and/or safety
hazards associated with aircraft operations associated with Brigham City
Municipal Airport. The AIA extends from the airport to the outer edge of the
conical surface.
   (B)   Traffic Pattern Zone (TPZ). This zone extends from the centerline of
Runway 35/17 to the outer edge of the horizontal surface.
   (C)   65Ldn Noise Area (NA). The area within the 65 decibel yearly day-night
average sound level.
   (D)   Inner Approach Zone (IAZ). The area within the FAR “Part 77” Approach
Surface for each Runway.
      (1)   Runway 17 Approach Zone. An approach zone is established at the end
of Runway 17 for utility landings and take-offs. The approach zone shall have a
width of 500 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond the end of the runway,
widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 1,010 feet at a distance of 1,700
feet beyond the end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the
centerline of the runway. The approach zone shall rise one foot in height for
each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at
the centerline elevation of the runway and extending to a distance of 5,000
feet from the end of the runway.
      (2)   Runway 35 Precision Approach Zone. A precision instrument approach
zone is established at the end of Runway 35 for precision instrument approach
zone shall have a width of 1,000 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond the end
of the runway; widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 1,750 feet at a
distance of 2,700 feet beyond the end of the runway. The precision instrument
approach zone shall rise one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal
distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the centerline elevation of
the precision instrument runway and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the
end of the runway.
   (E)   Outer Approach Zone (AZ). The area within the FAR “Part 77” Outer
Approach Surface for Runway 35 is established at 10,200 feet from the end of
Runway 35 with a width of 2,500 feet widening thereafter uniformly to a width
of 16,000 feet at a distance of 50,200 feet beyond the end of the runway. This
approach zone will rise one foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal
distance beginning at a point 10,200 feet from and at the centerline elevation
of the precision instrument runway and extending to a point 50,200 feet from
the end of the runway.
   (F)   Transitional Zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
   (G)   Horizontal Zones. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs
of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
Runway 35/17 and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those
arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
   (H)   Conical Zone. The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there
from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3023.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 29.19.090)
§ 156.264 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Conforming uses only;
   (B)   All uses in the Airport Overlay Zones shall be subject to the
regulations of this subchapter and prescribed development standards within the
airport master plan, as amended;
   (C)   Creation of airport hazards prohibited;
   (D)   No variance, permit or use shall be allowed in the airport hazard area
that would create or enhance an airport hazard;
   (E)   Use and operational limitations within the Airport Overlay Zones;
   (F)   No use shall be permitted which:
      (1)   Creates or tends to create electrical interference to navigational
devices and communication between aircraft and airports;
      (2)   Creates or tends to create gas, smoke, dust, glare or other visual
hazards in the atmosphere around airports or in the airport hazard area;
      (3)   Creates or tends to create structures that interfere with aircraft
safety; and
      (4)   Creates or tends to create any type of hazard for the airport that
would inhibit or constrain safe and acceptable airport operations.
   (G)   Except as exempted in division (H) below otherwise provided in this
subchapter, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree
shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this subchapter to a height in
excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such
applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in
question as follows:
      (1)   Runway 17 Visual Approach Zone: one foot in height for each 20 feet
in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the centerline
elevation of the end of the runway and extending a distance of 5,200 feet from
the end of the Runway 17;
      (2)   Runway 35 Precision Instrument Approach Zone: one foot in height
for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and
at the centerline elevation of the end of the runway and extending a distance
of 10,200 feet from the end of the runway;
      (3)   Transition Zone: one foot in height for each seven feet in
horizontal distance beginning at any point 250 feet normal to and at the
elevation of the centerline of the runway, extending 200 feet beyond each end
thereof, and 500 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of the
runway, extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of
150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition, there are established height
limits of one foot vertical height for each seven feet horizontal distance
measured from the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the
approach zone and extending upward and outward to the points where they
intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces;
      (4)   Horizontal Zone: 150 feet above the airport elevation or a height
of 4,225.5 feet above mean sea level (MSL); and
      (5)   Conical Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each one foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the
airport elevation 4,375.5 feet. MSL and extending to a height of 250 feet
4,725.5 feet. MSL feet above the airport elevation.
   (H)   (1)   Any object that would be shielded by existing structures of a
permanent and substantial character or by natural terrain or topographic
features of equal or greater height, and would be located in the congested area
of a city, town or settlement where it is beyond all reasonable doubt that the
structure so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air navigation.
      (2)   Structures up to and including 35 feet in height above the ground
level at its site where the ground elevation at its site is less than or equal
to 35 feet below the height limitations defined in §
156.263(G) of this chapter, and is beyond all reasonable doubt that the
structure will not adversely affect safety in air navigation. If in doubt,
submission of FAA Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction (as described in
this section) shall be used to determine its effect on safety in air
navigation.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.100)
§ 156.265 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   General. Except as provided in division (B) below, and in addition to
all other local notification and permitting requirements, each person who
proposes any of the following construction or alteration shall complete and
submit an FAA Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction, to the local
jurisdiction and to the Federal Aviation Administration in accordance Federal
Aviation Regulation Part 77, Object Affecting Navigable Airspace:
      (1)   Any construction or alteration of more than 200 feet in height
above the ground level at its site; and
      (2)   Any construction or alteration of greater height than an imaginary
surface extending outward and upward at a slope of 100:1 for a horizontal
distance of 20,000 feet from the nearest point of the nearest runway at the
Brigham City Municipal Airport.
   (B)   Exemptions from notification.
      (1)   Any object that would be shielded by existing structures of a
permanent and substantial character or by natural terrain or topographic
features of equal or greater height, and would be located in the congested area
of a city, town or settlement where it is beyond all reasonable doubt that the
structure so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air navigation.
      (2)   Any antenna structure of 20 feet or less in height, except one that
would increase the height of any antenna structure.
   (C)   Time of notice. The notice required under division (A) above must be
submitted at least 30 days before the earlier of the following dates:
      (1)   The date the proposed construction or alteration is to begin; and
      (2)   The date an application for a construction permit is to be filed.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.110)
§ 156.266 AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The City Council may adopt by resolution or enact by ordinance uniform
development standards and procedures for facilities within the airport
property.
(Prior Code, § 29.19.120)
WEST FOREST STREET CORRIDOR OVERLAY
§ 156.280 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   West Forest Street, between Interstate Highway 15 (I-15) and the Union
Pacific Railroad, is a primary gateway corridor into the city. It provides a
direct route into downtown Brigham City from I-15 and the Bear River Migratory
Bird Refuge, and is well situated to accommodate business growth. It is the
purpose and intent of this subchapter to allow business growth on West Forest
Street that is complementary to the city’s goals of promoting a high quality
business environment with a high ratio of jobs per acre and providing an
attractive gateway corridor.
(Prior Code, § 29.21.010) (Ord. 04-10, passed 3-4-2004; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-
19-2007)
§ 156.281 OVERLAY.
   The West Forest Street Corridor Overlay shall apply to all properties
located within the corporate limits of Brigham City designated on the Brigham
City Zoning Map as being subject to the West Forest Street Corridor Overlay.
   (A)   The following uses are allowed within the above referenced area, which
otherwise may not be listed in the underlying zone(s): conditional uses:
church, religious institution.
   (B)   The following uses shall be prohibited within the above referenced
area:
      (1)   Billboards;
      (2)   The following processing and manufacturing uses:
         (a)   Construction of buildings to be sold and moved off the premises;
         (b)   Dairy;
         (c)   Egg handling, sales or processing;
         (d)   Fertilizer and soil conditioner manufacture, processing and/or
sales, providing only non-animal products and by-products are used;
         (e)   Hatchery;
         (f)   Honey extraction;
         (g)   Incinerator, non-accessory;
         (h)   Monument works;
         (i)   Planing mill;
         (j)   Sandblasting; and
         (k)   Tire retreading or vulcanizing.
      (3)   Manufacture of brick, clay, ceramic, cinder, concrete, synthetic
cast stone, plastic and pumice stone products, including, in addition,
manufacture or fabrication of building blocks, tile or pipe from raw materials
for use in building construction or for sewer or drainage purposes;
      (4)   The following recreation uses: drag strip racing;
      (5)   The following sales and related services: ice manufacture, storage
and retail/wholesale sales;
      (6)   The following service activities: kennel, except when conducted
entirely within a sound- proof and air-conditioned building;
      (7)   The following storage and warehousing uses:
         (a)   Coal, fuel and wood yards and offices;
         (b)   Rental of equipment;
         (c)   Garage, public;
         (d)   Junk yard, impound lot or similar use;
         (e)   Storage units, except as provided for in division (C) below; and
         (f)   Warehouse (except where warehousing is incidental to the
principal use, and occupies less than 50% of the interior of a structure).
      (8)   The following transportation uses:
         (a)   Airport;
         (b)   Bus terminal;
         (c)   Freighting, trucking yard or terminal;
         (d)   Drive-it yourself agency;
         (e)   Express office;
         (f)   Taxi stand;
         (g)   Terminal, parking and maintenance facilities; and
         (h)   Transfer company.
      (9)   Sexually oriented business; and
      (10)   Tattoo establishment.
   (C)   Storage units may be considered as a permitted use on properties where
storage units exist as of the effective date of this subchapter, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   The intent of this division (C) is to permit the completion of
storage unit projects on parcels of land where such uses have been previously
approved and where the owner has anticipated expanding the use within the
boundaries of the parcel of land;
      (2)   The parcel of land on which storage units are located exists as a
legal lot or parcel of land on the effective date of this subchapter;
      (3)   Storage units shall not be permitted on parcels of land on which no
storage units have been previously approved, and which exist as legal lots or
parcels of land as of the effective date of this subchapter; and
      (4)   In addition to design review standards contained in §§
156.400 through
156.412 of this chapter, storage units approved subject to this part shall be
subject to the standards in divisions (D) through (H) below.
   (D)   A minimum setback of ten feet shall be maintained from the property
line abutting any public or private street intended for use by the general
public. The setback shall not be encroached upon by parking, buildings or
internal circulation except for approved driveways for access to the property.
   (E)   (1)   Landscaping shall be required on a minimum of 5% of the net area
of the developed site. Net area is the total site area remaining after any
required right-of-way dedication.
      (2)   The required setback in division (D) above may be applied toward
the required 5% landscaping requirement mentioned in division (D) above.
      (3)   Landscape designs shall incorporate live plant materials, which may
include a mixture of turf, ground covers, shrubs and trees, and may also
include decorative pavement areas composed of brick, flagstone, stamped
concrete or other similar materials, but not to include plain asphalt or plain
concrete. Sculptures, patios, fountains or other similar decorative features
may also be incorporated into a landscape plan.
      (4)   Gravel, cobbles or other such materials, may be used as accent
materials, or on limited portions of the plan, but shall not be the primary
material in a landscape plan.
      (5)   Landscaping plans may incorporate water conservation concepts,
however, water conservation or maintenance shall not be accepted as
justifications for eliminating live plant materials.
      (6)   Landscape plans proposing water conservation designs shall be
prepared by a licensed landscape architect. All landscaped areas incorporating
live plant materials shall be provided with an automatic underground irrigation
system, which is encouraged to include water conservation features.
   (F)   Parking lots in excess of 20 stalls shall include landscaping on a
minimum of 5% of the gross site area covered by parking. This landscaping
requirement may apply toward the 5% landscaping requirement mentioned in
division (E) above. Exterior perimeters of the parking lot shall have a minimum
of a five-foot wide landscaping strip, which area may be applied toward the 5%
landscaping requirement mentioned in division (E) above, but shall not apply
toward the 5% landscaping requirement mentioned in this division (F). All
landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatic underground water system
and sprinkling. Landscaping plans for parking lots may incorporate water
conservation concepts when prepared by a licensed landscape architect.
   (G)   (1)   Park strips shall provide separation between the curb of a
public or private street and any sidewalk or other hard-surfaced area adjacent
to the street. The width of the park strip shall be determined by the
application of the Brigham City Public Works Standards and Technical
Specifications, or if a private street, that which is most similar to the
public street standard. If an adjacent park strip is wider than that required
by the Brigham City Public Works Standards and Technical Specifications, the
wider park strip shall be required.
      (2)   Street trees shall be provided within the park strip area. Street
trees shall be chosen from the Brigham City Shade Tree List, with review and
approval by city staff and/or the city’s Planning Commission as otherwise
provided by ordinance.
   (H)   (1)   (a)   Predominant exterior building materials (those materials
which form the bulk of the building excluding roofs, windows, doors and trim,
but including walls, parapets and other major structural features) shall be of
a high quality. These may include the following in order of preference by the
city:
            1.   Brick;
            2.   Sandstone or other native stone;
            3.   Stucco;
            4.   Custom metal siding and panels in combination with other
materials, as a conditional use. This provision is not intended and shall not
be applied to allow the construction of mass-produced or standardized metal
buildings, notwithstanding such buildings may contain other materials as a
veneer or other application;
            5.   Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units;
            6.   Flagstone, river rock and similar rock;
            7.   Pre-cast or tilt-up concrete panels, with customized
decorative features; and
            8.   Wood.
         (b)   These materials may also be used in combination on the same
structure.
      (2)   Colors of predominant facade materials shall be of low reflectance,
subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors,
metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors for predominant facade materials
is discouraged.
      (3)   Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors.
      (4)   Predominant exterior building materials shall not including the
following:
         (a)   Smooth-faced concrete block; and
         (b)   Mass-produced or standardized metal siding or panels.
   (I)   The Community Development Director or designee shall have the
authority to identify and categorize unlisted uses within the listed prohibited
uses based on a finding of substantial similarity of character, original and
impact and the like, to a listed prohibited use, and when so categorized such
use shall thereafter be recognized and treated the same as a listed prohibited
use.
(Prior Code, § 29.21.020) (Ord. 04-10, passed 3-4-2004; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-
19-2007; Ord. 10-01, passed 1-21-2010; Ord. 13-13, passed 4-18-2013)
NORTH SHORE DEVELOPMENT PLANNED DISTRICT
§ 156.295 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NORTH SHORE DEVELOPMENT PLANNED DISTRICT.
   (A)   Definitions. The definitions contained in §
156.020 of this chapter shall apply to this subchapter, except as otherwise
provided herein. The following definitions are specific to this subchapter. In
the event that a definition herein imposes a stricter requirement than a
definition contained elsewhere in this chapter, the stricter requirement shall
apply.
      GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
         (a)   A plan pursuant to §
156.179 of this chapter, consisting of documents and supporting evidence
prepared and endorsed by a qualified professional team, as required by the
Planning Commission.
         (b)   The GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR THE NORTH SHORE DEVELOPMENT
PLANNED DISTRICT provides general guidance as to the approximate location and
proposed density of dwelling units, non-residential building uses and
intensities, open space and land use considered suitable for adjacent
properties.
      HOUSEHOLD PET. Animals ordinarily permitted in state residences and kept
for the company or pleasure of state residents. HOUSEHOLD PETS also includes
tropical fish, amphibians, reptiles or invertebrates of a number that do not
constitute a health hazard or nuisance, and can be safely and humanely kept in
aquariums, cages or enclosures, the cumulative size of which shall not exceed
50 cubic feet per household.
         (a)   HOUSEHOLD PETS shall not include animals such as dogs, cats, or
others that have the potential to escape or become feral and act as predators
on the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge or within the boundary of the North
Shore Development Planned District.
         (b)   HOUSEHOLD PETS shall not include the keeping of “dangerous
animals”, “vicious animals”, “wild animals” or “livestock”, as defined in
Chapter 90 of this code of ordinances.
         (c)   Furthermore, HOUSEHOLD PETS shall not include exotic, pygmy or
dwarf variations of animals defined as either “wild animals” or “livestock” in
Chapter 90 of this code of ordinances, including, but not limited to, miniature
horses, pygmy goats and Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs; notwithstanding, that such
animals may be kept as household pets by residents of other communities.
      NORTH SHORE DEVELOPMENT. A development located in the city containing a
mixture of residential, recreational and open space land uses that will be
governed by the provisions of this subchapter and the General Development Plan
adopted in conjunction with this subchapter and the city’s General Plan to
provide guidance for the development of the project.
      PROPERTY. The private property that is the subject of the North Shore
Development Planned District and General Development Plan.
   (B)   Purposes. The purposes of the North Shore Development Planned District
are:
      (1)   To allow the orderly and beneficial development of the North Shore
Development, a primarily residential community in a rural setting;
      (2)   To promote the economic benefit of the city and the county;
      (3)   To protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the city;
      (4)   To consider the interests of the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge
insomuch as such interests may be impacted by development of the North Shore
Development;
      (5)   To implement the city’s General Plan by controlling the type,
location, density, intensity, and other characteristics of development within
the North Shore Development Area as defined and described in the North Shore
Development General Development Plan;
      (6)   To ensure that appropriate infrastructure and services are
available to support the development of the North Shore Development; and
      (7)   To provide a structure for the review and approval of the design
and infrastructure feature of permitted and conditional uses within the North
Shore Development Planned District.
   (C)   Compliance. All development permits within the North Shore Development
Planned District shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter, the
standards contained herein and the policies of the city General Plan and the
North Shore Development General Development Plan.
   (D)   Public facilities, services. No development in the North Shore
Development shall be approved by the city unless there are available and
adequate public facilities and services as evidenced by meeting the following
standards:
      (1)   The public facilities are currently in place or will be in place
when the development permit is issued and the development permit is conditioned
on the availability of public facilities prior to approval of a final
subdivision plat or final site plan approval for a permitted or conditional
use;
      (2)   The provision of the public facilities are a condition of the
development permit and are guaranteed to be provided at or before the issuance
of a building permit for proposed development in the North Shore Development
Planned District development;
      (3)   The public facilities are under construction;
      (4)   There is an enforceable development agreement guaranteeing that the
facilities will be in place at the time that the impacts of the development
will occur; or
      (5)   The city’s Planning Commission determines that there are
significant overriding public policy considerations or public health, safety
and welfare concerns which warrant the approval of the application in the
absence of evidence that all public facilities and services are adequate and
available.
   (E)   Adequacy of public facilities. The available capacity for public
facilities and services shall be determined in accordance with the following
calculation methodology:
      (1)   Adding together the total capacity of existing and planned capital
improvements for a public facility;
      (2)   Calculate available capacity by subtracting from the total capacity
of division (E)(1) above the sum of:
         (a)   The demand for each public facility created by existing
development;
         (b)   The demand for each public facility created by the anticipated
completion of committed development; and
         (c)   The demand for each public facility created by the anticipated
completion of the proposed development under consideration for concurrency
determination.
   (F)   Zoning districts established. The following zoning districts are
hereby created within the North Shore Development Planned District: P-RR-1
(Planned/Rural Residential, one unit per acre density), P- A-5 (Planned/
Agricultural, five-acre minimum) and P-MU-160 (Planned/Multiple Use, one unit
per 160- acre density).
   (G)   Codes and symbols.
      (1)   In following sections of this subchapter, uses of land or buildings
which are allowed in the various districts are shown as “permitted uses”,
indicated by a “P” in the appropriate column, or as “conditional uses”,
indicated by a “C” in the appropriate column.
      (2)   If a use is not allowed in a given district, it is either not named
in the use list or it is indicated in the appropriate column by a dash, “_”. If
a regulation applies in a given district, it is indicated in the appropriate
column by a numeral to show the linear or square feet, or acres required, or by
the letter “A”. If the regulation does not apply, it is indicated in the
appropriate column by a dash, “_”.
   (H)   Uses.
      (1)   Uses. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building
or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or
maintained in the multiple use, agricultural or rural residential districts
except as provided in this subchapter.
 P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
                                                                               P-  P-  P-
                                                                               RR- A-5 MU-
                                                                               1       160
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted and           P   P   P
conditional uses
Agriculture
   Agriculture, except grazing and pasturing of animals                     P   P   P
   Agriculture, including grazing and pasturing of animals                  -   P   C
   Agriculture, business or industry                                        C   C   C
   Animals and fowl for recreation or for family food production for the    -   C   -
primary use of persons residing on the premises
   Nursery or green house, wholesale or retail                              C   P   -
   The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and gardeningP   P   P
Apiary (bee keeping)                                                           C   P   C
Aviary                                                                         P   P   C
Bed and breakfast facility subject to the conditions outlined in §§
156.335 through                                                                P   P   -
156.360 of this chapter
Cluster subdivision of single-family dwellings
   Provided that, the residential density is not increased by more than 10% P   P   -
for the district
   Provided that, the area, in acres, of the subdivision is not less than   5   640 -
Dude ranch: family vacation ranch                                              -   P   C
Educational institution                                                        C   C   C
Educational institution with lodging                                           C   C   C
Home occupation                                                                P   P   -
Household pets, as defined above                                               P   P   -
Licensed family child care                                                     C   C   -
Private park or recreational grounds                                           C   C   C
Private recreational camp or resort, including accessory or supporting
dwellings or dwelling complexes and commercial service uses which are owned or
managed by the recreational facility to which it is accessory (private         -   P   C
recreational camps or resorts shall not be subject to the residential density
restrictions of this section)
Private stables, horses for private use                                        P   P   C
Private stables or the keeping of horses for the private use of persons
residing on the premises and providing that not more than 2 horses shall be    P   P   C
kept for each one acre in the lot
Public use, quasi-public use, essential services, including but not limited to C   C   C
parks, schools, churches, dams and reservoirs
Recreation
   Archery shop/range                                                       -   P   C
   Campground                                                               -   C   C
   Golf course                                                              C   C   C
Residential facility for elderly persons                                       P   P   -
Residential facility for persons with a disability                             P   P   -
Signs; the type, size, height, location and other standards and requirements
for signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in §§
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter; except that, a single low profile off-premises        A   A   A
identification sign shall be permitted for identification of the Machine Lake
Wetlands Mitigation Bank. Sign location, area, setback and design shall be
subject to approval by the city’s Planning Commission
Single-family dwellings                                                        P   P   -
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, including living
quarters for a guard or night watchman, which building must be removed upon    P   P   P
completion or abandonment of the construction work
Wetland mitigation bank                                                        C   P   P
 
      (2)   Area regulations.
 
                                  P-RR-1            P-A-5              P-MU-160
No minimum lot area requirement
is established, however maximum
density expressed as the number   1 unit per 1 acre 1 unit per 5 acres 0
of residential dwelling units per
gross acre shall not exceed
 
      (3)   Width regulations.
 
                                                        P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
The minimum width in feet for any lot in the districts
regulated by this chapter, except as modified by planned 100    200   1,320
unit developments or cluster subdivisions shall be
 
      (4)   Frontage regulations.
 
                                                         P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
The minimum frontage in feet for any lot in the districts
regulated by this chapter on a public street or a private 25     50    60
street approved by the governing body shall be
 
      (5)   Front yard regulations.
 
                                                         P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
The minimum depth in feet for the front yard for main     30     30    60
buildings in districts regulated by this chapter shall be
 
      (6)   Accessory buildings.
 
                                                        P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
Accessory buildings may have the same minimum front yard
depth as main buildings if they have the same side yard  A      A     A
required for main buildings, otherwise they shall be set
back at least 6 feet in the rear of the main building
 
      (7)   Rear yard regulations.
 
                          P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
The minimum depth in feet for the rear yard in the districts regulated by
this chapter shall be
   For main buildings   30     50    60
   For accessory buildin20     20    20
 
      (8)   Side yard regulations.
 
                                                         P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
The minimum side yard in feet for any dwelling or main or 15     20    60
buildings shall be
Except on corner lots the side yard in feet which faces
on a street for both main and accessory buildings, shall  30     30    60
not be less than
The minimum side yard in feet for any accessory building  20     20    20
shall be
 
      (9)   Height regulations.
 
                       P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
The maximum height for all buildings and structures in districts regulated
by this chapter shall be
   In feet           35     35    35
   In number of stori2-1/2  2-1/2 2-1/2
 
      (10)   Animal regulations.
 
                                                      P-RR-1 P-A-5 P-MU-160
Any barn, coop, pen, stable, corral, enclosure for the
confinement of large animals, shall be set back from a 100    100   -
public street at least the following distance
 
   (I)   Exhibit A. Legal descriptions for parcels are as follows.
 
      (1)   P-RR-1 (Planned Rural Residential) area.
 
03-111-0001
BEG AT SW COR OF NW/4 OF SEC 20 TWP 9N R 2W, SLM, RUNNING E 455 FT, N 1,915 FT,
W 455 FT, S 1,915 FT TO BEG
 
03-111-0014
BEG AT A PT 33 FT S and 1,278.75 FT W OF NE COR OF SEC 20 T09N R02W SLM, S 400
FT, W 193.25 FT, N 400 FT, E 193.25 FT TO FOB.
TOGETHER W/ RESEVER : SEE DOC #248352 - DATED JUNE 12, 2007’ - CONT 1.77 AC M/
L.
 
03-111-0015
BEG 43 RDS W OF NE COR OF SEC 20 T09N R02W SLM, S 160 RDS, W 15 RDS, N 160 RDS,
E 15 RDS TO BEG.
TOGETHER W / RESERV. SEE REC DOC. #248352 - DATED JUNE 12, 2007 CONT. 15.1 AC
 
03-111-0023
BEG AT A PT LOC 1950.4 FT N 89*56’E FROM SW COR OF NW/4 OF SEC 20 T9N R2W SLM,
N 0*07’E 2,538.7 FT, TH TO THE RIGHT ALG THE ARC OF A CURVE WHOSE RADIUS IS
1477.5 FT A DIST OF 60.42 FT, LONG CHORD BEARS S 33*13’ 18W 60.42 FT, S 0*07’W
2,488.19 FT, N 89*56’E 33 FT TO POB. CONT 1.90 ACRES
 
03-111-0025
BEG AT A PT 433 FT S and 957 FT W OF NE COR OF SEC 20 T09N R02W SLM, S 2,207
FT, W 660 FT, N 2,207 FT, E 660 FT TO POB. WITH CERTAIN RESERVATIONS. CONT
33.43 AC M/L.
 
03-111-0042
BEGINNING 455 FEET EAST OF THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THE NORTHWEST QUARTER OF
SECTION 20, TOWNSHIP 9 NORTH, RANGE 2 WEST, SALT LAKE BASE AND MERIDIAN; THENCE
EAST ALONG THE QUARTER SECTION LINE 1,492 FEET TO A LANE BELONGING TO B.R.S.L.
CO.; THENCE NORTH 00007’ EAST 2,583.7 FEET; THENCE IN A SOUTHWESTERLY DIRECTION
ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF HIGHWAY TO A POINT 1,915 FEET DUE NORTH OF POINT OF
BEGINNING; THENCE SOUTH 1,915 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
 
03-111-0043
BEG 455 FT E OF SW COR OF NW/4 OF SEC 20 TWP 9N R 2W, SLM, E ALG 1/4 SEC LINE
1,492 FT TO A LANE BELONG- ING TO B.R.S.L. CO., N 0*7’E 2,583.7 FT IN A SLY
DIREC ALG S LINE OF HWY TO A PT 1915 FT DUE N OF BEG, S 1,915 FT TO BEG. ALSO
BEG AT NW COR OF SD SEC, E ALG N LINE OF SD SEC 1,923 FT, S 0*7’W 51.5 FT TO N
LINE OF HWY IN A SWLY DIRC ALG N LINE OF SD HWY TO A PT DUE S OF BEG. N 508.5
FT TO BEG. EXC BEG AT NW COR OF SD SEC, E 1,980 FT, S 33 FT, W 1,980 FT, N 33
FT TO BEG.
 
LESS[03-l 1 l-0042]BEGINNING 455 FEET EAST OF THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THE
NORTHWEST QUARTER OF SECTION 20, TOWNSHIP 9 NORTH, RANGE 2 WEST, SALT LAKE BASE
AND MERIDIAN; THENCE EAST ALONG THE QUARTER SECTION LINE 1,492 FEET TO A LANE
BELONGING TO B.R.S.L. CO.; THENCE NORTH 00007’ EAST 2,583.7 FEET; THENCE IN A
SOUTHWESTERLY DIRECTION ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF HIGHWAY TO A POINT 1,915 FEET
DUE NORTH OF POINT OF BEGINNING; THENCE SOUTH 1,915 FEET TO THE POINT OF
BEGINNING.
 
      (2)   P-A-5 (Planned Agricultural, 5-acre minimum) area.
 
03-111-0019
ALL THAT PORTION OF SW/4 OF SEC 20 T09N R02W SLM LYING WESTERLY OF THE HAMMOND
CANAL. 127 AC M/L
 
03-111-0020
REMAINDER DESC: ALL OF FOL LYING ELY OF HAMMOND CANAL BEG AT A PT 140 RDS W OF
SE COR OF SEC 20 T9N R2W SLM. N 160 RDS, W 100 RDS, S 160 RDS, E 100 RDS TO
POB. SUBJECT TO EASEMENTS ETC OF RECORD. LESS: E/2 OF NE/4 OF SW/4 OF SEC 20
CONT 29 ACRES M/L
 
03-111-0021
BEG AT A PT 40 RDS W OF SE COR OF SEC 20 T9N R2W SLM. N 160 RDS, W 100 RDS, S
160 RDS, E 100 RDS TO POB. SUBJECT TO EASEMENTS ETC OF RECORD. LESS: W/2 OF NW/
4 OF SE/4 OF SEC 20 CONT 80 ACRES M/L
 
03-111-0022
REMAINDER DESCRIPTION: BEG AT SE COR OF SEC 20 T9N R2W SLM W 40 RDS, N 160 RDS,
E 40 RDS, S 160 RDS TO BEG. CONT 39.88 ACRES
 
03-111-0024
REMAINDER DESC: ALL OF FOL ELY OF HAMMOND CANAL. E/2 OF N and E/4 OF SW/4 and
W/2 OF NW/4 OF SE/4 OF SEC 20 T9N R2W. RESERVING ACCESS EASMENTS OVER N 4 RDS
and 2 RDS ON EACH SIDE OF CANAL TOGETHER WITH A VEHICULAR ACCESS EASEMENT OVER
THE FOLLOWING: BEG AT NW COR OF E/2 OF NE/4 OF SW/4 OF SEC 20, W 33 FT, S 82.5
FT, E 33 FT, N 82.5 FT TO BEG. CONT 24 AC M/L
 
03-189-0009
BEG AT SE COR OF SEC 19 T9N R2W SLM N 160 RDS, W 20 RDS, S 160 RDS, E 20 RDS,
TO POB. TOGETHER WITH MINERAL ETC RIGHTS, EASEMENTS R/W’S ETC OF RECORD. CONT
20 ACRES M/L
 
      (3)   P-MU-160 (Planned Multiple Use, 1 unit per 160-acre density) area.
 
03-003-0043
ALL OF SEC 30 T09N R02W SLM LYING ELY OF CTR/L OF REEDER OVERFLOW. CONT 412 AC
M/L.
 
03-003-0045
ALL OF SEC 31 T09N R02W SLM LYING ELY OF C/L OF REEDER OVERFLOW. 388 AC M/L
 
03-003-0046
REMAINDER DESC: ALL OF SEC 31 T09N R02W SLM LYING WLY OF C/L OF REEDER
OVERFLOW. 252 AC M/L
 
03-003-0047
PRT SECS 29 and 32 T09N R02W SLM. BEG AT NE COR SD SEC 32, BEING A USA DEPT OF
INTERIOR ALUMINUM CAP MON, S00*1 1’15”W 1,362.11 FT ALG E/L SD SEC, N89*35’43”W
3,969.10 FT TO ELY EDGE OF A SLOUGH, NELY ALG SD ELY EDGE 7,532 FT M/L TO E/
L SD SEC 29 BEING A PT N00*04’22”E 2,600.43 FT FRM POB, S00*04’22”W 2,600.43 FT
ALG E/L SD SEC 29 TO POB. HAI SURVEY DATED 4/4/04. TOG/W CERTAIN EASEMENT FOR
INGRESS and EGRESS-SEE #208327. CONT 227 AC.
 
03-003-0048
SEC 29 T09N R02W SLM.
LESS: [03-003-0047] BEG AT NE COR SD SEC 32, BEING A USA DEPT OF INTERIOR
ALUMINUM CAP MON, S00*1 1’15”W 1,362.11 FT ALG E/L SD SEC, N89*35’43”W 3,969.10
FT TO ELY EDGE OF A SLOUGH, NELY ALG SD ELY EDGE 7,532 FT M/L TO E/L SD SEC 29
BEING A PT N00*04’22”E 2,600.43 FT FRM POB, S00*04’22”W 2,600.43 FT ALG E/L SD
SEC 29 TO POB. CONT 537.11 AC.
 
03-003-0049
SEC 32 T09N R02W SLM.
LESS: [03-003-0047] BEG AT NE COR SD SEC 32, BEING A USA DEPT OF INTERIOR
ALUMINUM CAP MON, S00*H’15”W 1,362.11 FT ALG E/L SD SEC, N89*35’43”W 3,969.10
FT TO ELY EDGE OF A SLOUGH, NELY ALG SD ELY EDGE 7532 FT M/L TO E/L SD SEC 29
BEING A PT N00*04’22”E 2,600.43 FT FRM POB, S00*04’22”W 2,600.43 FT ALG E/L SD
SEC 29 TO POB. CONT 515.90 AC.
 
03-003-0054
THAT PART OF NW/4 OF SEC 30 T9N R2W SLM. LYING W OF CO (REFUGE) RD. CONTG 7.63
AC M/L.
 
LESS [03-189-0011] PRT OF SW/4 OF SEC 19 and NW/4 SEC 30 T09N R02W SLM. BEG AT
PT IN EXISTING FENCE/L LOC N89*34’42”E 581.43 FT ALG N/L OF SD SW/4 OF SEC 19
FRM W/4 COR OF SD SEC 19, N89*34’42”E 1,971.56 FT ALG SD FENCE/L TO WLY R/W/
L OF A COUNTY RD, ALG SD COUNTY RD R/W FOLLOWING TWO (2) COURSES: 1)
S21*41’01”W 3,308.13 FT, 2) S61 *23’47”W 878.29 FT, N00*21’37”E 3,480.08 FT TO
POB.
 
LESS [03-189-0014]COMMENCING AT THE NW COR OF SEC 30 T9N R2W OF THE SLB BEING A
FOUND 3.25 INCH FISH AND WILDLIFE CAP, THENCE 80*21’37” W ALNG WA. OF SD SEC 30
1,196.75 FT TO NLY R/W OF PROJECT AND THE POINT OF BEGINNING AND CONTINUING
ALNG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING 11 COURSES,(1) N61*28’18” 1314.10 FT TO BEGINNING OF
A CURVE TO THE LEFT,(2) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 606.911 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 421.90 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD
WHICH BEARS N41 *33’26” E 413.45 FT, (3) N21 *38’33” E 1078.12 FT TO THE
BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE LEFT, (4)ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF
3,248.60 FT THROUGH CENTRAL ANGLE OF 5*04’20” 287.59 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A
CHORD WHICH BEARS N19*06’23” E 287.50,(5) N16*34’13” E 170.54 FT TO THE
BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,(6) ALNG THE ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS
OF 1,673.80 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 10*10’13” 297.11 FT SD ARC SUBSTENDED
BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N21 *39’20” E 296.42 FT, (7) N26*44’26” E 167.47 FT TO
THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE LEFT,(8) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS
OF 3,248.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 05*05’53” 289.06 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED
BY A CORD WHICH BEARS N24*11’29” E 288.96, (9) N21*38’33” E 3,256.26 FT TO THE
BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (10) ALNG THE ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A
RADIUS OF 672.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 68*20’09” 802.57 FT SD ARC
SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N55*48’37” E 755.84 FT, (11) N89*58’42” E
1190.53 FT TO THE E/L OF SEC 18 T9N R2W OF THE SLM. THENCE ALNG SD L S00*00’00”
W 44.08 FT TO THE SE COR OF SD SEC, ALNG E/L OF SD SEC 19 S00*04’06” W 33.00 FT
TO EXISTING SLY R/W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD AS DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG 857,ALNG SD
R/W N89*55’26” W 1,293.78 FT A POINT ON THE R/W OF SD PROJECT AND TO THE
BEGINNING OF A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT,ALNG SD R/W AND ALNG ARC OF SD
NON-TANGENT CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 606.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
49*10’16” 520.85 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S55*35’27” W 505.01
FT TO THE EXISTING R/W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG 857, ALNG SD
R/W S21*37’50” W 2495.58 FT TO THE E-W CENTERLINE OF SEC 19, S89*52’24” W 9.27
FT TO THE R/W OF SD PROJECT AND CONTINUING ALONG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING FIFTEEN
COURSES; (1) S21 *38’33” W 855.99 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,
(2) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE
OF 05*05’53” 294.93 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S24*l 1’30” W
394.83, (3) S63*15’34” E 17.00 FT,(4) S26*44’26” W 167.47 FT, (5) N63*15’36” W
17.00 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT, (6) ALNG ARC OF
SD NON-TANGENT CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 1607.80 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
10*10’13” 285.39 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S21*39’19” W
285.02,(7) S16*34’13” W 170.54 TO BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,(8) ALNG
ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
05*04’20” 293.43 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S19*06’23” W 293.34
FT, (9) S21 *38’33” W 645.87 FT (10) S68*21’27” E 17.00 FT, (11) S21*38’33” W
196.90 FT, (12) N68*21’27” W 17.00 FT, (13) S21*38’33” W 235.35 TO BEGINNING OF
A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (14)ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 672.91 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 467.78 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD
WHICH BEARS S41 *33’26” W 458.41 FT, (15)S61*28’18” W 1,350.52 FT TO THE W/LOF
SD SEC 30; ALNG SD LINE N00*21’37” E 75.38 FT TO POB.
CONT 7.63 AC M/L.
 
03-003-0055
ALL OF SEC 30 T09N R02W SLM LYING WLY OF C/L OF REEDER OVERFLOW, LESS: THAT
PART OF NW/4 OF SEC 30 LYING W OF CO (REFUGE) RD.
 
LESS: THAT PART OF NW/4 OF SEC 30 LYING W OF CO (REFUGE) RD.
 
LESS [03-189-0014] COMMENCING AT THE NW COR OF SEC 30 T9N R2W OF THE SLB BEING
A FOUND 3.25 INCH FISH AND WILDLIFE CAP, THENCE S0*21’37” W ALNG W/L OF SD SEC
30 1,196.75 FT TO NLY R/W OF PROJECT AND THE POINT OF BEGINNING AND CONTINUING
ALNG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING 11 COURSES,(1) N61*28’18” 1314.10 FT TO BEGINNING OF
A CURVE TO THE LEFT, (2) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 606.911 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 421.90 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD
WHICH BEARS N41*33’26” E 413.45 FT, (3) N21*38’33” E 1078.12 FT TO THE
BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE LEFT, (4) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF
3,248.60 FT THROUGH CENTRAL ANGLE OF 5*04’20” 287.59 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A
CHORD WHICH BEARS N19*06’23” E 287.50,(5) N16*34’13” E 170.54 FT TO THE
BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,(6) ALNG THE ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS
OF 1,673.80 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 10*10’13” 297.11 FT SD ARC SUBSTENDED
BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N21 *39’20” E 296.42 FT, (7) N26*44’26” E 167.47 FT TO
THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE LEFT,(8) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS
OF 3,248.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 05*05’53” 289.06 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED
BY A CORD WHICH BEARS N24*l 1’29” E 288.96, (9) N21*38’33” E 3,256.26 FT TO THE
BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (10) ALNG THE ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A
RADIUS OF 672.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 68*20’09” 802.57 FT SD ARC
SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N55*48’37” E 755.84 FT, (11) N89*58’42” E
1,190.53 FT TO THE E/L OF SEC 18 T9N R2W OF THE SLM. THENCE ALNG SD L
S00*00’00” W 44.08 FT TO THE SE COR OF SD SEC, ALNG WL OF SD SEC 19 S00*04’06”
W 33.00 FT TO EXISTING SLY R/W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD AS DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG
857,ALNG SD R/W N89*55’26” W 1,293.78 FT A POINT ON THE R/W OF SD PROJECT AND
TO THE BEGINNING OF A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT, ALNG SD R/W AND ALNG ARC
OF SD NON-TANGENT CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 606.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
49*10’16” 520.85 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S55*35’27” W 505.01
FT TO THE EXISTING R/W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG 857, ALNG SD
R/W S21*37’50” W 2,495.58 FT TO THE E-W CENTERLINE OF SEC 19, S89*52’24” W 9.27
FT TO THE R/W OF SD PROJECT AND CONTINUING ALONG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING FIFTEEN
COURSES; (1) S21 *38’33” W 855.99 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,
(2)ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3,314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE
OF 05*05’53” 294.93 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S24*l 1’30” W
394.83, (3) S63*15’34” E 17.00 FT,(4) S26*44’26” W 167.47 FT, (5) N63*15’36” W
17.00 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT, (6) ALNG ARC OF
SD NON-TANGENT CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 1,607.80 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
10*10’13” 285.39 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S21*39’19” W
285.02,(7) S16*34’13” W 170.54 TO BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,(8) ALNG
ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3,314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
05*04’20” 293.43 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S19*06’23” W 293.34
FT, (9) S21 *38’33” W 645.87 FT (10) S68*21’27” E 17.00 FT, (11) S21 *38’33” W
196.90 FT, (12)N68*21’27” W 17.00 FT, (13) S21 *38’33” W 235.35 TO BEGINNING OF
A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (14)ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 672.91 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 467.78 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD
WHICH BEARS S41 *33’26” W 458.41 FT, (15)S61*28’18” W 1350.52 FT TO THE W/LOF
SD SEC 30; ALNG SD LINE N00*21’37” E 75.38 FT TO POB.REMAINDER DESC: ALL OF SEC
30 T09NR02W SLM LYING WLY OF C/L OF REEDER OVERFLOW,
 
03-189-0010
BEG AT SE COR OF NE/4 OF SEC 19 T9N R2W SLM, N 244 FT, N 79*15’W 1690 FT, N
2*52’W 283 FT, N 13*15’E 264 FT M/L TO E BANK OF BEAR RIVER- REEDER OVERFLOW,
SLY ALG SD E BANK TO S/L OF NE/4 OF SEC 19, E ALG SD S/L TO BEG. CONT 17.28
ACRES M/L
 
03-189-0014
COMMENCING AT THE NW COR OF SEC 30 T9N R2W OF THE SLB BEING A FOUND 3.25 INCH
FISH AND WILDLIFE CAP, THENCE S0*21’37” W ALNG W/L OF SD SEC 30 1,196.75 FT TO
NLY R/W OF PROJECT AND THE POB AND CONT ALG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING 11 COURSES,
(1) N61 *28’18” 1,314.10 FT TO BEG OF A CURVE TO THE LEFT,(2) ALG ARC OF SD
CURVE A RADIUS OF 606.911 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 421.90 FT SD
ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD BEARS N41*33’26” E 413.45 FT, (3) N21*38’33”E 1078.12
FT TO THE BEG OF A CURVE TO THE LEFT, (4) ALG ARC OF SD CURVE A RADIUS OF
3,248.60 FT THROUGH CENTRAL ANGLE OF 5*04’20” 287.59 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A
CHD BEARS N19*06’23” E 287.50,(5) N16*34’13” E 170.54 FT TO THE BEG OF A CURVE
TO THE RIGHT, (6) ALG THE ARC OF SD CURVE A RADIUS OF 1,673.80 FT THROUGH A
CENTRAL ANGLE OF 10*10’13” 297.11 FT SD ARC SUBSTENDED BY A CHD BEARS
N21*39’20”E 296.42 FT, (7) N26*44’26” E 167.47 FT TO THE BEG OF A CURVE TO THE
LEFT,(8) ALG ARC OF SD CURVE A RADIUS OF 3,248.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
05*05’53” 289.06 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CORD BEARS N24*l 1’29”E 288.96, (9)
N21 *38’33”E 3,256.26 FT TO THE BEG OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (10) ALG THE ARC
OF SD CURVE A RADIUS OF 672.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 68*20’09” 802.57
FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHD BEARS N55*48’37” E 755.84 FT, (11) N89*58’42” E
1,190.53 FT TO THE E/L OF SEC 18 T9N R/W OF THE SLM. THENCE ALG SD/
L S00*00’00”W 44.08 FT TO THE SE COR OF SD SEC, ALG E/L OF SD SEC 19
S00*04’06”W 33.00 FT TO EXISTING SLY R/W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD AS DESCRIBED IN
BK 611 PG 85, ALG SD R/W N89*55’26”W 1,293.78 FT A PT ON THE R/W OF SD PROJECT
AND TO THE BEG OF A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT ALG SD R/W and ALG ARC OF SD
NON-TANGENT CURVE A RADIUS OF 606.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 49*10’16”
520.85 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHD BEARS S55*35’27”W 505.01 FT TO THE EXISTING
R/W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG 857, ALG SD R/W S21 *37’5”W
2,495.58 FT TO THE E-W CENTER/L OF SEC 19, S89*52’24”W 9.27 FT TO THE R/W OF SD
PROJECT AND CONTINUING ALG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING FIFTEEN (15) COURSES; (1)
S21*38’33”W 855.99 FT TO THE BEG OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (2) ALG ARC OF SD
CURVE A RADIUS OF 3,314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE 05*05’53” 294.93 FT SD
ARC SUBTENDED BY CHD BEARS S24*l l’30”W 294.83 FT, S63*15’34”E 17.00 FT,(4)
S26*44’26”W 167.47 FT, (5) N63*15’36”W 17.00 FT TO THE BEG OF A NON-TANGENT
CURVE TO THE LEFT, (6) ALG ARC OF SD NON-TANGENT CURVE A RADIUS OF 1,607.80 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 10*10’13” 285.39 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHD WHICH
BEARS S21*39’19”W 285.02, (7) S16*34’13”W 170.54 TO BEG OF A CURVE TO THE
RIGHT, (8) ALG ARC OF SD CURVE A RADIUS OF 3,314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE
OF 05*04’20” 293.43 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHD WHICH BEARS S19*06’23”W 293.34
FT, (9) S21*38’33”W 645.87 FT (10) S68*21’27”E 17.00 FT, (11) S21*38’33”W
196.90 FT, (12) N68*21’27”W 17.00 FT, (13) S21*38’33”W 235.35 FT TO BEG OF A
CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (14) ALG ARC OF SD CURVE A RADIUS OF 672.91 FT THROUGH A
CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 467.78 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHD BEARS S41
*33’26” W 458.41 FT, (15) S61*28’18” W 1,350.52 FT TO THE W/LOF SD SEC 30; ALG
SD/L N00*21’37”E 75.38 FT TO POB.
 
03-189-0015
S/2 OF SEC 19, TWP 9N, R 2W, SLM LESS: THAT PART OF W/2 OF S/2 LYING W OF CO
(REFUGE RD). LESS: BEG AT SE COR OF SEC 19, N 160 RDS, W 20 RDS, S 160 RDS, E
20 RDS TO PT OF BEG.
 
LESS [03-189-0014]
COMMENCING AT THE NW COR OF SEC 30 T9N R2W OF THE SLB BEING A FOUND 3.25 INCH
FISH AND WILDLIFE CAP, THENCE S0*21’37” W ALNG W/L OF SD SEC 30 1,196.75 FT TO
NLY R/W OF PROJECT AND THE POINT OF BEGINNING AND CONTINUING ALNG SD R/W THE
FOLLOWING 11 COURSES,(1) N61*28’18” 1314.10 FT TO BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE
LEFT,(2) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 606.911 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL
ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 421.90 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N41*33’26”
E 413.45 FT, (3) N21 *38’33” E 1,078.12 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE
LEFT, (4)ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3,248.60 FT THROUGH CENTRAL
ANGLE OF 5*04’20” 287.59 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N19*06’23”
E 287.50,(5) N16*34’13” E 170.54 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,
(6) ALNG THE ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 1,673.80 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL
ANGLE OF 10*10’13” 297.11 FT SD ARC SUBSTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS N21
*39’20” E 296.42 FT, (7) N26*44’26” E 167.47 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO
THE LEFT,(8) ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3,248.60 FT THROUGH A
CENTRAL ANGLE OF 05*05’53” 289.06 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CORD WHICH BEARS
N24*l 1’29” E 288.96, (9) N21*38’33” E 3256.26 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE
TO THE RIGHT, (10) ALNG THE ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 672.91 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 68*20’09” 802.57 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD
WHICH BEARS N55*48’37” E 755.84 FT, (11) N89*58’42” E 1190.53 FT TO THE E/L OF
SEC 18 T9N R2W OF THE SLM. THENCE ALNG SD L S00*00’00” W 44.08 FT TO THE SE COR
OF SD SEC, ALNG E/L OF SD SEC 19 S00*04’06” W 33.00 FT TO EXISTING SLY R/W OF
THE BEAR RIVER RD AS DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG 857,ALNG SD R/W N89*55’26” W
1,293.78 FT A POINT ON THE R/W OF SD PROJECT AND TO THE BEGINNIN OF A NON-
TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT, ALNG SD R/W AND ALNG ARC OF SD NON-TANGENT CURVE
HAVING A RADIUS OF 606.91 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 49*10’16” 520.85 FT SD
ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S55*35’27” W 505.01 FT TO THE EXISTING R/
W OF THE BEAR RIVER RD DESCRIBED IN BK 611 PG 857, ALNG SD R/W S21 *37’50” W
2,495.58 FT TO THE E-W CENTERLINE OF SEC 19, S89*52’24” W 9.27 FT TO THE R/W OF
SD PROJECT AND CONTINUING ALONG SD R/W THE FOLLOWING FIFTEEN COURSES; (1)
S21*38’33” W 855.99 FT TO THE BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (2)ALNG ARC OF
SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3,314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 05*05’53”
294.93 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S24*11’3O” W 394.83, (3)
S63*15’34” E 17.00 FT,(4) S26*44’26” W 167.47 FT, (5) N63*15’36” W 17.00 FT TO
THE BEGINNING OF A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE LEFT, (6) ALNG ARC OF SD NON-
TANGENT CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 1,607.80 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
10*10’13” 285.39 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S21*39’19” W
285.02,(7) S16*34’13” W 170.54 TO BEGINNING OF A CURVE TO THE RIGHT,(8) ALNG
ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 3,314.60 FT THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF
05*04’20” 293.43 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD WHICH BEARS S19*06’23” W 293.34
FT, (9) S21*38’33” W 645.87 FT (10) S68*21’27” E 17.00 FT, (11) S21 *38’33” W
196.90 FT, (12) N68*21’27” W 17.00 FT, (13) S21*38’33” W 235.35 TO BEGINNING OF
A CURVE TO THE RIGHT, (14)ALNG ARC OF SD CURVE HAVING A RADIUS OF 672.91 FT
THROUGH A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 39*49’45” 467.78 FT SD ARC SUBTENDED BY A CHORD
WHICH BEARS S41 *33’26” W 458.41 FT, (15)S61*28’18” W 1,350.52 FT TO THE W/LOF
SD SEC 30; ALNG SD LINE N00*21’37” E 75.38 FT TO POB. CONT 169.49 ACRES
      (4)   Township 9N, Range 2W map description.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3178.jpg]
 
      (5)   Section 20, Township 9N. Range 2W map description.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3176.jpg]
 
      (6)   Section 19, Township 9N, Range 2W map description.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3174.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 29.22.010) (Ord. 13-14, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 156.296 ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   Air quality. Any land use in the North Shore development that produces
emissions to the air shall, at a minimum demonstrate compliance with all state
air quality standards, as evidenced by the issuance of any permits required for
their emissions by the state.
   (B)   Water quality and watershed protection. Land uses in the North Shore
Development Planned District shall be subject to any applicable requirements of
the city source protection zones.
   (C)   Sewage disposal.
      (1)   Connection to the city sewer is required for all land uses, except
as otherwise permitted by the city’s Waste Treatment Department under
applicable provisions of the city code.
      (2)   If permitted by the City Council, following a recommendation by the
city’s Waste Treatment Department and city’s Culinary Water Department,
alternative sewage disposal systems shall be sited and constructed in
accordance with applicable health regulations and standards of the city, the
county and the state.
   (D)   Revegetation/erosion protection/runoff control. To the extent
possible, plans for the development of the North Shore Development and actual
construction of infrastructure and land uses shall provide for the preservation
of existing vegetation; shall provide for appropriate, prompt revegetation or
erosion protection measures; and shall provide for surface water runoff control
in accordance with the city’s Public Works Standards and Technical
Specifications or modifications thereto granted pursuant to the procedure for
such modifications.
      (1)   Storm water created by the development shall be detained on the
property and released according to standard engineering calculations and
practices, except as such practices may be modified for the North Shore
Development. Existing natural storm water drainage shall be allowed to follow
the current natural drainage patterns. due to the unique setting and rural
environment of the property, storm water management may be accomplished through
the use of roadside swales and permeable basins allowing storm water to
infiltrate into the ground. Design and construction of such storm water
management features shall be subject to restrictions of the city’s source
protection zones, if applicable.
      (2)   All developments shall minimize the area disturbed by construction
activities at any given time.
      (3)   Buildings shall not be located on soils with severe limitations for
any of the proposed uses, unless fully mitigated by appropriate design and
construction techniques. Limitations on development may be due to any of a
number of factors including the depth to bedrock or a water table, soil
permeability, the soil’s propensity to shrink and swell and other factors.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.020)
§ 156.297 CRITICAL AREAS.
   Development within critical areas, as defined in divisions (A) through (C)
below, is prohibited.
   (A)   Geologic hazards. The development layout and design shall avoid areas
which may be adversely affected by geologic hazards.
      (1)   This prohibition may be waived in cases where the developer
demonstrates to the Planning Commission that the geologic hazard is fully
mitigated by appropriate design and construction techniques.
      (2)   Geologic hazards include ground subsidence that may result from
natural or human-made conditions and also any kind of seismic activity.
   (B)   Floodplains. All areas within a 100-year floodplain as mapped for the
Federal Flood Insurance program, or as calculated by a qualified engineer, or
where the prevailing or potential natural vegetation is riparian in nature, are
declared to be critical to the maintenance of the North Shore Development’s
hydrologic systems, fisheries and wildlife habitat. Development of floodplain
areas has a significant potential to adversely affect wildlife, water quality
and, if it modifies the floodway, adjoining, upstream and downstream
properties, roads and other public facilities. Development in floodplain areas
may also be constrained by a high water table which raises the cost of
installing and maintaining utilities. Finally, floodplain development adversely
affects all taxpayers through public expenditures to prevent or clean up flood
damages.
      (1)   Development, other than open use recreation, shall be prohibited in
areas that include 100- year floodplains. Structures shall not be permitted in
a 100-year floodplain.
      (2)   Road and driveway crossings shall bridge over all 100-year
floodplains. The installation of culverts for such purposes shall be minimized
and is generally not appropriate.
      (3)   Where 100-year floodplain areas are modified any action that may
increase flood hazards or adversely affect water quality or fisheries shall be
avoided. Such actions may include, but are not limited to, stream channel
modifications, the storage of floatable or potentially polluting materials and
the construction of stream crossings.
      (4)   Plantings or natural areas (as opposed to scrap metal, junked
vehicles or concrete slabs) shall be used where stream channels are required to
be stabilized. Riprap may be utilized if approved in advance through the
development review process and integrated with a planting plan.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.030)
§ 156.298 WATER AND WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   For individual subdivisions and development proposals, the developer
shall submit a site plan prepared by a professional engineer showing the
property boundary with topography, proposed building envelopes and proposed
public and private roads and streets. The submittal shall show infrastructure
necessary to serve the proposed development with a water system designed in
compliance with the Brigham City Public Works Standards and Technical
Specifications, or applicable modifications thereto, to be dedicated to the
city, serving all building lots. A publicly dedicated water system is necessary
for the following purposes:
      (1)   To protect existing and future city water rights and water sources;
      (2)   To provide an efficient and reliable water source for fire
prevention and suppression; and
      (3)   To provide development sites with an efficient and reliable source
of water for culinary and other uses.
   (B)   All development shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
compliance with applicable city source protection zones. Source protection
restrictions must be binding on all heirs, successors and assigns. Any land use
restrictions required to insure compliance with source protection restrictions
must be recorded with the property description in the County Recorder’s office.
Copies of this recording must be submitted to the city’s Culinary Water
Department for review.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.040)
§ 156.299 SANITARY SEWER.
   (A)   (1)   For individual subdivisions and development proposals, the
developer shall submit a site plan prepared by a professional engineer showing
the property boundary with topography, proposed building envelopes and proposed
public and private roads and streets. The submittal shall show infrastructure
necessary to serve the proposed development with a sanitary sewer system
serving all building lots. A sanitary sewer system is necessary for the
following purposes:
         (a)   To protect existing and future city water sources from
contamination;
         (b)   To provide development sites with an efficient and reliable
system for the treatment of sewage and waste water; and
         (c)   To protect water bodies on and adjacent to the property subject
to this planned district from contamination.
      (2)   The system shall be designed in compliance with the Brigham City
Public Works Standards and Technical Specifications, or applicable
modifications thereto.
   (B)   Easements or rights-of-way required for sewer service by the city’s
Waste Treatment Department shall be provided by all developments proposing
public sewer systems prior to final subdivision plat or final development plan
approval.
   (C)   Where the city sanitary sewer capital facilities plan calls for sewer
main sizes through a development that are larger than necessary to serve the
development, the larger main shall be installed in accordance with city policy.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.050)
§ 156.300 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Water infrastructure and water supply shall be in place and
serviceable prior to any combustible construction.
   (B)   (1)   The city’s Fire Department has established the acceptable
emergency response time as ten minutes or less within the district. an
acceptable response time to larger scale development may actually be less, as
determined by the city’s Fire Department. (It must be realized that prevailing
weather conditions, general topography, geographical diversities and unusual
traffic conditions may inhibit Fire Department response times at any time of
year.)
      (2)   In order to comply with an acceptable level of service standard, a
developer may be required to provide appropriate fire protection
infrastructure, including facilities, apparatus and equipment for the city’s
Fire Department to comply with the appropriate level of service standard. In
addition, approved fire sprinkler and suppression systems may be required by
the Fire Marshal in conjunction with other appropriate mitigation measures,
which must be approved by the Fire Marshal, to comply with the required level
of service standard.
      (3)   If the city’s Fire Marshal determines that a desired level of
service cannot be provided to a proposed development, the developer shall
prepare and submit a fire protection mitigation plan to the Fire Marshal for
review and approval. This plan shall address the measures that will be used to
comply with the intent of the level of service standard, and the timing/phasing
in which such measures will be provided. An acceptable mitigation plan shall be
approved by the city’s Fire Marshal before a final subdivision plan or final
site plan approval is granted. Failure of a developer to provide an acceptable
plan may be cause for denial of a development application by the city.
   (C)   (1)   All proposed new subdivisions or developments will be analyzed
and rated for wildfire risk using the fire hazard severity scale developed by
the state’s Division of State Lands and Forestry. All of these factors can vary
from development to development. The composite score will categorize the hazard
level of the proposed development. Once a proposed subdivision or development
has been classified as to its hazard level, development standards for each
level can be used by the city’s Fire Marshal to guide fire protection and
wildfire prevention measures. This rating shall be submitted to the city at the
initial stage of a subdivision application, as required by the Fire Marshal, or
as otherwise required in the processing of development permits for any proposed
development. The rating scale is based on five separate factors:
         (a)   Slope: this factor is displayed as a percentage. It is
calculated by measuring the vertical distance and horizontal distance for a
given area, and dividing the vertical by the horizontal;
         (b)   Aspect: this factor is the cardinal direction in which the
surface of the ground faces;
         (c)   Response time of fire agency: this factor is measured in minutes
it takes the nearest responsible fire agency to respond to a fire in a given
area;
         (d)   Type of vegetation: this factor is categorized by fuel types.
Rates of spread, resistance to control and potential to cause structural damage
are the criteria for rating severity; and
         (e)   Vegetation density: this factor is considered the total
combustible vegetation that may be available as a fuel for wildfire.
      (2)   (a)   Hazardous fuels in the form of native vegetation will be
cleared around structures and around the perimeter of the development to assist
in wildfire prevention measures. This fuel break is not intended as a complete
vegetation clearing fire break. Fuel breaks must be in place prior to occupancy
of the structure.
         (b)   The definition of a fuel break by the state’s Division of Lands
and Forestry is “a change in fuel continuity, type of fuel or degree of
flammability of fuel in a strategically located parcel or strip of land to
reduce or hinder the rate of fire spread”.
         (c)   Fuel breaks shall consist of the following:
            1.   Grasses within 30 feet of structures shall be mowed to four
inches or less;
            2.   Ground litter shall be removed annually;
            3.   Over mature, dead and dying trees shall be evaluated as to
their potential to ignite and to carry fire and possibly will be removed;
            4.   Fuel breaks may contain individual tree specimens, ornamental
plants or other similar vegetation used as ground cover; provided, they will
not provide a means of transmitting wildfire from native vegetation to
structures; and
            5.   Fire resistive vegetation shall be planted in the fuel breaks
to prevent undue soil erosion.
         (d)   A maintained fuel break easement around the perimeter of any
development shall be dedicated in favor of the city and shall be shown on the
final recorded subdivision plat of a subdivision or the final approved site
plan of a development not requiring subdivision. The easement shall be recorded
by separate deed for development plans not requiring subdivision of land. Fuel
breaks must be maintained by the landowners and a requirement for such
maintenance shall be included as a stipulation in private covenants recorded as
part of any subdivision plat approval. In subdivisions, planned unit
developments, or other developments where a homeowners’ or other association of
property owners is created, such association shall be responsible for
monitoring of the fuel break easement. private covenants for the subdivision,
planned unit development, or other development shall include language enabling
the homeowners’ or other property owners’ association to budget for and provide
fuel break maintenance services around the perimeter of the development
boundary.
         (e)   The following chart identifies fuel break clearing limits around
structures and development perimeters based on the wildfire hazard rating:
 
Type                   Moderate High    Extreme
Development perimeters None     75 feet 100 feet
Structures             30 feet  50 feet 100 feet
 
   (D)   Certification of compliance with adopted service levels and standards
of the city’s Fire Department, shall occur prior to final site plan approval,
or in the case of a single-family dwelling unit or any use approved as a
conditional use or a permitted use, before a building permit is issued for such
development.
   (E)   Fire hydrants, water line sizes, water storage for fire protection and
minimum flow for fire protection shall be determined by using the standards of
the Insurance Services Office, which are known as the fire system grading
standards and the city’s Public Works Standards and Technical Specifications.
In no case shall minimum fire flow be less than 1,000 gallons per minute for a
period of two hours, unless otherwise permitted herein, or as approved by the
Fire Marshal.
   (F)   (1)   All recorded subdivision plats for the North Shore Development
shall include the following note. In developments not requiring subdivision of
land, an affidavit containing the following note shall be recorded against the
subject property in the County Recorder’s office.
      (2)   The property owner acknowledges that he or she is building in a
rural environment adjacent to lands managed primarily for natural values
including wildlife habitat and agriculture. As such, the property owner is on
notice that public services in the area are subject to the constraints inherent
to such environments.
      (3)   Emergency response time may be longer than it is in more accessible
areas, and access by emergency vehicles may be impeded at times due to weather
and road conditions. The owner understands and acknowledges that wildfire risks
are higher in the North Shore Development than in other areas of the city. By
this notice, the property owner assumes the risk of occupancy as outlined
above.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.060)
§ 156.301 TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE AND ACCESS DESIGN.
   (A)   Access.
      (1)   All points of access to existing city roads or streets shall meet
the standards set forth in the Brigham City Public Works Standards and
Technical Specifications, or applicable modifications thereto. The design and
construction of turn lanes, merging lanes, traffic signs or signals and other
improvements required to make access points conform to city standards shall be
the responsibility of the developer.
      (2)   Development plans shall provide for the dedication of any rights-
of-way which are within, but will not serve a development, and which are
determined by the Planning Commission or City Council to be necessary to
effectively link the proposed development with future major roads or future
developments or to prevent the “landlocking” of adjoining properties or to
provide the best possible long-term circulation pattern.
   (B)   Road infrastructure design.
      (1)   The design and construction of all roads in the North Shore
Development shall be in accordance with the Brigham City Public Works Standards
and Technical Specifications, as modified for the North Shore Development.
      (2)   Roads on soils having low bearing strengths, high shrink-swell
potentials or high frost heave hazards may be required, upon recommendation of
the City Engineer, to be constructed to specifications more demanding than
those required on other sites.
   (C)   Cul-de-sacs.
      (1)   Cul-de-sacs are discouraged and shall only be permitted where they
are identified on the General Development Plan or subsequent development plans.
      (2)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac on any non-rural designated
road, as designated on the General Development Plan or subsequent development
plans shall be 600 feet.
      (3)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac on a rural designated road, as
designated on the General Development Plan or subsequent development plans
shall be as follows, unless the Fire Marshal agrees to other lengths. The
length of these cul-de-sacs shall be based on the wildfire hazard rating of the
surrounding area.
 
Wildfire Hazard Rating Maximum Length
Moderate               1,200 feet
High                   900 feet
Extreme                500 feet
 
      (4)   The cul-de-sac shall not be less than 60 feet in diameter, or as
required by the Fire Marshal and City Engineer.
      (5)   A hammerhead cul-de-sac design may be allowed at the discretion of
the Fire Marshal.
      (6)   All cul-de-sacs must include signage indicating that the road is a
dead end road within 50 feet of the outlet.
   (D)   Bridges and culverts. Bridges and culverts shall be constructed to
support a gross vehicle weight of 40,000 pounds and shall have vehicle load
limits posted. Permanent culverts shall be installed at all intermittent and
perennial stream crossings. Specifications for bridges, culverts and other
stream crossing devices shall take into account at least the 25-year frequency
storm and upstream debris hazard. If the development is within a 100-year
floodplain, then 100-year frequency storm shall be used in drainage design.
   (E)   Traffic control and street signage.
      (1)   All roads will be designated with road names and signs will be
installed at each major road intersection. All lots and/or home sites will be
visibly signed with street addresses and numbered as such. Emergency access
roads shall be clearly identified.
      (2)   All roads shall be named or numbered in accordance with the city’s
addressing system and road identification signs in accordance with city
standards and specifications. All permitted occupied structures shall post
addresses prior to occupancy.
      (3)   The developer shall be responsible for the expense of constructing
and placing traffic- control signs, as follows.
         (a)   Stop signs shall be placed at all intersections of arterials; of
collectors and arterials; and when appropriate as determined by the City
Engineer, local streets/roads and collectors.
         (b)   Yield signs shall be required at the intersection of all other
streets and roads when determined by the Streets Department.
   (F)   Snow removal and road maintenance on private roads. Snow removal and
road maintenance on private roads will be the responsibility of the respective
property owner or homeowners’ association and will be noted as such on the
recorded plat of any subdivision which includes private streets. The CC&Rs for
the development shall include enforcement language for mandatory budgeting by
the association to provide snow removal and road maintenance services. When no
homeowners’ association exists, snow removal shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the private street.
   (G)   Pedestrian access.
      (1)   Sidewalks, pedestrian walkways or non-motorized trails shall be
provided for internal pedestrian, bicycle and/or equestrian circulation within
developed portions of the North Shore Development.
      (2)   Sidewalks, walkways, and trails shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the Brigham City Public Works Standards and Technical
Specifications, as modified for the North Shore Development.
   (H)   Public utilities.
      (1)   All utilities shall be placed underground unless the City Council,
following recommendation by the City Planning Commission, with input from the
affected utility, determines that special conditions exist, other than cost,
which should permit the utility to be installed above ground.
      (2)   Natural gas service may be installed at the developer’s option.
Propane use must conform to all applicable provisions of the Uniform Fire Code.
      (3)   Rights-of-way or easements shall be provided as required by the
utilities serving the proposed development.
      (4)   Underground utility services shall be installed extending into
private property to a distance 15 feet feet from the property line of each lot
before roads are surfaced.
   (I)   Coordination with Box Elder School District. All developments
proposing residential uses shall coordinate such development proposals with the
Box Elder School District. All residential developments where public
maintenance is anticipated shall provide adequate school bus loading and turn-
around areas, as evidenced by a written statement from the Box Elder School
District.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.070)
§ 156.302 SPECIAL SITE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   These criteria serve the public interest by requiring that the design of
developments in the North Shore Development are compatible with the natural,
rural environment and characteristics of their setting and with the image of
the area which the city seeks to promote; helping to reduce the potential for
land use conflicts by encouraging the protection of privacy and scenic views;
and protecting the integrity of the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge.
   (A)   Clustering of homes is encouraged to allow for reduced infrastructure
costs for roads, driveways and water and sanitary sewer systems when compared
with conventional design, and promote the visual integrity of development as
viewed from within the development.
   (B)   Development in the North Shore Development Planned District shall be
integrated in a manner that is consistent with the city’s General Plan and the
General Development Plan for the North Shore Development. Integration shall be
accomplished through, among other things, pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
visual, open space and other linkages and design techniques. A piecemeal
approach to planning and development, where individual development parcels are
designed and constructed without adequate integration opportunities with
surrounding areas, will not be permitted.
   (C)   Outbuildings, barns and associated corrals intended for the keeping
and use of horses shall be located in the rear yard not closer than 60 feet
from the rear plane of the house.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.080)
§ 156.303 LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Generally. The general purpose of this section is to protect and
promote the public health, safety and welfare, the quality of life and the
ability to view the night sky, by establishing regulations and a process of
review for exterior lighting.
      (2)   Specific regulations. This section establishes standards for
exterior lighting in order to accomplish the following:
         (a)   To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting;
         (b)   To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists, pedestrians
and equestrians;
         (c)   To provide for adequate lighting to protect public safety and
security of residents of the North Shore Development Planned District;
         (d)   To protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky, and
help preserve the quality of life of the North Shore Development Planned
District residents;
         (e)   To preserve the quality of the experience of tourists visiting
the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge and other adjacent wildlife areas;
         (f)   To protect the integrity of wildlife habitat at the Bear River
Migratory Bird Refuge and other adjacent wildlife areas;
         (d)   To prevent light trespass in all areas of the North Shore
Development Planned District;
         (f)   To promote efficient and cost effective lighting;
         (g)   To allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures;
         (h)   To provide lighting guidelines;
         (i)   To provide assistance to property owners and occupants in
bringing non-conforming lighting into conformance with this section; and
         (j)   To work with Box Elder County to promote the purposes of this
chapter.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CUT-OFF ANGLE (OF A LUMINAIRE). The angle, measured up from the nadir,
between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare source
is not visible.
      FOOT-CANDLE. A unit of illuminance amounting to on lumen per square foot.
      FULLY SHIELDED.
         (a)   Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light
rays are emitted by the installed fixtures at angles above the horizontal
plane.
         (b)   This means that the shield is not flush or parallel with the
light source or bulb.
         (c)   This is referred to in this document as a cut-off-fixture.
      GLARE. The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that
is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to
cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility.
      ILLUMINANCE. The quantity of light, or luminous flux, arriving at a
surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in lux or
foot-candles.
      INSTALLED. The initial installation of outdoor light fixtures defined
herein, following the effective date of this subchapter, but shall not apply to
those outdoor light fixtures installed prior to such date.
      LIGHT TRESPASS. Light emitted by a lighting installation that falls
outside the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
(Also called SPILL LIGHT.)
      LUMEN. A unit of measurement.
      LUMINANCE. The physical quantity corresponding to the brightness of a
surface (e.g., a lamp, luminaries, sky or reflecting material) in a specified
direction. It is the luminous intensity of an area of the surface divided by
that area.
      LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
      LUX (lx). The SI unit of illuminance. One LUX is one lumen per square
meter.
      OBTRUSIVE LIGHT. Spill light which, because of quantitative, directional
or spectral context, gives rise to annoyance, discomfort, distraction or a
reduction in the ability to see essential information.
      OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES. Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor
fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination
or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to search,
spot or flood lights for:
         (a)   Buildings and structures, including canopies and overhangs;
         (b)   Recreational areas;
         (c)   Parking lot lighting;
         (d)   Landscape lighting;
         (e)   Signs;
         (f)   Street lighting; and
         (g)   Display and service areas.
      SPILL LIGHT. Light emitted by a lighting installation that falls outside
the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited. (Also called
LIGHT TRESPASS.)
   (C)   Approved materials and methods of installation. The provisions of this
section are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of
installation not specifically prescribed by this section provided any such
alternate has been approved. The Planning Commission may approve any such
alternate; provided that, the proposed design, material or method provides
approximate equivalence to the specific requirements of this section, or is
otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this section.
      (1)   Shielding. All outdoor light fixtures except those exempted by
division (F) below and those regulated by division (C)(2) below shall be fully
shielded as required in division (C)(2) below.
      (2)   Requirements for shielding. The requirements for shielding light
emissions from outdoor light fixtures shall be as set forth herein. Shielding
of sign, landscape or building facade lighting shall be set forth in divisions
(D)(1) and (E)(6) below. Vegetation shall not be considered as a shield.
Requirements for Shielding
Requirements for Shielding
Fixture lamp type                             Shielded
Fluorescent3                                  Fully
Fossil fuel                                   None
Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, krypton5 None
High pressure sodium                          Fully
Incandescent greater than 100W                Fully
Low pressure sodium1                          Fully
Mercury vapor                                 Not permitted
Metal halide2                                 Fully
Quartz4                                       Fully
Notes to table:
1: This light source is monochromatic and is the most energy efficient of all.
It is a possible choice when used with a quality fixture that controls the
light output. LPS lighting should be mixed with another light source for color
rendering
2: Metal halide lamps shall be in enclosed luminaries
3: Warm white natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects
4: For the purposes of this section, quartz lamps shall not be considered an
incandescent light source
5: Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent materials
and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding
 
   (D)   On-site lighting.
      (1)   Direction. Building/wall mounted and free-standing exterior area
lighting shall be directed down and fully screened away from adjacent
properties. Sign, landscape and building facade luminaires that are non-cutoff
shall be equipped with glare shields, visors, barn doors or similar shielding
accessories that restrict direct illumination to within the perimeter of the
object being illuminated:
         (a)   Building mounted lighting, plaza lighting, open space lighting,
parking lot lighting and landscape lighting: the top of such fixtures shall not
exceed 30 feet in height from grade (including the pole base); and
         (b)   Recreational field lighting: shall be exempt from the height
requirement.
      (2)   Details. Details of all commercial exterior lighting installations
require approval by the city’s Planning Commission prior to installation.
      (3)   Lighting alternatives. Other lighting alternatives that meet the
intent of items above may be used with prior written approval from the city’s
Planning Commission.
   (E)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Recreational facility. No public outdoor recreational facility
shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m., except to conclude any recreational or
sporting event or other activity conducted at a ball park, outdoor
amphitheater, arena or similar facility in progress prior to 10:30 p.m. No
private outdoor recreation facility shall be illuminated after 10:00 p.m.
      (2)   Outdoor building, landscaping and signs. The unshielded (per
division (E)(6) below) outdoor illumination of any building or landscaping is
prohibited, except with incandescent fixtures with lamps of 100 watts or less.
Free-standing advertisement signs with internal lighting are permitted. All
illuminated outdoor advertising signs shall be equipped with an automatic time
controller that prevents the operation of the lighting fixtures between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. Businesses open 24 hours a day are exempt from
this curfew.
      (3)   Mercury vapor. The installation of mercury vapor fixtures is
prohibited.
      (4)   Searchlights. Searchlights used for advertising or entertainment
purposes are prohibited past 10:00 p.m.
      (5)   Light trespass, deemed nuisance. Outside lighting such as lamps,
bulbs, lights and all other devices for producing artificial light which shine
or reflect light onto or into a neighboring residence or property so as to
annoy or disturb the persons inhabiting or using such property is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is unlawful and prohibited.
         (a)   Investigation and enforcement by the city of violations of this
section shall be only upon written complaint signed and submitted by the
aggrieved complaining party. The maximum maintained illuminance levels
permitted at property lines is set forth herein.
 
Maximum Footcandles at Property Lines
Application                             Horizontal Footcandles Measured At
                                        Grade
Property line adjoins a public roadway  0.5 footcandles
or public right-of-way
Property line adjoins a non-residential 0.3 footcandles
property
Property line adjoins a residential     0.1 footcandles
property
 
      (6)   Upward lighting, signs. All upward-directed sign building or
landscaping lighting is prohibited, unless equipped with glare shields, visors,
barn doors or similar shielding accessories that restrict direct illumination
to within the perimeter of the object being illuminated.
      (7)   Flood lights, spotlights. Any unshielded (per division (E)(6)
above) flood light or spot light must be aimed no higher than 45 degrees above
straight down.
      (8)   Cut-off wall packs. Non cut-off wall packs are prohibited.
      (9)   Drop lenses. Drop lenses that change a luminaire from cutoff to
non-cutoff are prohibited.
      (10)   Tilting. Tilting of existing or new fixtures that change a cutoff
fixture to non-cutoff is prohibited.
   (F)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Non-conforming fixtures. Outdoor light fixtures installed prior to
the effective date of this section are exempt from the provisions of this
section; provided, however, that, no change in use, replacement, structural
alteration or restoration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it
thereafter conforms to the provisions of this section. Routine maintenance
activities shall be allowed and include the following: replacement of lamps,
replacement/repair of damaged or inoperative luminaire components such as
ballasts, igniters, lenses, reflectors, refractors, sockets or photo cell
controls.
      (2)   Fossil fuel light. Fossil fuel light produced directly or
indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels
is exempt from the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Special conditions. For street lighting in a right-of-way, the City
Council may grant an exemption to the requirements of this section.
      (4)   Construction lighting. Lighting necessary for construction is
exempt from the provisions of this section; provided, said lighting is
temporary and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction
work.
      (5)   Emergency lighting. Emergency lighting by police, fire and rescue
authorities is exempt from this section.
      (6)   Holiday lighting. Holiday lighting is exempt from this section.
   (G)   Applications (commercial uses only). Any person applying for a
building, electrical or sign permit to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall,
as a part of said application submit evidence that the proposed work will
comply with this section. The application shall contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Plan. Plans indicating the location of the premises, and the
type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports other devices;
         (b)   Lumination descriptions. Descriptions of the illuminating
devices, fixtures, lamps, supports and other devices. This description shall
include but is not limited to manufacturer’s catalog cuts, footcandle plots (in
tenths, example: 0.3), and drawings including sections where required.
Footcandle plots shall include listings of average, maximum, minimum, maximum/
minimum, average/minimum values, as well as plots; and
         (c)   Evidence. The above required plans and descriptions shall be
sufficiently complete to enable the City Engineer to readily determine whether
compliance with the requirements of this section will be secured. If such plans
and descriptions cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the
nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures or lamps proposed, the
applicant shall submit evidence of compliance by certified test reports as
performed by a recognized testing lab.
   (H)   Issuance of permit for lighting on private property. The requirements
of this section shall be incorporated into any design review, conditional use
review, building permit review or other such land use approvals granted by the
City Council, City Redevelopment Agency, Planning Commission or Community
Development Department.
   (I)   Maximum lighting levels. All installations are allowed to meet the
Illumination Engineering Society of North America minimum standards, plus 30%,
maximum.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.090)
§ 156.304 CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Conflict. Whenever regulations in this subchapter conflict with other
provision of the city code, the provisions of this subchapter shall govern.
Whenever regulations of other provisions of the city code address matters that
are not addressed by this subchapter, then said other provisions shall govern.
   (B)   Severability.
      (1)   This subchapter and the various parts, sections and clauses are
hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby
declared that the remainder of the subchapter shall not be affected thereby.
      (2)   The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
subchapter on each part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more portions thereof be
declared invalid.
(Prior Code, § 29.22.100)
900 NORTH/MAIN STREET PLANNED DISTRICT
§ 156.320 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of establishing the 900 North/Main Street Planned
District is to address a very specific area of the city which is located at the
crossroads of North Main Street and 900 North Street, State Route 13 and State
Route 38. The Planned District is intended to create a zoning district that can
be a productive and vibrant location for promoting businesses and jobs. The
Planned District site is bound by Main Street on the west, 900 North Street on
the north and 100 East on the east. (See Exhibit "A", legal description and
site map, attached to the ordinance codified herein, as illustrated in §
156.324.)
(Prior Code, § 29.23.010) (Ord. 18-16, passed 10-18-2018; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-
7-2024)
§ 156.321 PLANNED DISTRICT.
   The 900 North/Main Street Planned District shall apply to all properties
located within the corporate limits of Brigham City at the southeast corner of
the 900 North Street and Main Street intersection as shown in Exhibit "A",
attached to the ordinance codified herein as illustrated in §
156.324.
   (A)   Zoning district established. P-GC (Planned - General Commercial).
   (B)   Uses. The following uses are allowed within the P-GC District, which
otherwise may not be listed in the underlying General Commercial Zoning
District:
      (1)   The underlying zone is General Commercial; all uses allowed under
the same permitted or conditional use designation as in other General
Commercial Districts are hereby allowed in this Planned District.
      (2)   Additional permitted uses allowed and incorporated in the P-GC
District:
         (a)   Landscape service business. A business that designs, installs
and maintains landscape. Business includes the parking of trucks and equipment
trailers on-site. No on-site repair and maintenance of landscape related
machinery, including its trucks, equipment, and trailers and storage of
landscape materials or fertilizers.
   (C)   General Development Plan. The approved civil site and landscape plans
and new building elevations continue to serve as the General Development Plan
for this 900 North/Main Street Planned District, except that the proposed site
plan shall serve as the modified parking and secured area plan. Any significant
revision to the General Development Plan requires an amendment to this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.23.020) (Ord. 18-16, passed 10-18-2018; Ord. 22-09, passed 5-
5-2022; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-7-2024)
§ 156.322 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   The following provisions shall apply in this P-GC District, which district
shall also be subject to other provisions of the city code, except where
conflict in regulations occur, the regulations specified in this subchapter, or
on the development plan approved pursuant to this subchapter shall apply.
   (A)   Standards for area, coverage, density, yard requirements (setbacks),
height regulations, parking, lighting and signage shall be governed by the
standards of the GC (General Commercial) District, city code chapters on sign
regulations and off-street parking requirements.
   (B)   Standards for public improvements shall be governed by applicable
adopted city ordinances and laws, including adopted Public Work Standards.
   (C)   (1)   Landscaping shall be governed by the standards of the GC
District and accepted General Development Plan.
      (2)   A minimum of 50% of the area of the required landscaping shall
consist of live plant materials.
      (3)   Park strip areas (area between curb and sidewalk) in the public
right-of-way is to be landscaped with grass and street trees.
      (4)   Screening of any secured area shall be achieved through chain link
fencing with slats or other appropriate methodology approved by the Planning
Commission. The installed two-rail steel fencing along a portion of 100 East
Street and a portion of 900 North Street in lieu of the security fence where
the area is improved and used for parking is allowed through a hold harmless
agreement with Brigham City and recorded with the property due to the fencing
location within the public right-of-way and located adjacent to the public
sidewalk. Said fencing serves as a barrier between the parking and the public
sidewalk in lieu of the required landscape and is to be maintained for such
purposes.
   (D)   New building construction is intentionally allowed to be flexible and
creative. The exterior texture, siding, color, type and the like is to be
advanced by owner/applicant and as approved by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 29.23.030) (Ord. 18-16, passed 10-18-2018; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-
7-2024)
§ 156.323 CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Conflict. Whenever regulations in this subchapter conflict with other
provisions of the city code, the provisions of this subchapter shall govern.
Whenever regulations of other provisions of the city code address matters that
are not addressed by this subchapter, then said other provisions shall govern.
   (B)   Severability. This subchapter and the various parts, sections and
clauses are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is
hereby declared that the remainder of the subchapter shall not be affected
thereby. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
subchapter on each part, section, paragraphs, sentence, clause or phrase
hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more portions thereof be
declared invalid.
(Prior Code, § 29.23.040) (Ord. 18-16, passed 10-18-2018; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-
7-2024)
§ 156.324 EXHIBITS.
   (A)   IMT Subdivision.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3300.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3302.gif]
      (B)   Exhibit A; 900 North/Main Street Planned District Legal Description
and Site Map.
03-083-0007 (852 N. Main)
BEG AT POINT APPROXIMATELY 1320 FT NORTH & 2476 FT WEST & S 01*00’00” W 50 FT
M/L FROM SE CORNER OF SEC 12, T 09N, R 02W, SLM. THENCE S 01*00’00” W 80 FT,
EAST 145 FT, N 01*00’00” E 80 FT TO SOUTH LINE OF UTAH ST RD COMMISSION R/W,
WEST ALONG SD R/W 145 FT M/L TO BEG.
LESS: NORTH 15 FT TO BRIGHAM CITY.
03-083-0008 (816 N. Main)
BEG AT PT APPROX 1320 FT N & 2476 FT W & S01*W 130 FT M/L FRM SE COR SEC 12
T09N R02W SLM, E 145 FT, N01*E 80 FT TO S LINE OF UTAH ST ROAD COMM R/W, E 185
FT M/L TO W SIDE OF 100 E ST AS NOW OR HEREAFTER LOC, S01*W 340.4 FT, W 330 FT
M/L TO E SIDE OF ST & FED HWY, N01*E 260.4 FT ALG E SIDE OF SD HWY TO BEG.
LESS: BEG AT PT S01*00’00”W 50 FT & E 145 FT FRM PT OF REC LOC 1320 FT N & 2476
FT W FRM SE COR SEC 12 T09N R02W SLM, SD POB ALSO BEING GRANTOR’S NW PROP COR,
E 185 FT ALG GRANTOR’S N PROP LINE TO GRANTOR’S NE PROP COR, S01*00’00”W 15.00
FT ALG GRANTOR’S E PROP LINE, W 185 FT M/L TO GRANTOR’S W PROP LINE,
N01*00’00”E 15 FT TO POB. SUBJECT TO BDY/L AGREEMENT REC AS ENTRY #248805. CONT
2.44 AC M/L.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3184.png]
   (C)   Site plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3304.gif]
   (D)   Landscape Plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3306.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3309.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3311.gif]
 
(Ord. “Exhibit 29.23” passed - -; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-7- 2024)
SUPPLEMENTARY AND QUALIFYING PROVISIONS
§ 156.335 EFFECT OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The regulations hereinafter set forth in this subchapter qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.336 SUBSTANDARD LOTS AT TIME OF ORDINANCE PASSAGE.
   Any lot legally held in separate ownership as of 11-1-1986 (Ord. 568), which
lot is below the requirements for lot area or lot width for the district in
which it is located may be used for a single-family dwelling if such lot is
located in a district which permits single-family dwellings.
   (B)   The width of each of the side yards for such a dwelling may be reduced
to a width which is not less than the same percentage of the lot width as the
required side yard would be of the required lot width; provided that, in no
case shall the smaller of the two yards be less than five feet or the total
width of the two yards be less than 13 feet.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.337 LOT STANDARDS.
   Except for planned unit developments and cluster subdivisions, and as
otherwise provided in this subchapter, every lot, existing or intended to be
created, shall have such area, width and depth as is required by this chapter
for the district in which such lot is located and shall have frontage upon a
dedicated or publicly-approved street or upon a private street or right-of-way
approved by the Planning Commission, before a building permit may be issued.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.338 EVERY DWELLING TO BE ON A LOT; EXCEPTION.
   Every dwelling structure shall be located and maintained on a separate lot
having no less than the minimum area, width, depth and frontage required by
this chapter for the district in which the dwelling structure is located;
except that, group dwellings, cluster dwellings, condominiums and other multi-
structure dwelling complexes under single ownership and management, which are
permitted by this chapter and have approval from the Planning Commission, may
occupy one lot for each such multi-structure complex.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.339 YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY.
   No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is
hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space
on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot
whereon a building is to be erected or established.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.340 SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE.
   No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this chapter for lot or building may be sold or leased away
from such lot or building.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.341 SALE OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area
requirements for the district in which it is located may be cut off from a
larger parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building
or development as a lot.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.342 YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except
for accessory buildings in a rear yard, the ordinary projections of skylights,
sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues, and other ornamental features
which project into a yard not more than two and one-half feet, and open or
lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies
opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard not more than five feet and
uncovered porches or stairs which are not more than 30 inches above the
adjoining grade and that do not extend from the structure more than five feet
into the required yard.
   (A)   Raised patios, either open or roofed in a required rear yard under the
following conditions. The patio may extend not more than eight feet into the
required rear yard; the patio shall be attached to the rear of the dwellings;
the patio shall not exceed two-thirds of the rear width of the dwelling to
which it is attached; the patio shall be a ground floor patio only; the sides
of the patio shall remain unenclosed except for lattice work and required
handrails and guardrails. Any dwelling located within the current minimum
setback, the eight feet extension will be reduced to comply with the current
minimum setback.
   (B)   Front porches in a required front yard under the following conditions.
The front porch may extend not more than eight feet into the required front
yard: the porch shall be attached to the front of the dwelling; the dwelling
shall be located on an interior lot and not on a corner lot; the porch shall
not exceed two-thirds of the front width of the dwelling to which it is
attached and not impact the required off street parking (driveway, garage,
carport and the like); the front and sides of the porch shall remain unenclosed
except for required handrails, guardrails or porch half wall not to exceed 42
inches in height, and supporting structures for any roof covering; and the
projection shall not exceed one story in overall height. (See figure at the end
of this section.) Any dwelling located within the current minimum setback, the
eight feet extension will be reduced to comply with the current minimum
setback.
   (C)   Easements.
      (1)   No dwelling, main building, accessory building or structure shall
be located within a recorded easement area unless the property owner either
produces evidence satisfactory to the Director or designee that the easement
has been vacated, or executes a recordable document, in a form approved by the
City Attorney, indicating that notwithstanding apparent vacation of the
easement, the building or structure may be subject to the superior interest of
the easement holder and may be required to be relocated at the property owner's
expense to accommodate such interests.
         (a)   Location: Any building or structure in an easement area shall be
located pursuant to the setback and other applicable requirements of this
title.
         (b)   No expansion of legal rights: Nothing in this section is
intended to expand or restrict the rights or obligations of any party to any
recorded easement.
      (2)   Buildings or structures that are located in a location where
utilities are or may be constructed aboveground, buildings and structures may
be built or provided at least:
         (a)   Fifteen feet clearance is maintained between any part of the
building structure and utility lines; and
         (b)   Five feet clearance is maintained between the building structure
and any utility pole. The owner shall agree to make utility accommodation, up
to and including removal of the building or structure, if necessary, at his/her
own expense, if future utility placement, replacement or maintenance require
such action and with the city or franchised utility bearing no liability for
any cost incurred.
      (3)   Retaining walls shall not be placed upon any public utility
easements unless the Director or designee determines the retaining wall will
not unreasonably interfere with the public utility easement and approve the
retaining wall in writing.
Projections into Required Yards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3313.gif]
 
(Prior Code, § 29.05 .080) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 20-12, passed 7-
2-2020; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 156.343 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED.
   Public and quasi-public utility buildings, when authorized in a district,
may be erected to a height greater than the district height limit by
conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.090) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.344 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT AND STORY LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Height. Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators,
stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and
maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, wireless or television masts,
theater lofts, silos or similar structures may be erected above the height
limits herein prescribed, but no space above the height limit shall be allowed
for purposes of providing additional floor space.
   (B)   Story.
      (1)   In instances where sufficient grade slope allows for the main story
of an accessory building to be accessed from ground level at the highest ground
elevation and the lower story accessed from the opposing side of the building
at the lowest ground elevation, a two-story accessory building shall be
allowed.
      (2)   The following location and height standards and regulations apply
on a sloping site to qualify for a two-story accessory building.
         (a)   Accessory building location shall be located within the required
building setbacks as illustrated herein.
         (b)   Accessory building height is measured as the vertical distance
from the average ground elevation along the sloping or terraced exterior
building wall to the highest point of the building as illustrated herein.
         (c)   For the purpose of measuring the highest point of the building
the average ground elevation is the mid-point between the highest and lowest
ground elevations along the sloping or terraced exterior building wall as
illustrated herein.
         (d)   Buildings on slopes greater than 15% grade are required to
complete and submit structuring engineering for the building.
(The figure for accessory building locations on a sloping sites shall continue
on the following page.)
Accessory Building Location on a Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3047.jpg]
Accessory Building Height on a Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3045.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 29.05.100) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 22-05, passed 3-
17-2022)
§ 156.345 CANNABIS PRODUCTION ESTABLISHMENT AND MEDICAL CANNABIS PHARMACY.
   (A)   A cannabis production establishment:
      (1)   Unless waived by the state’s Department of Agriculture and Food,
may not be located within 600 feet of any residential zone or within 1,000 feet
of any community location, measured from the nearest entrance to the cannabis
production establishment following the shortest ordinary route of pedestrian
travel to the boundary of the community location or residential zone;
      (2)   Shall be operated entirely within an enclosed building;
      (3)   Shall be designed to filter inside air exchanges to the outside
through air filter systems that remove dust, fumes, vapors, odors or waste from
air that exits the building;
      (4)   Shall maintain any exterior brick in an unpainted condition and
leave brick in its natural color to avoid drawing attention to the structure;
      (5)   Exterior materials that are not brick, glass or transparent or
translucent greenhouse materials intended to allow natural light into the
interior of the structure shall be painted white, brown, or a similar color to
avoid drawing attention to the structure;
      (6)   Shall obtain a city business license before conducting business
within the city; and
      (7)   Shall meet the minimum land use requirements for the zone in which
it is located.
   (B)   A medical cannabis pharmacy:
      (1)   Unless waived by the state’s Department of Health, shall be located
no closer than 600 feet from the border of any residential zone and 200 feet
from any community location, measured from the nearest entrance to the cannabis
pharmacy establishment following the shortest ordinary route of pedestrian
travel to the boundary of the community location or residential zone;
      (2)   Shall not have drive-through service;
      (3)   Shall not have outdoor seating or seating areas;
      (4)   Shall not have outdoor vending machines of any kind;
      (5)   Shall have one public entry door at the front of the building
facing the street;
      (6)   Shall not darken or cover any windows on the front of the building,
but shall maintain windows clear and allow visibility into the pharmacy from
the street;
      (7)   Shall not have cannabis products visible from outside the medical
cannabis pharmacy;
      (8)   Shall not have bars on windows;
      (9)   Shall maintain any exterior brick in an unpainted condition and
leave brick in its natural color in order to avoid drawing attention to the
building;
      (10)   Exterior materials that are not brick or glass shall be painted
white, brown or a similar color to avoid drawing attention to the structure;
      (11)   Shall be designed to filter inside air exchanges to the outside
through air filter systems that remove dust, fumes, vapors, odors or waste from
air that exits the building;
      (12)   Shall meet the minimum land use requirements for the zone in which
it is located;
      (13)   Shall obtain a city business license before conducting business
within the city; and
      (14)   Shall limit the hours of operation it is open to the public to 9:
00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.110) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-
7-2019)
§ 156.346 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   Fences and walls may be erected or allowed as limited or exempted
herein; and, provided that, any fence or wall over three feet in height shall
require a fence permit and if over six feet in height, be designed to withstand
anticipated wind loads, as defined within the current adopted Building Code.
The Community Development Director or designee shall be the Land Use Authority
for all fences and walls, except as otherwise noted in this section. For
fences, retaining wall or other landscape features greater than three feet in
height the following shall apply:
      (1)   When sidewalk is present, a fence, retaining wall or other
landscaping features may be placed up to one foot of the location of the
sidewalk; and
      (2)   When no sidewalk is present, a fence, retaining wall or other
landscaping features may be placed in such a manner that it will be located no
closer than one foot to future sidewalk location.
   (B)   Limitations are as follows:
      (1)   No private fence or wall shall be erected, allowed or maintained on
public property without city approval. Such approval may be granted by the City
Council under the following circumstances:
         (a)   The applicant is the owner of the adjacent property for which
the fence or wall approval is sought;
         (b)   The public property involved is a city street;
         (c)   When no sidewalk is present, the fence or wall will be placed in
such a manner that it will be located no closer than one foot to future
sidewalk location;
         (d)   When sidewalk is present, the fence or wall may be placed to
within one foot of the location of the sidewalk;
         (e)   The portion of the public right-of-way between the fence or wall
and the curb when curb is present, or between the fence or wall and the travel
way when no curb is present, shall be maintained by the adjacent property
owner;
         (f)   All other provisions of the city code apply; and
         (g)   The owner will sign a document prepared by the City Attorney
agreeing to hold the city harmless from liability arising as a result of the
placement of the fence or wall on public property.
      (2)   On interior lots:
         (a)   In side and rear yards, and that portion of the front yard
between the front plane of the house and the required front yard setback,
fences and walls shall be allowed to a maximum height of six feet as
illustrated herein; and
         (b)   In the required front yard setback, fences and walls shall be
allowed to a maximum height of four feet. A property owner may erect a six-foot
fence in the required front yard setback along a common property line that is
the back yard of an adjacent property; provided, all other provisions of this
chapter are met.
      (3)   On corner lots:
         (a)   In side and rear yards, and that portion of the front yard
between the front plane of the house and the required front yard setback,
fences and walls shall be allowed to a maximum height of six feet; except that,
in street-facing side and rear yards which back onto front yards of adjoining
lots, fences and walls shall be limited to a maximum height of six feet as
illustrated herein; and
         (b)   In the required front yard setback, fences and walls shall be
allowed to a maximum height of four feet. A property owner may erect a six-foot
fence in the required front yard setback along a common property line that is
the back yard of an adjacent property; provided, all other provisions of this
chapter are met.
Interior and Corner Lot Limitations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3043.jpg]
   (C)   The height limitations for fences and walls are further limited as
follows:
      (1)   In any district requiring a front yard, no obstruction to view
above three feet and below seven feet in height shall be permitted on any
corner lot within a triangular as per §
156.353 of this chapter.
      (2)   Where a fence or wall is erected on or within five feet of a
property line, upon a retaining wall or where for other reasons there is a
difference in the elevation of the surface of the land on either side of a
fence, height of the fence shall be measured from a point halfway between the
top of the retaining wall and the land on the lower side or from the average
elevation of the surface of the land on either side and within ten feet of the
fence, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict the fence or
wall to less than four feet in height measured from the surface of the land on
the side having the highest elevation.
   (D)   Temporary fences may be approved by the Director or designee for the
following conditions:
      (1)   For the purpose of protecting or securing site construction with an
active demolition permit, building permit, special event permit or other
similar type of permit;
      (2)   For the purpose of protecting or securing an attractive nuisance,
dangerous or unsafe property deemed by the Director or designee;
      (3)   The duration of a temporary fence shall be stated in the required
fence permit; and
      (4)   Temporary fencing may be up to six feet in height.
   (E)   (1)   Fences and walls shall be constructed according to the local
building code and consist of durable industry standard materials including:
         (a)   Cedar, douglas fir, redwood or pressure-treated wood products;
         (b)   Vinyl (Polyvinyl chloride) fencing products;
         (c)   Natural boulder, rock or stone products;
         (d)   Prefabricated masonry block, brick or stone products;
         (e)   Cast in place or precast concrete products; and
         (f)   Wrought iron, welded wire mesh, aluminum or galvanized chain
link products.
      (2)   Fence and wall materials that may not be permitted include:
         (a)   Tarps, or fabrics, stacked refuse or discarded debris,
manufactured wood pallets, chipboard, particle board, or plywood;
         (b)   Barbed wire or electrically charged fencing unless located in
the agricultural zoning district or approved by the Land Use Authority through
a separate land use application; and
         (c)   Razor wire fencing unless approved by the Land Use Authority
through a separate land use application.
   (F)   The property owner is responsible to maintain, repair, remove or
replace fencing, walls or other similar features for screening deemed unsafe or
structurally unsound by the Director or designee.
   (G)   The Planning Commission may grant an exception to the height limits
contained in this subchapter for fences or walls surrounding tennis courts,
swimming pools, schools or other special type facilities, where it is shown
that the normal use or level of protection requires a greater height for safety
or other reasons; provided, however, that, the rights of adjoining property
owners are equally considered.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.130) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 22-10, passed 9-
1-2022; Ord. 22-19, passed 9-1-2022)
§ 156.347 WATER AND SEWAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   In all cases where a proposed building or proposed use will involve the use
of sewerage facilities, and a connection to a public sewer system, as defined
by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality, is not available, and in
all cases where a connection to a public water system approved by the state’s
Department of Environmental Quality is not available, the sewage disposal and
the domestic water supply shall comply with the requirements of such Department
and of the local Board of Health, and the application for a building permit
shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from said Board or
Department.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.140) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.348 DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any and all uses of property must comply with the requirements of the
“Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance”, as contained in §§
51.030 through
51.035 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.150) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.349 CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS.
   The installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks of a type approved by the
governing body shall be required on any existing or proposed street adjoining a
lot on which a building new primary structure is to be constructed (except
accessory buildings) or remodeled, or on which a new use is to be established.
Such curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be required as a condition of building
or use permit approval.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.160) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.350 EFFECT OF OFFICIAL MAP.
   Wherever a front yard is required for a lot facing on a street for which an
official map has been recorded, the depth of such front yard shall be measured
from the mapped street line provided by the official map.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.170) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.351 LOTS AND DWELLINGS ON PRIVATE STREETS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   Lots with frontage on private streets only shall be allowed by conditional
use permit or planned unit development procedure only, and subject to all
applicable requirements of this chapter and Chapter 155 of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.180) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.352 FAMILY SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   A FAMILY SWIMMING POOL is defined as any structure or container
holding water to a depth of 18 inches or greater and having either a diameter
or diagonal measurement of ten feet or greater.
   (B)   A family swimming pool shall be permitted in the side and rear yard of
a dwelling as an accessory use; provided, the following requirements are met.
      (1)   The location of such family swimming pool or accessory machinery
shall not be less than ten feet from any interior property line. On corner
lots, the distance from said pool to the property line facing on a street shall
not be less than the required side yard for any accessory building in that
zone.
      (2)   An outside family swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a
substantial barrier of not less than six feet in height, and any lights used to
illuminate said pool or its accessories shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from adjoining premises. A SUBSTANTIAL BARRIER shall mean any
barrier that would not allow passage by any person, except by means of a
lockable gate.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.190) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.353 CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS.
   (A)   In addition to the other provisions contained in this chapter, a clear
view at the intersection of two streets shall be maintained within a triangular
area formed by the existing or future back-of-curb lines extended and a line
connecting them at points 50 feet from the intersection of such lines; or, the
property lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the
intersection of such lines; whichever is the least restrictive as shown herein.
To maintain this clear view, the following standards shall apply, except for
the exceptions noted in division (D) below.
      (1)   No solid-type fence or other visual obstructions between three feet
and seven feet in height from the street elevation (measured from the elevation
of the adjoining sidewalk) shall be allowed.
      (2)   Open-type fences or other obstructions which are at least 50%
transparent are allowed to a height of four feet though they must be maintained
to permit clear and unobstructed view.
      (3)   Pruning of trees is required to maintain an overhang at least seven
feet above the elevation of the adjoining sidewalk or street when no sidewalk
is present in the clear view area.
Intersection of Two Streets
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3049.jpg]
   (B)   A clear-view area shall also be maintained at the intersection of a
street and a private drive within a triangular area formed by a diagonal line
connecting the line of the back side of the sidewalk and the line of the edge
of the private drive at points ten feet from the projected intersection of such
lines and a rectangular area extending from the two points of the triangular
area at the location of the sidewalk to the curb of the street as shown herein.
When no sidewalk is present, the measurement shall be taken from the property
line along the street right-of-way as shown herein. In order to maintain this
clear view, the standards outlined in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3) above
shall apply.
Private Drive and Street (Sidewalk)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3051.jpg]
Private Drive and Street (No Sidewalk)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3053.jpg]
   (C)   The owner of any fence or wall shall have the duty and be required to
properly maintain the same by painting, treating, trimming, repairing or
removal.
   (D)   Exceptions to this section include:
      (1)   Reasonable number of posts, telephone or power poles, pruned trees
and pedestal type identification signs; and
      (2)   Commercial structures, designated parking stalls, signs and other
obstructions located at controlled intersections within the GC (General
Commercial) or CBD (Central Business District) Zoning Districts. A controlled
intersection for purposes of this section includes a posted four-way stop sign
intersection, three-way stop sign intersection at a “T” intersection or
signalized stop light intersection.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.200) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 09-18, passed 12-
3-2009; Ord. 15-02, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 156.354 TELEVISION SATELLITE ANTENNAS.
   Building permits are required for television satellite antennas and shall
comply with the following regulations: exception: antennas 30 inches or less in
diameter are not regulated by this section.
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   All television satellite antennas shall have setbacks as required
for accessory building, except as further limited herein, if free-standing. The
setback shall be measured from the property lines to the nearest point of the
antenna. The distance for rotating antennas shall be measured from the nearest
point of the antenna in its closest rotational configuration.
      (2)   In any commercial or manufacturing zone, such antenna may be
located on the roof or in the rear or side yards; but shall only be permitted
in the front yard or in a side yard facing the street on a corner lot, by
approval of the Appeal Authority when a usable satellite signal cannot be
obtained in an otherwise approved location.
      (3)   Pad-mounted television satellite antennas shall only be located in
the rear yard of any lot in any residential zone.
   (B)   Antenna size. A television satellite antenna exceeding 12 feet in
diameter in a residential zone shall be considered a conditional use and
subject to the provisions of §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter.
   (C)   Antenna height. No antenna shall exceed the height limitation in its
respective zone.
   (D)   Construction standards.
      (1)   All antennas shall be erected in a secure and wind-resistant
manner.
      (2)   Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a
direct strike of lightning.
      (3)   All antennas in a residential zone shall be located and designed to
reduce the visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from
public streets.
   (E)   Temporary television satellite antennas. Temporary television
satellite antennas may be located on property for up to a total of 30 days
without being subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.210) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.355 USES NOT LISTED.
   Within any zoning district, the Community Development Director or designee
shall have the authority to identify and categorize unlisted uses within the
listed permitted or conditional uses, based on a finding of substantial
similarity of character, origin and impact and the like, to a listed use, and
when so categorized such use shall thereafter be recognized and treated the
same as a listed use.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.220) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.356 PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS EXEMPT FROM CERTAIN ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   The Planning Commission may exempt public utilities from lot area, width and
frontage regulations contained within the zoning district regulations of this
chapter upon a finding that such exemption:
   (A)   Will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity;
   (B)   The proposed use will comply with all other regulations and conditions
specified in this chapter for such use;
   (C)   Such exemption will not substantially adversely affect the General
Plan or intent of the zoning district in which the use is proposed; and
   (D)   In the particular case for which the exemption is requested, adherence
to lot area, width and frontage regulations is unnecessary in order to carry
out the intent of the General Plan.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.230) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.357 BED AND BREAKFAST SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   The following regulations and site standards govern the approval and
operation of bed and breakfast facilities within residential and commercial
zoning districts. Bed and breakfast facilities may be allowed by conditional
use permit where the applicant can show evidence of compliance with outlined
standards and procedures and where there is a clearly minimal impact on
adjacent residential properties and neighborhoods.
   (A)   Requirements for approval.
      (1)   A conditional use permit may be granted by the Planning Commission
for a bed and breakfast facility provided that the requirements of this section
are met in addition to the requirements of §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter.
      (2)   The granting of a conditional use permit for a bed and breakfast
facility shall not exempt the application from meeting other applicable
ordinances, covenants, codes or laws recognized by the city. The following pre-
conditions and documentation are required.
         (a)   Along with a conditional use application, a letter of
application sworn before a notary public shall be provided by the owner(s)
stating that such owners or a live-in residential manager, pursuant hereto,
will occupy the said facility, except for bonafide temporary absences. Said
letter shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, with a certified
copy to accompany the building permit application;
         (b)   The effective period of the conditional use permit for bed and
breakfast facilities shall be two years from December 31 of the calendar year
of the original permit. At the end of every two years thereafter, renewal of
the conditional use permit shall be automatically granted upon receipt of the
Community Development Department of certification by the property owner that
the property remains the principal residence of the owner or live-in
residential manager, pursuant to part division (B)(1) below, and that all other
conditions required at the time of approval remain unchanged. Notification
shall be sent to the owner for response. Failure to obtain such certification
may be the basis for revocation of the conditional use permit. The Planning
Commission, at its discretion, may require a new application and a
demonstration of compliance with all conditions necessary for a conditional use
permit;
         (c)   Building plans or a floor plan (one-fourth inch to the foot)
showing the bed and breakfast facility shall be provided; and
         (d)   Plans for proposed signs, showing proposed size, location,
materials and appearance of the proposed sign or signs.
   (B)   Development standards and requirements for bed and breakfast
facilities.
      (1)   In R-1-20, R-1-12, R-1-10 and R-1-8 Zoning Districts, the bed and
breakfast facility shall be occupied by the owner(s) of the property, except
for bonafide temporary absences. In all other zoning districts where bed and
breakfast facilities are allowed, a live-in residential manager may be
permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission as a condition of
approval. In such cases, the bed and breakfast facility shall be occupied by
the residential manager except for bonafide temporary absences. A change in
ownership will necessitate the request of a new condition use permit.
      (2)   Bed and breakfast facilities in R-1-20, R-1-12, R-1-10, and R-1-
8 shall be limited to a maximum of four guest sleeping rooms per dwelling. The
maximum number of guest sleeping rooms in bed and breakfast facilities located
in other zoning districts shall be determined by the Planning Commission on an
individual basis through the conditional use process.
      (3)   In R-1-20, R-1-12, R-1-10 and R-1-8 Zoning Districts, only one bed
and breakfast facility shall be allowed per block, unless the Planning
Commission determines that extraordinary circumstances warrant a greater
number.
      (4)   The bed and breakfast facility shall be located on a parcel of
sufficient size to accommodate the structure or structures, the number of
people using the facility, parking areas, open space areas and the like.
      (5)   The bed and breakfast facility shall be designed, or existing
structure modified, so that to the degree reasonably feasible the appearance of
the structure remains as a residential dwelling. Unique architecture is
encouraged, where possible, in keeping with the local area.
      (6)   Signage for a bed and breakfast facility shall comply with the sign
standards for the district in which the bed and breakfast facility is located.
The Planning Commission may also dictate materials and appearance of the sign
in order to protect the residential nature of the neighborhood in which the bed
and breakfast is located.
      (7)   The development parcel for the bed and breakfast shall include
appropriate setbacks, buffering and landscaping to mitigate impacts on
adjoining residential properties.
      (8)   Two parking spaces shall be provided for the host family. At least
one off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room in addition
to needed parking for owners/employees of the facility. All required parking
shall be subject to front yard setback standards for the district in which the
bed and breakfast facility is located.
      (9)   The design and size of the bed and breakfast facility shall conform
to all applicable Fire, Building and Health Codes. The facility shall be
licensed in conformance with all city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.240) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.358 KEEPING OF RESIDENTIAL FOWL.
    The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for the keeping of
residential fowl within certain residential districts. Fowl shall be kept in a
way that will ensure the continued health and well- being of the residents of
the city while allowing a more self-sustaining method of living.
   (A)   Types of fowl not allowed. Male chickens and chicken crowing hens,
guineafowl, emu, ostrich, peacock, and turkey. Fowl are not considered
household pets.
   (B)   Residential districts. Residential fowl are allowed in the R-M-7, R-1-
6, R-1-8, R-1-10, R-1-12, R-M-15, R-1-20, R-M-30, R-1-40, GC, and CBD Districts
and shall be further limited to single-family dwelling units which have a
separate legal lot or parcel of record.
   (C)   Permit.
      (1)   A permit is required for the keeping of fowl.
      (2)   The permit is a one-time permit. There shall be no "grandfathering"
or legal nonconforming use property rights arising from the permit.
      (3)   The permit cost is as set forth in resolution.
      (4)   Each fowl owner is required to read the supplemental educational
materials supplied by the city.
   (D)   Allowed number of fowl.
      (1)   A minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet is required for the keeping
of fowl. The minimum number of fowl permitted on any lot is four, for the
social wellness of the fowl. The permitted number of fowl is as follows:
 
6,000 sq. ft.  4 fowl
8,000 sq. ft.  6 fowl
10,000 sq. ft. 8 fowl
14,000 sq. ft. 10 fowl
20,000 sq. ft. 12 fowl
 
      (2)   No more than 12 fowl will be permitted on any lot.
   (E)   Containment and protection.
      (1)   Fowl shall be provided with a predator-proof coop with a minimum of
two and one-half square feet per fowl.
      (2)   Coops shall not be larger than 200 square feet unless a building
permit is issued for its construction.
      (3)   Coops and pens shall be no taller than eight feet in height and
shall be located in the back yard. On corner lots, the side yard which faces
the street, the coop and pen shall not be within the 20-foot side yard setback
from property line.
      (4)   Coops and pens shall be a minimum of five feet from the property
line and 25 feet from the nearest residential dwelling. There is no minimum
distance between the coop and the property owner's dwelling unless the coop is
larger than 200 square feet.
      (5)   There shall be an enclosed area for a run with a minimum of five
square feet per fowl. A securely fenced rear yard is acceptable for the run.
Fowl shall not be allowed out of the run or to roam free outside a fenced area.
      (6)   It is unlawful for the owner of any fowl to permit such fowl to
trespass or go upon the premises of another or to run at large on any public
roadway, public property or public park.
      (7)   It is unlawful for the owner of any fowl to release such fowl upon
the premises of another or upon any public property or public park.
   (F)   Sanitation and maintenance.
      (1)   All coops and runs shall be kept in a clean condition and free from
objectionable odor.
      (2)   No such odor shall be detectible at the property line. All food
shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.
      (3)   Feathers, food, droppings, and used litter shall be disposed of in
a sanitary way. Droppings may be used as compost.
   (G)   Business or gain.
      (1)   The keeping of residential fowl shall not be used as a business or
for monetary gain.
      (2)   There shall be no sale or income resulting from the keeping of
fowl, including the sale of eggs.
   (H)   Slaughtering and removal.
      (1)   The slaughtering of fowl shall not be conducted on the premises at
any time.
      (2)   Dead fowl and unused eggs shall be removed and disposed of in a
sanitary manner within 24 hours.
   (I)   Conflict. This section shall not nullify the more restrictive
provisions of covenants, conditions and restrictions for subdivisions, but
shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
   (J)   Revocation. A permit may be revoked for cause and may also be revoked
where a complaint is made to the city regarding nuisance, noise, odor or other
violation of this section due to fowl as verified by a City Animal Control
Officer, and the owner of the property at issue fails to mitigate such
nuisance, noise, odor or other violation to the city's satisfaction.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.250) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-11, passed 5-
19-2011; Ord. 13-01, passed 1-17-2013; Ord. 25-02, passed 1-16-2025)
§ 156.359 VACATION RENTAL SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   The following regulations and site standards govern the approval and
operation of vacation rental facilities within residential and commercial
zoning districts. Vacation rental facilities may be allowed by conditional use
permit where the applicant can show evidence of compliance with outlined
standards and procedures and where there is a clearly minimal impact on
adjacent residential properties and neighborhoods. The purpose of a vacation
rental is to allow an existing dwelling to be used and occupied as a short-term
rental for vacationers and maintain its character and function as a residential
dwelling.
   (A)   Requirements for approval.
      (1)   A conditional use permit may be granted by the Planning Commission
for a vacation rental facility; provided that, the requirements of this section
are met in addition to the requirements of §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter.
      (2)   The granting of a conditional use permit for a vacation rental
facility shall not exempt the application from meeting other applicable
ordinances, covenants, codes or laws recognized by the city. The following pre-
conditions and documentation are required:
         (a)   Along with a conditional use application, a letter of
application sworn before a notary public shall be provided by owner(s) stating
that such owner(s) live within the city limits of the said vacation rental;
         (b)   Floor plan of the dwelling; and
         (c)   Site plan of the property.
   (B)   Standards and requirements for vacation rental facilities.
      (1)   The owner of the vacation rental shall live within the city limits,
except for bonafide temporary absences. A change in ownership will necessitate
the request of a new condition use permit. For the purpose of this subchapter a
bonafide temporary absence shall mean for a period of up to three years. During
the temporary absence of the owner(s), a manager who lives within the city
limits shall manage the rental for the owner(s).
      (2)   A vacation rental shall be limited to two adult guests per bedroom
and children as accommodations permit and by the Planning Commission on an
individual basis through the conditional use process.
      (3)   The vacation rental floor plan and principal function shall remain
as a residential dwelling as to be used for its main purpose when not used as a
vacation rental.
      (4)   Signage for a vacation rental facility is prohibited to maintain
its appearance as a residential dwelling.
      (5)   At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
vacation rental. All required parking shall be subject to front yard setback
standards for the district in which the vacation rental facility is located.
      (6)   The vacation rental facility shall conform to all applicable Fire,
Building and Health Codes. The facility shall be licensed in conformance with
all city ordinances.
      (7)   (a)   The effective period of the conditional use permit for
vacation rental facilities shall be from year to year to verify ownership and
residency. At the end of each business license year thereafter, renewal of the
conditional use permit shall be automatically granted upon receipt of the
community and Economic Development Department of certification by the property
owner that the property owner remains the owner of the vacation rental and
continues to live within the city limit, and that all other conditions required
at the time of approval remain unchanged.
         (b)   The owner is responsible to provide said information with the
business licenses renewal form. Failure to obtain such certification may be the
basis for revocation of the conditional use permit. The Planning Commission, at
its discretion, may require a new application and a demonstration of compliance
with all conditions necessary for a conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.260) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 12-16, passed 12-
6-2012)
§ 156.360 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ATTACHED. One of the following:
         (a)   A shared wall with any portion of the primary dwelling,
expanding the primary dwelling footprint with no separation of space between
the internal accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling as illustrated as
a potential variation herein; or
         (b)   A roof attached to the primary dwelling, expanding the primary
dwelling footprint with an allowance for separation of space between the
internal accessory dwelling unit wall and the primary dwelling as illustrated
as a potential variation herein.
      DETACHED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An accessory dwelling unit created:
         (a)   As a stand-alone permanent structure with typical footing and
foundation, not attached to the primary dwelling and provides fully connected
utility services to the unit. Campers, recreational vehicles, recreational
coaches, trailers, mobile homes and other portable units or structures are not
considered a permanent structure for the purpose of this definition;
         (b)   As an entirely separate unit or constructed as part of an
existing accessory structure, such as a detached garage as illustrated as a
potential variation herein;
         (c)   For the purpose of offering a long-term rental of 30 consecutive
calendar days or longer;
         (d)   Located on the same lot of record as the primary dwelling; and
         (e)   Includes separate dedicated kitchen and bathroom facilities for
the exclusive use of the accessory dwelling unit occupants.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3055.jpg]
      INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An accessory dwelling unit created:
         (a)   Within an existing primary dwelling;
         (b)   Provided within the footprint of the existing primary dwelling
at the time the internal accessory dwelling unit is created;
         (c)   For the purpose of offering a long-term rental of 30 consecutive
calendar days or longer;
         (d)   Located on the same lot of record as the primary dwelling; and
         (e)   Includes separate dedicated kitchen and bathroom facilities for
the exclusive use of the internal accessory dwelling unit occupants.
      PRIMARY DWELLING. A single-family dwelling that:
         (a)   Is detached; and
         (b)   Is occupied as the primary residence of the owner of record.
      RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A residential structure or any portion of a residential
structure that is occupied as a residence.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A residential unit or any portion of a residential
unit that the owner of record or the lessee of the residential unit offers for
occupancy for less than 30 consecutive calendar days.
   (B)   Accessory dwelling units allowed in certain zoning districts.
      (1)   A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed for each
primary dwelling or in a detached accessory dwelling unit associated with a
primary dwelling as a permitted use in the MU-40, MU-80, MU-160, A-1, A-5, RR-
1, RR-5, R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-6, R-M-7, R-M-15, R-M-30, GC and CBD Zoning
Districts; provided, the accessory dwelling unit complies with all the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Only one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot of record.
      (3)   The accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling shall be on
the same lot of record, shall not be subdivided, and shall not be sold
separately.
   (C)   Accessory dwelling unit requirements.
      (1)   Before occupancy, city officials shall confirm the accessory
dwelling unit complies with all applicable building, health, and fire codes, as
adopted.
      (2)   Utilities and meters.
         (a)   The accessory dwelling unit shall be served by the utility
(electrical, water, sewer, and gas) and utility meter serving the primary
dwelling. Propane fuel or propane tank is not allowed for the primary heating
source.
         (b)   An exception to allow a separate water and/or sewer connection
from the primary dwelling may be filed with the land use application to be
reviewed and considered. If approved, the standard connection fee is required.
         (c)   Impact fees are required for all detached accessory dwelling
units.
         (d)   All detached accessory dwelling unit utilities shall be placed
underground.
         (e)   No accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted if it is
determined that there is not adequate utilities to service the property.
   (D)   Appearance.
      (1)   Detached accessory dwelling unit. The detached accessory dwelling
unit shall:
         (a)   Be designed to have the same or similar design as the primary
dwelling’s architectural character and color by using similar exterior building
materials, window types, door and window trims, roofing materials, and roof
pitch as illustrated in the figure in (D)(2) below; or
         (b)   Be designed to appear as a dwelling with characteristics of
modern architectural designs and exterior wall and roof coverings that are in
compliance with residential building code regulations, consistent with
residential industry building standards, and is complimentary to adjoining
properties and surrounding area.
      (2)   Internal accessory dwelling unit. Except for any access door, the
internal accessory dwelling unit shall be designed not to change the appearance
of the primary dwelling as a single-family dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3057.jpg]
   (E)   Required off-street parking.
      (1)   One additional on-site hard-surface (concrete, asphalt or pavers)
parking space shall be provided for the exclusive use of the accessory dwelling
unit, regardless of whether the primary dwelling is existing or new
construction. If three or more parking spaces exist, one space can be
designated for the exclusive use of the accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   The accessory dwelling unit parking space shall be located outside
of any front yard setback area as illustrated as a potential variation herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3059.jpg]
   (F)   Alternative off-street parking.
      (1)   An existing primary dwelling with both side yard setbacks, each
less than nine feet in width may allow the additional required on-site parking
space in the front yard setback; provided, the location of the parking space be
adjacent to and abutting the existing driveway in the following order of
priority. (See figure below.):
         (a)   On exterior side of driveway between the driveway and side
property line; and
         (b)   On interior side of driveway and not greater in width than ten
feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3061.jpg]
      (2)   An existing primary dwelling with a single car garage or carport
with an existing or proposed side yard parking space outside of the front yard
setback may allow the additional required on-site parking space in the front
yard setback; provided, the location is directly behind the side yard parking
space as a tandem space. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3063.jpg]
      (3)   (a)   An existing primary dwelling with a driveway that extends
along the side yard to access an existing detached garage or carport may allow
the additional required on-site parking space in the front yard setback;
provided, the location of the parking space be adjacent to and abutting the
existing driveway and not greater in width than ten feet. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3065.jpg]
      (b)   A primary dwelling with a rear yard detached garage may allow the
additional required on-site parking space in the driveway behind the front yard
setback; provided that, primary dwelling parking ingress and egress are not
obstructed. (See Figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3067.jpg]
      (4)   The accessory dwelling unit parking space shall not be located
within the clear view area on a corner lot.
      (5)   Drive approaches and curb cuts shall comply with the city’s Public
Works Standards.
      (6)   A primary dwelling located within a homeowner’s association that
restricts parking in the front yard setback or common area is permissible as an
acceptable alternative under the figure in division (F)(3)(b) above; provided,
the applicant has the homeowner’s association’s written approval.
      (7)   When an accessory dwelling unit is created through the conversion
of a garage or carport, the parking spaces provided by the garage or carport
shall be replaced at a location on the lot, provided they are located outside
of any front yard setback area.
   (G)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   No portion of a mobile home, or mobile home park or subdivision, as
defined in U.C.A. § 57-16-3, Utah Code and Chapter 29.02, Brigham City Code,
shall be used as an accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   An accessory dwelling unit is prohibited if it will be served by a
failing septic tank, as determined by the city or the county’s Health
Department.
   (H)   Permits and license required.
      (1)    A land use application shall be filed with the city to create or
establish an accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   No construction to create or establish an accessory dwelling unit
shall commence without the issuance of the necessary building permits and
zoning approval, as required by the city.
      (3)   The owner of the primary dwelling shall obtain an approved rental
business license issued by the city, before the accessory dwelling unit is
rented. Such license shall remain valid and shall be renewed, as required by
the city.
   (I)   Recordation required.
      (1)    A notice of record shall be recorded in the office of the Box
Elder County Recorder that provides:
         (a)   A description of the primary dwelling;
         (b)   A statement that the primary dwelling or primary dwelling lot of
record contains an accessory dwelling unit; and
         (c)   A statement that the accessory dwelling unit may only be used in
accordance with the city’s land use regulations.
      (2)   Upon recording the notice described in division (I)(2) above, the
city shall deliver a copy of the notice to the owner of the accessory dwelling
unit.
   (J)   Owner-occupancy required. The owner of the primary dwelling shall
reside on the property, either occupying the primary dwelling or accessory
dwelling unit.
   (K)   Addition to primary dwelling for purpose of creating an internal
accessory dwelling unit. The footprint of an existing primary dwelling may be
increased to create an internal accessory dwelling unit provided the following
are met.
      (1)   The existing primary dwelling, all existing accessory structures,
and the lot upon which the primary dwelling is located are all in compliance
with the city’s Land Use Ordinances, Building Codes and other ordinances and
requirements, as applicable.
      (2)   The proposed addition to create an internal accessory dwelling unit
meets all requirements of being “attached” to the primary dwelling.
      (3)   The location of the proposed addition to the primary dwelling
complies with all requirements of the city’s Land Use Ordinances, including
compliance with required yard setbacks and height.
      (4)   Required parking for the internal accessory dwelling unit can be
provided as required by this section.
      (5)   A valid building permit is issued authorizing the proposed
construction.
      (6)   The proposed internal accessory dwelling unit will comply with all
requirements of this section.
   (L)   Short-term rental prohibited. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be
rented or occupied for a period of less than 30 consecutive calendar days. It
is prohibited for any accessory dwelling unit to be used as a short-term rental
unit.
   (M)   Size, height and area restrictions.
      (1)   Detached accessory dwelling unit. A detached accessory dwelling
unit shall:
         (a)   Not be less than 300 square feet or more than 1,000 square feet;
         (b)   Not occupy more than 25% of the rear yard area of the lot;
         (c)   Meet all accessory building standards for lot coverage, rear
yard coverage, height and any other standards for the zone in which it is
located;
         (d)   Be limited to 20 feet in height to the peak of roof when located
outside of the primary dwelling buildable area illustrated in the figure in
division (M)(1)(f) below;
         (e)   Be limited to one story, except when located:
            1.   One floor level above a detached garage as a second story when
located inside of the primary dwelling buildable area illustrated in the figure
in division (M)(1)(f) below;
            2.   Within the attic space as a loft of a one-story detached
accessory structure located outside of the primary dwelling buildable area
illustrated in the figure in division (M)(1)(f) below; or
            3.   Within the primary dwelling buildable area illustrated in the
figure in division (M)(1)(f) below, a two-story detached accessory dwelling
unit may be located.
         (f)   Be located within 150 feet of a fire apparatus access road as
defined by the Internal Fire Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3069.jpg]
      (2)   Internal accessory dwelling.
         (a)   An internal accessory dwelling unit has no restriction or
requirement governing:
            1.   The size of the internal accessory dwelling unit in relation
to the primary dwelling;
            2.   Total lot size; or
            3.   Street frontage.
         (b)   The primary dwelling is subject to the lot coverage, height and
any other standards for the zone in which it is located.
   (N)   Yard regulations (setbacks).
      (1)   Detached accessory dwelling unit. A detached accessory dwelling
unit shall meet all accessory building standards for the zone in which it is
located and, if it qualifies for second story under exception in division
M.1.e., shall meet all standards for inside of the primary dwelling buildable
area as illustrated in the figure in division (M)(1)(f) above. Exception: an
accessory structure to be used as a detached accessory dwelling unit that
existed prior to 12-18-2014 (Ord. 14-16), and meets all other required
standards can be located within the five-foot side yard setback provided the
following standards are satisfied:
         (a)   The structure has a firewall with no openings;
         (b)   No closer than two feet from the property line;
         (c)   Not located in a utility easement; and
         (d)   Privacy standards in division (F) above.
      (2)   Internal accessory dwelling unit. The primary dwelling is subject
to the yard regulations (setbacks) for the zone in which it is located.
   (O)   Privacy. The following privacy standards and requirements shall apply
to all detached accessory dwelling units:
      (1)   Installation of fencing to buffer and mitigate the impact of the
unit location, parking areas and unit entrances from adjoining properties.
Fencing shall be a six-foot tall solid visual barrier and shall comply with
applicable fencing requirements beginning at the front yard setback abutting
side and rear yard property lines as illustrated herein;
      (2)   Windows on a detached accessory dwelling unit located above a
detached garage facing adjoining properties are prohibited, unless required by
Building, Health and Fire Codes, as adopted. If required, a frosted,
translucent or stained type of non-see-through window shall be installed.
      (3)   Balconies and rooftop decks are prohibited.
      (4)   Exterior stairways and landings shall not be located or encroach
into the accessory building setback from property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3071.jpg]
   (5)   Exterior lighting shall provide illumination directed downward with
light source shielded from adjoining properties.
   (P)   Address. The primary dwelling and the Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit
shall have the same address number. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall
have the same address as the primary dwelling and be referenced as “Unit A”.
Addresses must be in a visible location for emergency responders.
   (Q)   Enforcement lien. The city may, in addition to any other legal or
equitable remedies available, pursue a lien against the subject property in an
amount of $100 for each day of violation (after the day which the opportunity
to cure the violation expires) for:
      (1)   Any violation of U.C.A. § 10-9a-530, entitled “internal accessory
dwelling units”; or
      (2)   Any violation of this section.
   (R)   Notice and hearing.
      (1)   The city adopts the lien notice and hearing notice requirements set
forth in U.C.A. § 10-9a-530.
      (2)   An owner appealing a violation may appeal that decision to the
designated appeal officer, or to the appeal authority if no appeal officer is
designated; provided, they do so in writing within 14 days of the notice of
violation by delivering the same to the Community Development Director or
designee.
   (S)   Appeal of administrative hearing decision. Any decision of the appeal
officer or the appeal authority may be appealed by the owner or city to the
District Court within 30 days from the written decision is made.
(Prior Code, § 29.05.270) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 21-12, passed 8-
5-2021; Ord. 22-01, passed 2-17-2022; Ord. 23-25, passed 11-2-2023; Ord. 24-21,
passed 6-20-2024)
§ 156.361 OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to balance the critical
need for safety, security, and property rights within the city’s goal of
maintaining a warm community feel and eliminating light pollution.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   All exterior outdoor lighting installed after the effective date of
this section shall conform to these requirements.
      (2)   All existing outdoor lighting shall be brought into conformance
with these requirements when the existing lighting is directly impacted as part
of a project that requires a Brigham City building permit.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Fixtures.
         (a)   Fully shielded. All exterior outdoor lighting fixtures shall be
fully shielded and directed downward. To qualify as a “fully shielded” fixture,
a light fixture shall meet all of the criteria below:
            1.   The top and sides of the fixture shall be constructed of
completely opaque material.
            2.   The light source shall be entirely contained inside the opaque
sides of the fixture housing.
            3.   Fixtures inside of structures such as eave overhangs,
canopies, or patio covers are required to be fully shielded which can be done
by the structure.
         (b)   Exemption. A fixture in a residential zone that has a total
light output of less than 2,000 lumens is exempt from this section.
      (2)   Light trespass. All outdoor light fixtures, including security
lighting, shall be aimed and shielded so that illumination shall be confined to
the property boundaries where the source is located.
   (D)   Exemption. The following are exempt from the requirements of this
section:
      (1)   American flags.
      (2)   Architectural lighting of building facades.
      (3)   Emergency lighting.
      (4)   Aviation lighting.
      (5)   Historic lighting.
      (6)   String lighting.
      (7)   Ornamental lighting.
      (8)   Seasonal decorations.
      (9)   Swimming pool and decorative water fountain lighting.
      (10)   Temporary lighting for approved special events.
      (11)   Right-of-way traffic control lighting and devices as determined by
the city.
   (E)   Plan submittal. For all developments subject to the International
Building Code. An outdoor lighting plan stamped and certified by a professional
architect or professional engineer demonstrating compliance with this section
shall be submitted with any land use application or building permit application
in which outdoor lighting is proposed and shall include the following:
      (1)   A site plan showing the location of all buildings, parking, and
pedestrian areas on the property.
      (2)   The location and height of all outdoor lighting fixtures on the
property.
      (3)   A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp, support
and shield, both proposed and existing. The description shall include the
manufacturer’s catalog cuts and illustrations (including sections where
required), lamp types, materials and shielding, wattages and lumen outposts.
      (4)   A light calculation which shows the total lumens output of the
proposed and existing outdoor lighting on the property.
      (5)   Any change to an outdoor lighting fixture or the type of light
source set forth in the plan requires a change request which must be submitted
to the city for review and approval, with adequate information to assure
compliance with this section.
(Ord. 25-15, passed 7-17-2025)
USES
§ 156.375 USES.
   All uses allowed by this chapter shall be identified as:
   (A)   Permitted use;
   (B)   Conditional use;
   (C)   Temporary use; and
   (D)   Non-conforming use.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.376 PROHIBITED USES.
   Any use which is not identified by this chapter as either a permitted use, a
conditional use or a temporary use is hereby determined to be a prohibited use.
A prohibited use shall not be allowed or authorized within the incorporated
area of the city.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.377 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   All requests for a permitted use, a conditional use or a temporary use shall
be a made on an application form provided by the Community Development
Department.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.378 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The Community Development Director or designee is authorized to issue
all required approval of zoning for a permitted use. As required by the city
building codes, all requests for a permitted use shall also provide an
application for a building permit and/or application for a business license, as
applicable.
   (B)   No permitted use shall become effective until an approval is received
from the Director or designee and a building permit and/or business license, as
required, is issued by the city. The Community Development Director or designee
is also authorized to impose such other reasonable conditions as provided in §
156.379 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.379 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR PERMITTED USE.
   All applications for a permitted use are required to comply with the
requirements of this Title, the requirements of the current Building Codes, and
the city business license codes (Title XI of this code of ordinances) as
adopted and as applicable. A permitted use application shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following general standards and criteria.
   (A)   The Community Development Department shall review the permitted use
request and determine if the request meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The use is identified as a permitted use within the schedule of
uses for the zoning district within which the use is located;
      (2)   The use complies with the requirements for the zoning district with
respect to minimum area, setback requirements, height, buffer and landscape
standards, maximum coverage, parking, unloading and all other requirements
applicable to the district;
      (3)   The use does not have an adverse effect on any sensitive areas, as
defined by §§
156.230 through
156.243 of this chapter;
      (4)   The use complies with all road dedication requirements of the city
and provides necessary infrastructure as required by the Brigham City Public
Works Standards and/or Utah Department of Transportation; and
      (5)   The use meets all requirements of the Bear River Health Department
and State Department of Environmental Quality, as required and applicable.
   (B)   Upon finding that the proposed use, building or structure complies
with the standards and requirements of this chapter, the Community Development
Director or designee shall issue an approval of zoning. With the receipt of a
zoning clearance, the proposed building or structure shall be reviewed for
compliance with the city building codes, as adopted. If the request for a
permitted use complies with the requirements of this chapter, the current
Building Code, as adopted, and the requirements of the Bear River Health
Department or the State Department of Environmental Quality, as applicable, the
permitted use shall be authorized.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.379 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The purpose of the issuance of a conditional use permit is to allow the
proper integration into the city of those uses which may be suitable in
specific locations or if such uses are designed, arranged or conducted on the
site in a particular manner. A conditional use permit may be approved by the
Planning Commission as provided by this chapter for any of the uses for which a
conditional use permit is required as identified within the schedule of uses
for the zoning district within which the use is located. The Planning
Commission is also authorized to impose such other reasonable conditions as
provided in §
156.380 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.380 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR CONDITIONAL USE.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall review a conditional use request with
the following general standards and criteria:
      (1)   The use applied for at the location proposed is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility that will contribute to the general
well-being of the area and the city;
      (2)   Compatibility of the proposed use with the intent, function and
policies established in the city’s General Plan;
      (3)   Compatibility of the proposed use with the character of the site,
adjacent properties and other existing and proposed development;
      (4)   The availability of, or ability to provide adequate services,
drainage, parking and loading space, fire protection and safe transportation
access and vehicular circulation;
      (5)   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity; and
      (6)   If the Planning Commission determines that the standards of this
section cannot be met and that adequate mitigation measures cannot be imposed
to bring the use into conformity with the standards and criteria, the Planning
Commission may deny the request for a conditional use permit.
   (B)   (1)   In approving a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission
may impose such reasonable conditions with respect to location, construction,
maintenance, operation, site planning, traffic control, flood control, time
limits and other items for the conditional use permit as deemed necessary for
the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may require guarantees or other evidence
that such conditions will be met and complied with.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.381 REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   If there is cause to believe that grounds exist for revocation
or modification of an approved conditional use permit, the Planning Commission
shall schedule the item for consideration at a regular meeting.
      (2)   A minimum notice of 14 days prior to the meeting shall be provided
to the owner and the operator of the approved conditional use permit.
   (B)   A conditional use permit may be modified or revoked by the Planning
Commission if the Planning Commission finds that one or more of the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   The conditional use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner;
      (2)   The use for which the conditional use permit was granted has now
ceased for at least 18 consecutive calendar months;
      (3)   The nature of the use for which the conditional use permit was
granted has changed or the intensity of use has increased beyond that
originally approved;
      (4)   The use constitutes a nuisance; and
      (5)   One or more of the conditions of the conditional use permit have
not been met.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.080) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.382 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT TO RUN WITH THE LAND.
   All conditional use permits authorized and approved as required by this
chapter are determined to run with the land.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.090) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.383 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of the issuance of a temporary use is to allow the
establishment of a use on a temporary basis which will not create an undue risk
to the public health, welfare and safety, and which will not create a nuisance.
      (2)   Such uses may include, but is not limited to, construction offices,
or the storage of materials and equipment necessary for construction, and
seasonal activities such as a corn maze, pumpkin patch/stand, fireworks stand
and Christmas tree lot.
   (B)   (1)   A temporary use shall be approved by the Community Development
Department or designee, as provided by this chapter, for any of the uses for
which a temporary use is identified in the Schedule of Uses for the zoning
district in which the use is located.
      (2)   A temporary use shall only be authorized by the Community
Development Director or designee for a period of up to six months. As required
by the current Building Code, all requests for a temporary use shall also
provide application for a building permit and/or application for a business
license, as required by the city.
      (3)   No temporary use shall become effective until approval is received
from the Community Development Director or designee and a building permit and/
or business license, if required, is issued by the city. The Community
Development Director or designee is also authorized to impose such other
reasonable conditions as provided in §
156.384 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.100) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.384 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR TEMPORARY USES.
   In approving a temporary use, the Community Development Director or designee
may impose such reasonable conditions with respect to location, construction,
maintenance, operation, site planning, traffic control, time limits and other
items for the temporary use as deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent
properties and the public interest. The Community Development Director or
designee may require guarantees or other evidence that such conditions will be
met and complied with.
   (A)   The Community Development Director or designee shall review a
temporary use request with the following general standards and criteria:
      (1)   The property on which the use, building or other structure is
proposed is of adequate size and dimensions to permit the conduct of the use in
such a manner that it will not be materially detrimental to adjoining and
surrounding properties;
      (2)   The use will cease within a maximum of six months from the date of
issuance of the temporary use permit; and
      (3)   The use will comply with all requirements of the current Building
Code, city business licensing (Title XI of this code of ordinances), Bear River
Health Department and all other requirements as applicable.
   (B)   In approving a temporary use, the Community Development Director or
designee may impose such reasonable conditions or restrictions as deemed
necessary to secure the purposes of this chapter. These conditions may include:
      (1)   The site will be suitably maintained and that the design, setbacks,
fences, walls and buffers of all buildings and other structures are adequate to
protect, preserve and/or enhance the appearance and character of the area;
      (2)   The regulations of §§
156.445 through
156.465 of this chapter, dealing with parking facilities, including vehicular
ingress and egress, loading and unloading areas and the surfacing of parking
areas and driveways to specified standards;
      (3)   The provision of an adequate water supply, sewage disposal, flood
control and fire protection;
      (4)   The mitigation of nuisance factors such as noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic
disturbances and radiation;
      (5)   Does not have an adverse effect on any sensitive areas, as defined
by this chapter;
      (6)   The regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal
schedules and functions;
      (7)   The regulation of signs as per §§
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter;
      (8)   The provision of a reasonable guarantee, bond or other surety, as
determined by the Community Development Director or designee, that the proposed
temporary use will be maintained and operated in compliance with all conditions
and requirements; and
      (9)   Such other reasonable conditions determined necessary by the
Community Development Director or designee to allow the establishment and
operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.110) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.385 APPEALS OF PERMITTED USE, CONDITIONAL USE OR TEMPORARY USE DECISION.
   Any person adversely affected by a decision of the Community Development
Director or designee or the Land Use Authority in the approval or denial of a
permitted use, conditional use or temporary use may, within 14 days after the
decision is made, file an appeal of the decision to the Appeal Authority
specifying the nature of the appeal and the grounds on which they are adversely
affected.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.120) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.386 NON-CONFORMING USE, LOT OR STRUCTURE.
   A non-conforming use, lot or structure legally existing at the time this
chapter becomes effective, or at the time of an amendment to this chapter, or
by some action by a federal, state or local government entity may continue,
provided the use, lot or structure has been maintained continuously. A non-
conforming use, lot or structure shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
intensified, except as provided for in §
156.387 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.130) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.387 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR NON-CONFORMING USE, LOT OR STRUCTURE.
   A non-conforming use, lot, or structure that legally exists at the time this
chapter becomes effective, or at the time of an amendment to this chapter, or
by some action by a federal, state or local government entity may continue;
provided that, the use, lot or structure has been maintained continuously.
   (A)   Alteration of a non-conforming use, lot or structure.
      (1)   A non-conforming use, lot or structure shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or intensified. A non-conforming use, lot or structure may apply to
the Appeal Authority to be enlarged or modified by meeting the following
criteria:
         (a)   The change is in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood and
in keeping with the intent of the comprehensive plan and this chapter;
         (b)   The proposed change shall not impose any unreasonable impact or
burden upon land located in the vicinity; and
         (c)   Reasonable conditions may be attached to the approval in order
to assure compatibility with the surrounding properties.
      (2)   A non-conforming use or structure may be maintained and repaired.
On any work being completed that requires a building permit, a zoning approval
shall be issued that identifies the following: the non-conformity; its legally
non-conforming status; and that the use, lot or structure is not being
enlarged, expanded or intensified.
      (3)   Any reconstruction or restoration of a non-conforming structure
shall comply with both this chapter and with U.C.A. § 10-9a-511, or successor
law.
   (B)   Determination of abandonment. The determination of an abandonment of a
non-conforming use, lot or structure shall comply with U.C.A. § 10-9a-511, or
successor law.
(Prior Code, § 29.06.140) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
DESIGN REVIEW
§ 156.400 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of design review is to secure the general
purposes of this chapter and the master plan and to insure that the general
appearance of buildings and structures and the development of the land shall in
no case be such as would impair the orderly and harmonious development of the
neighborhood or impair investment in and occupation of the neighborhood.
   (B)   It shall not be the intent of this subchapter to restrict or specify
the particular architectural design proposed or to specify the exterior detail
or design, color or materials proposed by the applicant, except as such detail
is of such magnitude as to affect the general appearance and compatibility of
the development with its surroundings.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.010)
§ 156.401 APPLICATION AND REVIEW.
   All applications for occupancy permits or building permits for all buildings
and structures, except for single-family and two-family dwellings and their
accessory buildings, shall be accompanied by architectural and site development
plans to scale which shall show building locations, landscaping, prominent
existing trees, ground treatment, fences, off-street parking and circulation,
location and size of the adjacent streets, north arrow and property lines,
drawings of the major exterior elevations, the building materials, proposed
exterior color scheme, existing grades and proposed new grades. All such
drawings and sketches shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission; except
that, the review and approval of such permits by the Community Development
Department may be authorized as set forth by the Planning Commission Policy
when the application meets all requirements of this chapter. The number of sets
of architectural and site development plans to be submitted shall be determined
by the Community Development Department. All of the above required
architectural and site development plans shall have been reviewed and approved
prior to the issuing of a building permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.020)
§ 156.402 EXCEPTIONS.
   For buildings and uses covered by conditional use permits or planned unit
development approval, design review shall be incorporated within such
conditional use permits or planned unit development approval and need not be a
separate application; provided, the requirements of this subchapter are met.
Agricultural buildings are exempt.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.030)
§ 156.403 PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Planning Commission, or the Community Development Department when
authorized by the Planning Commission, shall determine whether the proposed
architectural and site development plans submitted are consistent with this
subchapter and with the general objectives of this chapter, and shall give or
withhold approval accordingly.
   (B)   Denial of approval by the Community Development Department may be
appealed to the Planning Commission, and denial by the Planning Commission may
be appealed to the local governing body, as provided for appeals in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.040)
§ 156.404 CONSIDERATIONS IN REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.
   The Planning Commission and the Community Development Department shall
consider the following matters, and others when applicable, in their review of
applications:
   (A)   Considerations relating to traffic safety and traffic congestion:
      (1)   The effect of the site development plan on traffic conditions on
abutting streets;
      (2)   The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of
vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walkways;
      (3)   The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking facilities to
prevent traffic congestion;
      (4)   The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and
unloading facilities;
      (5)   The circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development;
and
      (6)   The surfacing and lighting of off-street parking facilities.
   (B)   Considerations relating to outdoor advertising: the number, location,
color, size, height, lighting and landscaping of outdoor advertising signs and
structures in relation to the creation of traffic hazards and the appearance
and harmony with adjacent development.
   (C)   Considerations relating to landscaping:
      (1)   The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent development, or to conceal
storage areas, utility installations or other unsightly development;
      (2)   The planting of ground cover or other surfacing to prevent dust and
erosion; and
      (3)   The unnecessary destruction of existing healthy trees.
   (D)   Considerations relating to buildings and site layout:
      (1)   Consideration of the general silhouette and mass, including
location on the site, elevations and relation to natural plant coverage, all in
relationship to the neighborhood; and
      (2)   Consideration of exterior design in relation to adjoining
structures in height, bulk and area openings, breaks in facade facing on the
street (or streets), line and pitch of roofs and the arrangement of structures
on the parcel.
   (E)   Considerations relating to drainage: the effect of the site
development plan on the adequacy of the storm and surface water drainage.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.050)
§ 156.405 CONDITIONS.
   The Planning Commission, or the Community Development Department when
authorized, shall decide all applications for design review. Design approval
may include such conditions consistent with the considerations of this
subchapter as the Commission or Community Development Department deems
reasonable and necessary under the circumstances to carry out the intent of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.060)
§ 156.406 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
   Upon a finding by the Planning Commission or Community Development
Department that the application meets the intent of this subchapter, the design
approval shall be granted, subject to such conditions as are necessary;
otherwise, approval shall be denied.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.070)
§ 156.407 NOTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OR DENIAL.
   Upon the grant of design approval, the Community Development Department
shall prepare and mail or deliver to the applicant a formal statement thereof,
stating the fact of the grant and any conditions attached thereto, or the fact
of denial and the reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.080)
§ 156.408 TIME LIMITATIONS ON APPROVAL.
   If construction in harmony with the permit for any development for which
design approval has been granted has not been commenced within one year from
date of notification of approval, the approval shall be deemed automatically
revoked. Upon application an extension of time may be granted by the Planning
Commission, or by the Community Development Department if authorized.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.090)
§ 156.409 TRANSFER OF APPROVAL UPON CHANGE IN USE.
   Design approval shall be deemed revoked if the buildings erected or the
classification of their use or the classification of the use of land for which
the approval was granted is changed, unless the approval is transferred by the
Planning Commission, or the Community Development Department if authorized to
do so. If the transfer is not approved, a new application must be filed.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.100)
§ 156.410 CONFORMANCE TO APPROVAL.
   Development for which design approval has been granted shall conform to the
approval and any conditions attached thereto.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.110)
§ 156.411 MODIFICATION.
   Upon request of the applicant, modifications in the approved plan may be
made by the Planning Commission or the Community Development Department if
authorized to do so, if it is found that the modification will meet
requirements of this subchapter. The Planning Commission may revoke or modify a
design approval which does not conform to any requirement of the approval
permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.120)
§ 156.412 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS FOR HISTORIC DOWNTOWN.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of design review within the downtown Main
Street district bounded by 100 North on the north, 200 South on the south, 100
East on the east and 100 West on the west, is to secure the general purposes of
this chapter and the General Plan and to ensure that the general appearance of
buildings, structures, signs and the development of the land shall in no case
be such as would impair the historic character and appearance of the Central
Business District of the city. To this end, under provisions of this
subchapter, design review may restrict or specify the particular architectural
design proposed and specify the exterior detail or design, color or materials
proposed by the applicant.
   (B)   All applications for development or redevelopment requiring review
under this subchapter shall be designed in conformance with the Brigham City
Historic Downtown Guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 29.24.130)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 156.425 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the planned unit development is to allow
diversification in the relationship of various uses and structures to their
sites, and to permit more flexibility in the use of such sites.
   (B)   The application of planned unit concepts is intended to encourage
excellence in neighborhood, housing or area design, while insuring substantial
compliance with the intent of the General Plan, district regulations and other
provisions of this chapter relating to the public health, safety and general
welfare, and at the same time securing the advantages of large-scale site
planning for residential, commercial or industrial developments, or
combinations thereof.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.010) (Ord. 98-11, passed 3-19-1998)
§ 156.426 DEFINITION.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean an
integrated design for development of residential, commercial or industrial
uses, or combinations of such uses, in which one or more of the regulations,
other than use regulations, of the district in which the development is to be
situated, is waived or varied to allow flexibility and initiative in site and
building design and location, in accordance with an approved plan and imposed
general requirements as specified in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.020)
§ 156.427 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   Planned unit developments may be allowed by Planning Commission approval in
any zoning district. No such planned unit development permit shall be granted
unless such development will meet the use limitations of the zoning district in
which it is to be located, including planned unit developments in planned
districts, and meet the density and other limitations of such districts, except
as such requirements may be lawfully modified as provided by this subchapter or
by district regulations. Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no
sense excuses the developer from the applicable requirements of Chapter 155 of
this code of ordinances, except as modifications thereof are specifically
authorized in the approval of the application for the planned unit development.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.030)
§ 156.428 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No planned unit development shall have an area less than that
approved by the Planning Commission as adequate for the proposed development.
No minimum area is specified.
      (2)   However, planned unit developments of any size may be allowed only
upon a finding of fact by the Planning Commission that the plan complies with
the intent of the General Plan, and incorporates excellence of neighborhood,
housing or area design, that will compensate for the effects upon the
neighborhood of deviations from district regulations.
   (B)   A planned unit development which will contain uses not permitted in
the zoning district in which it is to be located will require a change of
zoning district and shall be accompanied by an application for a zoning
amendment; except that, any residential use shall be considered a permitted use
in a planned unit development which allows residential uses and shall be
governed by density, design and other requirements of the planned unit
development permit.
   (C)   The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time
of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of
the property.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall require such arrangements of structures
and open spaces within the site development plan as necessary to assure that
adjacent properties will not be adversely affected:
      (1)   Density of land use intensity shall in no case be more than 25%
higher than allowed in the zoning district, except not more than 10% higher in
residential districts;
      (2)   Where feasible, least height and intensity of buildings and uses
shall be arranged around the boundaries of the development; and
      (3)   Lot area, width, yard, height, density and coverage regulations
shall be determined by approval of the site development plan.
   (E)   Preservation, maintenance and ownership of required open spaces within
the development shall be accomplished by:
      (1)   Dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system;
      (2)   Granting to the local jurisdiction a permanent, open space easement
on and over the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space
remain perpetually in recreational use, with ownership and maintenance being
the responsibility of an owners’ association established with articles of
association and by-laws which are satisfactory to the governing body; or
      (3)   Complying with the provisions of the Condominium Ownership Act of
1963, being U.C.A. Title 57, Chapter 8, or its successor statute, as per Utah
Code, which provides for the payment of common expenses for the up keep of the
common areas and facilities.
   (F)   Landscaping, fencing and screening related to the several uses within
the site and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its
surroundings shall be planned and presented to the Planning Commission for
approval, together with other required plans for the development.
   (G)   The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the
intensity and direction of area or flood-lighting shall be detailed in the
application.
   (H)   A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission with the application.
   (I)   A planting plan showing proposed tree and shrubbery plantings shall be
prepared for the entire site to be developed.
   (J)   The proposed use of the particular location shall be shown as
necessary or desirable, to provide a service or facility which will contribute
to the general well-being of the neighborhood and the community.
   (K)   It shall be shown that under the circumstances of the particular case,
the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of persons residing in the vicinity of the planned unit development.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.040) (Ord. 98-11, passed 3-19-1998)
§ 156.429 USES ALLOWED.
   Subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission, uses allowed
in a planned unit development shall be those uses allowed in the planned
district or other zoning district in which the planned unit development is to
be located; provided that, for the purposes of this subchapter and chapter,
multiple-family dwellings may be allowed in a planned unit development approved
in a single-family zoning district; provided, the overall density of the
development does not exceed 10% above the density normally allowed for single-
family dwellings in said district.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.050)
§ 156.430 GENERAL SITE PLAN.
   Application shall be accompanied by a general site plan showing, where
pertinent:
   (A)   The use or uses, dimensions, sketch elevations, and locations of
proposed structures;
   (B)   Dimensions and locations of areas to be reserved and developed for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, public uses such as schools and
playgrounds, landscaping and other open spaces;
   (C)   Architectural drawings and sketches outlining the general design and
character of the proposed uses and the physical relationship of the uses; and
   (D)   Such other pertinent information, including residential density,
coverage and open space characteristics, shall be included as may be necessary
to make a determination that the contemplated arrangement of buildings and uses
makes it desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those
ordinarily applicable under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.060)
§ 156.431 REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   In order that it may approve a planned unit development, the Planning
Commission shall have authority to require that the following conditions (among
others it deems appropriate) be met by the applicant:
   (A)   The proponents of the planned unit development have demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that they are financially able to
carry out the proposed project;
   (B)   The proponents intend to start construction within one year of the
approval of the project and any necessary zoning district change, and intend to
complete said construction, or approved stages thereof, within four years from
the date construction begins;
   (C)   Application for planned unit development in planned districts meets
the requirements of such districts, including the requirements of the General
Development Plan;
   (D)   The development is planned as one complex land use rather than as an
aggregation of individual and unrelated buildings and uses; and
   (E)   The development as planned will accomplish the purpose outlined in §
156.425 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.070)
§ 156.432 SCOPE OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   In carrying out the intent of this subchapter, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following principles.
   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter that site and building plans for a
planned unit development shall be prepared by a designer or team of designers
having professional competence in urban planning as proposed in the
application. The Commission may require the applicant to engage such a
qualified designer or design team.
   (B)   It is not the intent of this section that control of the design of a
planned unit development by the Planning Commission be so rigidly exercised
that individual initiative be stifled and substantial additional expense
incurred; rather, it is the intent of this section that the control exercised
be the minimum necessary to achieve the purpose of this subchapter.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve or disapprove an application for a
planned unit development. In an approval, the Commission may attach such
conditions as it may deem necessary to secure compliance with the purposes set
forth in §
156.425 of this chapter. The approval or denial of an application for a planned
unit development by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Appeal
Authority. All appeals must be filed with the Community Development Department
within 30 days of the date of the final decision of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.080)
§ 156.433 CONSTRUCTION LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Upon approval of a planned unit development, construction shall
proceed only in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Planning Commission, and in conformity with any conditions attached by the
commission to its approval.
   (B)   Amendments to approved plans and specifications for a planned unit
development shall be obtained only by following the procedures here outlined
for first approval.
   (C)   The Community Development Department shall not issue any permit for
any proposed building, structure or use within the project unless such
building, structure or use is in accordance with the approved development plan
and with any conditions imposed in conjunction with its approval.
(Prior Code, § 29.25.090)
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.445 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these off-street parking requirements is to reduce congestion
and traffic hazards within the city by incorporating adequate, attractively-
designed off-street parking and loading facilities for various land uses.
Parking areas shall be designed in such a manner that they will result in
maximum efficiency, protection of public safety, provide for the special needs
of the handicapped and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from
adverse impacts created by such parking.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.010)
§ 156.446 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   New development. The off-street parking standards of this
subchapter apply to any new development and to any new use established.
      (2)   Expansions and alterations. The off-street parking standards of
this subchapter apply when an existing structure or use is expanded or
enlarged. Additional off-street parking spaces shall be required only to serve
the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use. The Planning
Commission may require increases in parking for non-complying parking areas
when found necessary to ensure adequate off-street parking.
      (3)   Change of use. Off-street parking shall be required for any change
of use or change of operation that would result in a requirement for more
parking than the existing use. Additional parking shall be required only in
proportion to the extent of the change, not for the entire building or use.
      (4)   Required areas. Areas for deliveries and loading shall be required
as a part of the site plan review to ensure that loading and deliveries do not
constrain fire access, street safety or use public streets for deliveries.
   (B)   Parking and loading areas to be maintained. All off-street parking and
loading area within the city shall comply with all of the standards prescribed
in this subchapter, and shall be permanently maintained in good condition for
the duration of the use or uses served by the facility. All paved areas shall
be maintained in good repair without broken parts, potholes or litter.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.020)
§ 156.447 SITE, ACCESS AND LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED.
   All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a detailed
site, access and lighting plan showing the required off-street parking spaces
and points of access.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.030) (Ord. 25-15, passed 7-17-2025)
§ 156.448 OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULES.
   (A)   Off-street parking requirements. The table below contains the minimum
parking requirements for specific uses. The maximum percentage allowed for
compact spaces is also given. Special requirements for each use are provided
under the “Notes” column where appropriate. Parking requirements for uses
within the Historical Downtown should refer to division (D) below.
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement Max. % Compact Stalls Allowed Notes
                                                                                            Max. %
Use            Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement                                       Compact     Notes
                                                                                            Stalls
                                                                                            Allowed
COMMERCIAL
Auto repair,                                                                                            If towing service is provided, sufficient area
service and    3 spaces for each service bay, plus 1 space for every 300 square feet of     25%         shall be located on-site for temporary storage of
auto parts     retail sales area                                                                        vehicles and the tow truck
sales
Auto sales     1 customer parking space per 400 square feet of gross floor area in the      25%          
               automobile sales area or 5 parking spaces, whichever requirement is greater
Hotels and     1 space per room where no cooking facilities are provided. Living units with             Ancillary uses such as restaurants or retail shops
motels         cooking facilities shall provide 1.25 parking spaces per unit                25%         shall provide additional parking as identified for
                                                                                                        the specific use as required by this chapter
Lumber yards
and plant      1 space per 300 square feet of indoor floor sales area                       25%          
nurseries
Professional   1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for the first 20,000 square              Drive up windows shall provide sufficient stacking
offices and    feet plus 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area in excess of       25%         room and sufficient area for 3 spaces from teller
banks          20,000 square feet                                                                       window
                                                                                                        Drive up windows shall provide sufficient stacking
Restaurants    1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for each 4 seats              room and sufficient area for 4 spaces from place of
and fast food  whichever is greater plus 0.5 space for each employee on the highest         25%         order and 4 spaces from pick up window. Exception:
establishments employment shift with a minimum of 5 spaces for employee parking                         see §
                                                                                                        156.455 of this chapter
Retail -
intensive
general        1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for the first 20,000 square
merchandising, feet plus 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area in excess of       25%          
including      20,000 square feet
shopping
centers
Retail - less
intensive:     1 space per 400 feet of gross floor area                                     25%          
furniture,
carpet
Sports
stadiums and
arenas,
auditoriums
(including
school
auditoriums),  1 space per 4 seats and 1.3 spaces for each 100 square feet of gross floor   25%          
other places   area used for assembly and not containing fixed seats
of public
assembly and
clubs and
lodges having
no sleeping
facilities
Swimming pools
(commercial    1 space per each 10 persons based on capacity load                           25%          
and public)
ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION
Amusement      1 space per 100 square feet of floor space                                   25%          
center
Bowling alleys                                                                                          Ancillary uses such as restaurants shall comply
and billiard   5 parking spaces per alley and 2 spaces per billiard table                   25%         with the specific requirements outlined in this
halls                                                                                                   chapter
Commercial     1 space per 5 horses boarded on site                                         None         
riding stables
Golf courses   6 spaces per hole                                                                         
Miniature golf 3 spaces per hole                                                                         
courses
                                                                                                        Ancillary uses such as commercial pro shops and
Driving ranges 1 space per hole                                                             25%         restaurants shall provide sufficient parking as
                                                                                                        required in this chapter
                                                                                            25%
                                                                                            Ancillary
                                                                                            uses such
Health spas                                                                                 as
and sports     1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area                              restaurants  
complexes                                                                                   to provide
                                                                                            parking as
                                                                                            required by
                                                                                            this
                                                                                            chapter
Movie theaters 1 space per 4 seats                                                          25%          
Tennis,
handball and   3 spaces per court                                                           25%         Ancillary uses to provide sufficient additional
racquetball                                                                                             parking as required by this chapter
facilities
HEALTH SERVICES
Churches,
auditoriums,
assembly       1 space for each 6.5 feet of linear pew or 3.5 seats in an auditorium;
halls,         provided, however, that, where a church building is designed or intended to               
mortuaries and be used by 2 congregations at the same time, an additional 50% of the
other places   minimum spaces required shall be provided
of public
assembly
                                                                                                        If drop-off facilities are contemplated, they shall
Commercial day                                                                                          be designed to provide a continuous flow of
care,                                                                                                   vehicles to safely load and unload children without
preschool and  1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area                              25%         stacking on public streets. When drop-off
nursery                                                                                                 facilities are provided, a reduction to the number
schools                                                                                                 of spaces required may be reduced as per §
                                                                                                        156.449 of this chapter
                                                                                                        A traffic study may be required. Accessory units
Hospitals      2 spaces per bed in the total facility                                       25%         and clinics will be calculated as outlined in this
                                                                                                        chapter
Medical,
dental offices 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area                              25%          
and clinics
Nursing homes  1 space per 2.5 beds for nursing and convalescent homes                      None         
Veterinarians  1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area excluding kennel boarding
and veterinary area                                                                         25%          
hospitals
INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing  1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area devoted to manufacturing,    30%         Ancillary uses such as offices are to provide
               plus required parking for business vehicles                                              parking as required by this chapter
Open storage
uses in an     1 space per 5,000 square feet of open area being utilized for storage
approved       exclusive of access, landscaping and the like                                             
industrial
area
Research and   1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area, plus the required parking   30%          
development    for business vehicles
Truck transfer 1 space for each 2 employees, plus parking for each truck associated with                 
companies      the business
               1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the first 20,000
               square feet devoted to warehouse, plus the required parking for square                   No conversions of any portion of a warehouse use to
Warehousing    footage devoted to other uses. 1 space per 2,000 square feet for the second              any other use shall be permitted unless the parking
               20,000 square feet. 1 space per 2,500 square feet of floor area in excess of             requirements for such other uses are met
               40,000 square feet
RESIDENTIAL
Handicapped or A minimum of 2 parking spaces, plus 1 parking space for every 4 handicapped              The Planning Commission may vary off-street parking
group home     persons                                                                      None        needs in relation to the number of staff/employees
housing                                                                                                 required and the special needs of the residents
               2 spaces per dwelling unit                                                               Parking one behind the other arrangements for all
Single-family  Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). See requirement options in §                 None        required parking is prohibited. Required parking
dwelling       156.360                                                                                  shall not be located within the minimum required
                                                                                                        front yard setback
Two-family                                                                                              Parking one behind the other arrangements for all
dwelling,                                                                                               required parking is prohibited
three-family   2 space per dwelling unit, plus 1 guest parking space per 4 dwelling units               Required parking shall not be located within the
dwelling,      Required guest parking begins with four or more units in a development with              minimum required front yard setback
four-family    a homeowner’s association/common area or a separate legal lot or parcel of None        Guest parking shall be clearly marked and
dwelling,      record. Any separate legal lot or parcel of record with less than four units             distributed proportionally to the dwelling unit
multiple-      is exempt from guest parking                                                             locations they are intended to serve. Guest parking
family         At least one of the required spaces shall be designated covered parking                  shall not be located more than 200' from the
dwelling,                                                                                               dwelling units intended to be served unless
condominium                                                                                             approved by the Land Use Authority
                                                                                                        Guest parking shall be clearly marked and
               Two car garage with a two-car driveway width no less than 22' in length and              distributed proportionally to the dwelling unit
Townhome       18' plus 1 guest parking space per 4 dwelling units                          None        locations they are intended to serve. Guest parking
dwelling       Any separate legal lot or parcel of record with less than 4 townhome is                  shall not be located more than 200' from the
               exempt from guest parking                                                                dwelling units intended to be served unless
                                                                                                        approved by the Land Use Authority
Home                                                                                                    The number of parking spaces for home occupations
occupation                                                                                             shall be determined as part of the conditional use
                                                                                                        permit
OTHER
Public         1 space per 250 square feet of office space, and 1 space for 3.5 seating for             All public open space area may be excluded from
buildings and  meeting space                                                                            determining the parking requirement if these areas
use                                                                                                     are not used for any other use
                                                                                                        The number of parking spaces for uses not specified
                                                                                                        herein shall be determined by the Community
                                                                                                        Development Director or designee being guided,
Parking spaces                                                                                          where appropriate, by the requirements set forth
for uses not                                                                                           herein for uses which are similar to the use not
specified                                                                                               specified. Appeals to the decision of the Community
                                                                                                        Development Director or designee are made to the
                                                                                                        Appeal Authority as designated in §§
                                                                                                        156.055 through
                                                                                                        156.057  of this chapter
 
   (B)   Rules for computing requirements. The following rules apply when
computing off-street parking and loading requirements:
      (1)   Multiple uses: parking for multiple use sharing the parking shall
comply with the requirements of §
156.452 of this chapter for shared parking;
      (2)   Fractions: if, in the application of the requirements of this
subchapter, a fractional number is obtained, any fraction will be disregarded;
      (3)   Area measurements: unless otherwise specifically noted, all square
footage-based parking and loading standards are to be computed on the basis of
gross floor area;
      (4)   Occupancy-based standards: for the purpose of computing parking
based on employees, students, residents or occupants, calculations shall be
based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift, the maximum
enrollment or the maximum fire rated capacity, whichever is applicable and
whichever results in the greater number of spaces; and
      (5)   Unlisted uses: upon receiving a development application for a use
not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the Community
Development Director or designee shall apply the off-street parking standard
specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or
require a parking study in accordance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Off-street parking for land uses with unique parking requirements.
Off-street parking for land uses with unique parking requirements and uses
which have widely varying parking demand characteristics, make it impossible to
specify a single off-street parking standard. Uses found by the Community
Development Director or designee to have unique parking requirements shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   A developer proposing to develop or expand a land use with unique
parking requirements shall submit a parking study that provides justification
for the number of off-street parking spaces proposed.
      (2)   The Community Development Department and City Engineer shall review
this study and any other traffic engineering and planning data relevant to the
establishment of an appropriate off-street parking standard for the proposed
use.
      (3)   (a)   A parking study shall include estimates of parking based on
recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or other
acceptable estimates as approved by the Public Works Department, and should
include other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that
are the same as or comparable with the proposed use.
         (b)   Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area,
type of activity, location or parameters of the use that may be estimated to
parking requirements.
      (4)   (a)   The study shall document the source of data used, and methods
used to develop their recommendations.
         (b)   After reviewing the parking study, the Community Development
Department and City Engineer shall establish a minimum off-street parking
standard for the proposed use.
      (5)   Appeals of the administrative decision may be made to the Appeal
Authority in accordance with the procedures of §§
156.055 through
156.057 of this chapter.
   (D)   Parking requirement within the Historical Brigham City Downtown.
      (1)   The boundary of the Historical Brigham City Downtown shall be
defined as those properties that front on or within the boundary of 100 North
to 200 South and 100 East to 100 West.
      (2)   The protection of the buildings and the historical environment
within the historical downtown should be overall objective when considering
parking within this area.
      (3)   Because of the nature of the building and uses within the
Historical Downtown Area, all parking requirements will be reviewed evaluated
by the Planning Commission on a case by case basis.
      (4)   A parking study may be required to evaluate and determine the
needed parking.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.040) (Ord. 25-04, passed 2-6-2025)
§ 156.449 REDUCTION OF PARKING REQUIREMENT.
   The number of parking spaces required by these schedules may be reduced as a
condition of the development review by the Planning Commission for conditional
use applications or as approved by the Community Development Director or
designee for permitted uses if it can be demonstrated through a parking study,
prepared by a traffic engineer, that the proposed use(s) would have a parking
demand less than the requirements stated in this subchapter. This parking study
must be validated through empirical evidence, which is acceptable to the
Community Development Director or designee, from similar uses. Appeals of the
decision of the Planning Commission and Community Development Director or
designee are made to the Appeal Authority as outlined in §§
156.055 through
156.057 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.050)
§ 156.450 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES.
   In order to minimize the number of unused parking spaces, the number of
parking spaces specified in this subchapter shall not be exceeded by an amount
of more than 25% of the required off-street parking.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.060)
§ 156.451 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES.
   (A)   Access to required off-street parking spaces shall be from a private
driveway and not from a public street and shall not be designed to require
vehicles to back onto a street, except:
      (1)   Single-family; and
      (2)   Two-family, three-family and four-family dwellings, with site
specific approval by the City Engineer and City Public Works Director. Such
approval shall take into consideration the following:
         (a)   The uniform application of public works standards and
specifications;
         (b)   The design of the driveways, including spacing between
driveways, shared or separated drive approaches, landscaping and street
function for garbage and recycle collection, snow removal and the like;
         (c)   The street classification shall be a minor or standard
residential street. Collector or arterial streets are not considered;
         (d)   Curb and waterways installed along the street shall continue
through private driveways and guest parking approach;
         (e)   Any off-street parking (private driveways and guest parking
spaces) must be at 21 feet in length behind the property/public right-of-way
line as not to obstruct the sidewalk;
         (f)   Consideration for guest parking;
         (g)   Private driveways shall lead to a garage servicing residential
dwelling units and shall not exceed a maximum width of 20 feet;
         (h)   Private driveways shall provide a minimum required landscape
separation width of two feet of landscaping between adjacent private driveways;
         (i)   Each dwelling unit shall be limited to one private driveway;
         (j)   Private driveways shall not expand or increase additional
parking area over required landscape separations, the sides of the main
building, onto common space, side yard, rear yard or front yard setbacks; and
         (k)   The maintenance of residential refuse collection, required
landscape separations between private driveways and snow removal of private
driveways, guest parking spaces and public sidewalks shall be maintained by the
association entitled to the control of the residential development.
      (3)   Curbside service of residential refuse containers shall conform
with regulations applicable to city residential refuse collection.
   (B)   Provisions for clear view of intersecting streets and private drive
and streets shall conform with regulations applicable to city clear view of
intersecting streets.
   (C)   All parking shall conform to city parking regulations and unlawful
parking on the public right-of-way, sidewalk, parking strip or curbing is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.070) (Ord. 19-12, passed 8-1-2019)
§ 156.452 SHARED PARKING.
   (A)   When any land or building is under the same ownership or under a joint
use agreement and is used for two or more purposes, the number of parking
spaces is computed by multiplying the minimum amount of parking normally
required for each land use by the appropriate percentage as shown in the
following parking credit schedule for each of the five time periods shown. The
number of parking spaces required is determined by totaling the resulting
numbers in each column; the column total that generates the highest number of
parking spaces then becomes the parking requirement.
    Weekday                     Weekend                        Nighttime
Use Daytime (6:00 Evening (6:00 Daytime (6:00 Evening (6:00    (Midnight - 6:00
    a.m. - 6:00   p.m. -        a.m. - 6:00   p.m. - midnight) a.m.)
    p.m.)         midnight)     p.m.)
              Weekday                  Weekend                     Nighttime
Use           Daytime (6:  Evening (6: Daytime (6:00 Evening (6:00 (Midnight -
              00 a.m. - 6: 00 p.m. -   a.m. - 6:00   p.m. -        6:00 a.m.)
              00 p.m.)     midnight)   p.m.)         midnight)
All other     100%         100%        100%          100%          100%
uses
General       80%          90%         100%          70%           5%
retail
Hotel, motel, 75%          100%        75%           100%          100%
inn
Meeting       50%          100%        100%          100%          10%
center
Multi-family  50%          90%         90%           90%           100%
residential
Office/       100%         10%         10%           5%            5%
industrial
Restaurant    65%          100%        80%           100%          50%
Theater/      40%          100%        80%           100%          10%
entertainment
 
   (B)   Neighboring property owners may share parking spaces if:
      (1)   A permanent cross-access easement or other recorded agreement is
established; and
      (2)   Access between the properties can be gained without utilizing a
public or private street.
   (C)   The combined parking required for all properties can be met as
outlined in §
156.448 of this chapter or in division (A) above when involving two or more
uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.080)
§ 156.453 OFF-SITE PARKING.
   Required parking may be located off-site, if approved as an alternative
parking plan and in compliance with all of the following standards.
   (A)   Ineligible activities. Off-site parking may not be used to satisfy the
off-street parking standards for residential uses (except for guest parking),
restaurants, convenience stores or other convenience- oriented uses. Required
parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located off-
site.
   (B)   Location. Off-site parking may be located within a 300-foot radius
from the use served. Off-site parking spaces may not be separated from the use
served by a street right-of-way with a width of more than 80 feet, unless a
grade-separated pedestrian walkway or other traffic control or safety device is
provided.
   (C)   Agreement for off-site parking. Off-site parking requires a written
agreement that shall run with the land and which shall be recorded. A signed,
notarized copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall be submitted
to the Community Development Director or designee for review and approval.
Recordation of the agreement shall take place prior to the issuance of a
building permit for any use to be served by the off-site parking area. An off-
site parking agreement may be revoked only if required off-street parking
spaces are provided in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.090)
§ 156.454 PARKING AND PARKING LOT ACCESS.
   Entrances and exits for parking facilities shall be designed to reduce
traffic congestion on public streets and minimize conflicts with neighboring
uses. The principles of access management should be used to evaluate and
determine adequacy of the ingress and egress to the parking facilities. The
following standard shall be provided as follows.
   (A)   Access drive approach width, location and number for single-family and
two-family dwellings shall be in accordance with the Brigham City Public Works
Standards; except that, no approach shall be allowed in the clear view areas as
described in §
156.353 of this chapter.
   (B)   Standards for the width, radius, location and number of curb cuts for
all uses, except single- family or two-family dwellings shall be in accordance
with the Brigham City Public Works Standards.
   (C)   To reduce and limit the number of points of access along city streets.
Shared access between adjoining parcels is strongly encouraged. The Planning
Commission may require a shared access as a condition of project approval. When
a shared access is used, the adjacent property owners shall:
      (1)   Record a cross easement for the approach, signed by both adjacent
property owners and the city, allowing both adjacent property owner’s equal and
unrestricted access to the approach; and
      (2)   The shared access shall be adequately separated to allow individual
maintenance and repair.
   (D)   The Public Works Director and Planning Commission shall determine the
appropriate arrangement of approaches for essential service facilities during
the design review or conditional us review process.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.100) (Ord. 12-06, passed 3-30-2012)
§ 156.455 STACKING LANES, NUMBER OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   General. Adequate stacking or waiting lanes for those uses requiring
such stacking areas shall be designed so that no obstruction shall occur at the
public right-of-way. The following table shows the requirement for stacking
based on the type of activity.
Activity Type Minimum Stack Measured From
Activity Type               Minimum Stack Measured From
Automated teller machine    3 per machine Teller
Bank teller lane            3 per lane    Teller or window
Carwash stall, self-service 1             Entrance
Carwash stall, automatic    6             Entrance
Gasoline pump island        30 feet from each end of pump island
Other                       Determined by City Engineer or designee
Restaurant drive-through    8*            Order box**
NOTES TO TABLE:
* Within the CBD zone, stacking may be reduced to 6 vehicles (a minimum of
three spaces between the pick-up window and place of order).
**Stacking for at least 4 vehicles shall be provided between the order box
and pick-up window.
 
Exception: The stacking may be reduced as noted within the CBD Zone.
 
   (B)   Standards for design and layout apply to all drive through facilities.
Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout
standards.
      (1)   Stacking space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet in size.
      (2)   Stacking spaces shall not impede on-site or off-site traffic
movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
      (3)   Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways
with raised medians, as deemed necessary by the City Engineer or designee for
traffic movement and safety.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.110) (Ord. 13-04, passed 3-7-2013; Ord. 18-07, passed 5-
17-2018)
§ 156.456 PARKING LOT LAYOUT.
   Parking lots shall be designed to provide for internal circulation so that
each parking space is accessible to all other parking spaces without using a
public street. All properties shall provide attractive, direct and safe
pedestrian access to parking. The layout of the parking areas shall relate to
building entrances. The graphic and tables below shall be used to provide the
minimum design standards for parking layout.
Parking Lot Requirements
A = Parking Angle
B = Stall Width
C = Stall Length
D = Aisle Width
E = Stall To Curb
F = Curb To Curb
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3073.jpg]
Standard Vehicle       Compact Vehicle
Width-9’ Depth-18’ Width-9’ Depth-16’
A B C D E F            A B C D E F
Standard Vehicle         Compact Vehicle
Width-9’ Depth-18’   Width-9’ Depth-16’
A   B   C   D    E   F   A   B   C   D    E   F
0° 10�22�12’10�32�0° 10�20�12’10�32’
30°9’18�15’18�51�30°9’16�15’15�45’
45°9’18�15’21�57�45°9’16�15’17�49’
60°9’18�20’22�64�60°9’16�20’18�56’
90°9’18�24’18�60�90°9’16�24’16�56’
NOTES TO TABLE:
* One way traffic only
 
(Prior Code, § 29.26.120)
§ 156.457 COMPACT CAR DESIGN.
   Each compact space approved herein shall be designated as a compact space
with either signage placed at both ends of a row of compact spaces with one
additional sign for each five spaces over the initial five spaces or painted
letters on pavement of at least 12 inches high and seven inches wide stating
“Compact” for each space. All compact parking spaces shall be approved by the
city and shall be located throughout the required parking lot areas in groups
as to allow appropriate design transition.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.130)
§ 156.458 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   Off-street parking for persons with disabilities shall be provided in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), being 42 U.S.C. §§
12101 et seq., or its successor statute, and the Uniform Federal Accessibility
Standards. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in off-street parking
lots and shall count towards fulfilling the minimum automobile required
parking. The number, location and identification of handicapped parking spaces
required shall be determined by the most current Building Code adopted by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.140)
§ 156.459 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Parking lots with five or more spaces must have a minimum ten-foot
wide landscaped strip adjacent to any road right-of-way. Exterior perimeters of
the parking lot shall have a minimum five-foot wide landscaping strip.
   (B)   Parking lots within a Commercial or Manufacturing Zone with more than
20 spaces shall have a minimum 5% interior landscaping.
   (C)   All landscaped areas shall consist of live plant materials and be
serviced by a permanent underground sprinkler system.
   (D)   Parking lots of five or more spaces shall provide a solid screening
fence six feet in height when parking lots are adjacent to an existing or
proposed residential use. This solid barrier shall be maintained in good
condition with no advertising thereon.
   (E)   No off-street parking shall be allowed in required landscaped areas.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.150)
§ 156.460 RESERVED.
§ 156.461 SURFACING.
   (A)   All required off-street parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be
paved and permanently maintained with hard-surfacing. Hard-surfacing materials
shall include concrete, asphalt, brick pavers and stone.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may allow for exceptions to the requirements
of division (A) above with the following conditions:
      (1)   The proposed use is within the M-D or M-G Zones;
      (2)   The required off-street parking is less than five parking stalls;
and
      (3)   The applicant provides an alternative parking surface that is
dustless and will not track onto the public right-of-way.
   (C)   All required off-street parking must not occur in an area that meets
the requirements of divisions (A) or (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.170)
§ 156.462 GRADING.
   (A)   Parking lots shall be properly graded to allow for drainage of surface
water in an approved manner as to keep the parking area free of water and ice.
   (B)   Drainage plans are to be approved by the City Engineer and Public
Works Department prior to issuance of a building permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.180)
§ 156.463 USE OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Use of parking areas. Required off-street parking areas shall be used
solely for the parking of licensed, motor vehicles in operating condition.
Required spaces may not be used for the storage of vehicles, boats, motor
homes, campers, mobile homes or building materials.
   (B)   Use of parking areas for temporary events and sales.
      (1)   A portion of a parking lot that allows at least 75% of the
remaining legal parking spaces to be used for parking in conformance with the
standards of this chapter may be set aside for purposes of a temporary event,
such as a “tent sale”, “sidewalk/parking lot sale” or other permitted activity.
These events may not exceed seven consecutive days in length and may not occur
more than once each calendar quarter at the same parking lot for the same
business. For the purpose of this division (B)(1), the standards and
regulations governing the use of parking areas for mobile food vendors shall be
regulated by §§
112.060 through
112.068 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   The property owner and operator of the licensed business at the
location are jointly responsible for ensuring that events blocking parking do
not result in unsafe traffic or circulation conditions and ensures that there
is adequate fire and emergency vehicle access. The Police Chief, Fire Chief or
their designee may order the event cancelled and removed without hearing or
notice if found that the arrangement of the temporary event or sale interferes
with safe flow of traffic or emergency vehicle access to a site.
      (3)   The property owner, business licensed at the site and entity
responsible for the event are jointly responsible for ensuring there is
adequate parking at the event site. The use of public right-of-way for event
parking is prohibited. Parking arrangements may be made for use of adjoining or
nearby parking areas within a 300-foot radius, but a copy of the agreements
shall be in writing and filed with the Community Development Director or
designee at least five working days prior to the event.
   (C)   Long-term vendors located in parking lots.
      (1)   Temporary long-term use of a parking lot for a vendor (example and
not limited to: Christmas trees, fireworks, snow cone sales) that will be
located in the parking lot for more than seven consecutive days may be
permitted by the Community Development Director or designee provided that a
copy of a written agreement for use of the parking area is submitted to the
city prior to the establishment of the use.
      (2)   A site plan showing the location of the facility and an indication
of the total number of existing spaces in the parking lot and parking to be
removed by the vendor shall be submitted to the Community Development Director
or designee.
      (3)   Depending on the design of the parking area and location of the
long-term vendor, the Community Development Director or designee may require
parking spaces in the area of the vendor to be re-striped for purposes of
providing parking or accommodating safe traffic flows.
      (4)   In no case shall a long-term vendor be permitted to remove more
than 5% of the subject property’s parking spaces from general usage.
   (D)   Temporary vendors on undeveloped sites. The use of undeveloped sites
for parking or sales by temporary vendors shall be prohibited. Temporary
vendors may utilize undeveloped portions of appropriately zoned properties
provided that the property owner creates an approved right-of-way access, a
paved surface for the area, parking needed by the vendor and landscaping. The
Community Development Director or designee may approve the design and
landscaping for temporary vending.
   (E)   Shopping cart corrals. Cart corrals or similar facilities shall not be
permitted to replace required parking. New development shall identify cart
corral or collection areas on the site plan.
   (F)   Garbage dumpster. Garbage dumpsters shall not be permitted to replace
required parking. The location of garbage dumpsters shall be sited so as not to
interfere with any required off-street parking for a use. New development shall
identify the location and access to dumpster area on the site plan.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.190) (Ord. 16-15, passed 11-3-2016)
§ 156.464 STORAGE.
   All areas designated for off-street parking, maneuvering, loading or site
landscaping shall not be used for outdoor storage of materials.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.200)
§ 156.465 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Where necessary, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for
loading and unloading services.
   (A)   All loading areas or docks shall be located so that no vehicle shall
be parked or require maneuvering room within a public street.
   (B)   Each loading facility shall not be less than 45 feet in length and 12
feet in width and shall have an overhead clearance of not less than 14 feet.
   (C)   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided
on the site.
   (D)   Off-street loading facilities for one use shall not be considered as
providing required off-street loading or parking facilities for any other use.
   (E)   All truck loading spaces shall be separated from adjoining residential
districts by a masonry wall not less than six feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 29.26.210)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 156.480 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AWNING. A retractable or non-retractable shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building, constructed of non-rigid
materials on a supporting framework.
   BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is secured
or anchored to its support at one or more edges. National flags, state or
municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not
be considered BANNERS.
   BILLBOARD. Any sign, detached or attached, except a ghost sign, exceeding 64
square feet in area and which is designed or intended to direct attention to a
business, product, service, event or attraction that is not sold, offered or
existing on the property where the sign is located.
   BILLBOARD, ABANDONED. Any billboard which has been left without needed
protection, care or support or maintenance for at least 12 months.
   BILLBOARD, DIGITAL. Any billboard which uses electronically projected text,
images or graphics. DIGITAL BILLBOARDS include, but are not limited to,
billboards that use light emitting diodes (LEDs), plasma displays, fiber optics
or other technology that results in bright, high-resolution text, images and
graphics.
   BILLBOARD, EXISTING. A billboard which was constructed, maintained and in
use or for which a permit was issued on or before 3-3-2022.
   BILLBOARD, NEW. A billboard for which a permit to construct is issued after
3-3-2022.
   BILLBOARD, NON-CONFORMING. An existing billboard which is located in an area
or zone not permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
   CANOPY. A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so
as to extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors,
windows and other openings supported by the building and supports extending to
the ground directly under the CANOPY.
   COPY. Alphabetic or numeric information that together with logos, conveys
the primary message of a sign.
   CURFEW. The time between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. where within digital signs
are required to be shut off.
   DWELL TIME. The length of time that elapses between changes in text, images
or graphics on a digital sign.
   FIELD. The background of certain types of signs, which is uniform in color
and appearance and upon which copy and logos are displayed.
   FLAG. Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns
or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other
entity.
   LOGO. A symbol or trademark of a company designed for easy recognition,
which may or may not include alphanumeric copy.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials
supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
   PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.
   PREMISES. A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land together with any buildings
or structures thereon.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned by a governmental entity.
   ROTATION TIME. The time it takes for static text, image and graphic on a
digital sign to transition to a different text, image or graphic.
   SIGN. Any advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, illustration, insignia, surface or space placed, erected or maintained
in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement or promotion
of the interests of any person, entity, product or service, and visible from
outdoors. The definition of SIGN shall also include the sign structure,
supports, lighting system and any attachments, ornaments or other features used
to draw the attention of observers.
   SIGN AREA, CUMULATIVE. The cumulative area for all signs on a building for
building-mounted signs and, in addition, the cumulative area of all free-
standing signs on a site.
   SIGN AREA. For signs that have a frame or a separate background, the area of
a sign that is used for writing, representation, emblem or other display
purposes located within the area of the frame or separate background containing
the display, excluding the structural supporting framework, bracing or wall
provided such wall meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental
to the display itself. In computing SIGN AREA, only one side of a back-to-back
or double face sign shall be computed when the signs are parallel or diverge
from a common edge by an angle of not more than 30 degrees. For signs that do
not have a frame or a separate background, SIGN AREA shall be computed on the
basis of the least rectangle, triangle or circle large enough to frame the
display, including any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed. When a low-profile sign is mounted on
a base rising a maximum of three feet and consisting of materials matching the
predominant materials used in the construction of the principal building on the
premises where the sign is located, the area of the base shall not be included
in the calculation of sign area.
   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the
sign, excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street
or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less. When a low-profile
sign is mounted on a base rising a maximum of three feet and consisting of
materials matching the predominant materials used in the construction of the
principal building on the premises where the sign is located, the height of the
base shall not be included in the calculation of SIGN HEIGHT.
   SIGN, ABANDONED. Any sign applicable to a use that has been discontinued for
a period of three or more months.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. Any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to depict
action or to create a special effect or scene. Such motion does not refer to
methods of changing copy. ANIMATED SIGN does not include a digital sign, as
defined herein.
   SIGN, AWNING. Any sign painted on, attached to or otherwise incorporated
into an awning.
   SIGN, BUS BENCH. Any sign incorporated into the design and/or construction
of a bench providing seating for users of a public transportation system.
   SIGN, CABINET. A sign consisting of a frame, usually but not necessarily
consisting of metal, containing or covered by transparent, translucent or
opaque material that includes the sign copy.
   SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign painted on, attached to or otherwise incorporated
into a canopy.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign that is characterized by graphical content
that can be changed or altered through manual, mechanical or electronic means.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN does not include a digital sign, as defined herein.
   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign placed on a site identifying a new
development, the project contractor, builder and/or institution providing
financing for the project. CONSTRUCTION SIGNS may include a plat map, project
marketing sign and real estate information.
   SIGN, DIGITAL. Any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode
technology or other similar technology to produce an illuminated image, picture
or message of any kind whether the image, picture or message is moving or
stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any
kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise
known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting
diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL) or
any other similar technology.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATIONAL (OFF-PREMISES). Signs that serve as
directional guides for vehicular or pedestrian traffic to:
      (1)   Recognized areas of regional importance and patronage, including:
         (a)   Recreational and entertainment centers of recognized regional
significance;
         (b)   Religious, civic or fraternal organizations;
         (c)   Historical landmarks, churches, schools, community centers,
hospitals, parks or other such sites; and
         (d)   Public safety, municipal directional, parking and essential
services.
      (2)   Businesses or uses that are located on premises other than that
upon which the sign is located.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATIONAL (ON-PREMISES). A sign guiding or directing
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and including instructions (e.g., parking or
exit and entrance signs) and which may contain the name and/or logo of an
establishment.
   SIGN, DIRECTORY. An identification sign, located on or off the premises to
direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, that contains the name of a building,
complex or center, and name and address of two or more businesses, being part
of the same sign structure or interior to the building and visible from the
outdoors.
   SIGN, ELECTRIC AWNING. Any fireproof space frame structure with translucent
flexible reinforced vinyl covering cosigned in awning form, which may include
signage. Such awnings are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light
sources in fixtures approved under currently adopted state building codes.
   SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. Any sign that has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outlines illuminated by a light source located outside of
the sign.
   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing
light source used primarily to attract attention. Does not include changeable
copy signs, animated signs, digital signs or signs which, through reflection or
other means, create an illusion of flashing or intermittent light.
   SIGN, FLAT. A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside wall of a
building or structure, and which does not project horizontally more than 24
inches from such building or structure with messages or copy on the face side
only.
   SIGN, FREE-STANDING. A sign supported upon the ground and not attached to
any building or wall. FREE-STANDING SIGNS include high profile and low-profile
signs.
   SIGN, GHOST. A sign painted on a wall of a building that is at least 50
years old, which sign was present during the history of the building at least
50 years prior to the current date, as documented by historic photographs,
drawings or other documentation, and which advertised a product or service
which may or may not be currently in existence. The definition of GHOST SIGN
does not and is not intended to include billboards. GHOST SIGNS may duplicate
their original dimensions and design as documented above. The area of a GHOST
SIGN shall not be included in the calculation of sign area for the property on
which the GHOST SIGN is located.
   SIGN, HIGH PROFILE. An on-premises free-standing sign higher than six feet
that is supported by one or more upright members or poles and not attached or
braced by any other structure.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign that identifies primarily the name and/or logo
and/or address of a commercial, industrial or condominium complex and the owner
and tenants thereof. IDENTIFICATION SIGNS may also contain information
pertaining to the goods or services offered by the commercial, industrial or
condominium complex; however, such information shall be secondary in appearance
and area to the primary function of identification.
   SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. Any sign that has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outlines illuminated by a light source located inside of
the sign. Internally illuminated sign does not include digital signs, as
defined herein.
   SIGN, LOW PROFILE. Any free-standing sign having a maximum height of six
feet from final grade, or six feet from the top of the base upon which it is
constructed, which is incorporated into a landscape design theme or planter
box. LOW PROFILE SIGNS may be mounted on a base rising a maximum of three feet
and consisting of materials matching the predominant materials used in the
construction of the principal building on the premises where the sign is
located.
   SIGN, NON-CONFORMING. Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully
erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this
chapter and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all
applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign that directs attention to a use, product,
commodity or service not related to the premises on which the sign is located.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. Any sign that directs attention to a use conducted,
product or commodity sold, or service performed upon the premises on which the
sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, PERMANENT. Any sign or advertising display constricted of durable
materials, usually intended to be displayed out of doors as a principal means
of identification or advertisement for an indefinite period of time.
   SIGN, POLITICAL. A temporary sign on or off premises, announcing, promoting
or drawing attention to any candidate(s) seeking public office in a forthcoming
election; or signs advocating political issues to be voted upon at any special
or general election.
   SIGN, PROJECT MARKETING. A temporary sign advertising the availability of a
project under construction or recently completed for sale, rental or lease. A
PROJECT MARKETING SIGN shall be located on the property to which it pertains.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign attached perpendicular to a building or other
structure and extending in whole or in part more than 12 inches beyond any wall
of the buildings or structures.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE.
      (1)   A temporary sign advertising an open house, or the sale, or
availability for rental or lease, of the property on which the sign is located,
or a sign located off-premises and directing customers to an open house for
property for sale, rental or lease.
      (2)   This definition does not include construction or project marketing
signs.
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected or painted upon or above the roof or parapet of
a building, including ground signs that rest on or overlap a roof.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, inflatable or
advertising display constructed of plastic, vinyl, paper, cloth, canvas, light
fabric, cardboard, wall board or other light materials, with or without light
frames, usually intended to be displayed out of doors for an event which spans
a short period of time.
   SIGN, WALL. A sign that is either painted on a wall or its facing, or is
painted in such a way that it gives the visual appearance of being painted on a
wall or facing by not having a frame or separation from the wall or facing, or
consists of flat, individually constructed letters.
   SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign either attached to a window or door or located within
a building so as to be visible through a window or door by people outside of
the building. This term does not include merchandise displays.
   SIGN, YARD SALE. A temporary sign that announces a yard sale, garage sale or
similar event on a property.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 22-02, passed 3-
3-2022)
§ 156.481 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purposes of these sign regulations are:
      (1)   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
by businesses and others in the city;
      (2)   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city’s
ability to promote economic development and growth;
      (3)   To promote an environment that fosters business creation and
growth;
      (4)   To protect the appearance of the Central Business District of the
city as a unique historical and visual environment;
      (5)   To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
      (6)   To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public
and private property;
      (7)   To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations; and
      (8)   To secure, promote and implement the purposes and goals of the
city’s General Plan.
   (B)   This subchapter is adopted under the zoning authority of the city in
furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.482 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign
regulations contained herein are declared to be the maximum standards allowable
for the purpose set forth.
   (B)   The types of signs allowed by this subchapter shall be plenary and
sign types not specifically allowed as set forth within this subchapter shall
be prohibited.
   (C)   It is not intended by this subchapter to interfere with, nor abrogate,
nor annul, any easement, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that, where this subchapter imposes a greater restriction
upon signs, and the location thereof requires or imposes other conditions than
those required or imposed by other laws, ordinances or restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.483 APPEALS.
   Rules, regulations and procedures for appeals of the provision of this
subchapter and the regulations of the various zoning districts are as specified
in §§
156.070 through
156.072 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.484 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Community Development Department of the city shall be vested with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter of the zoning ordinances,
and in performance of such duty, shall be empowered and directed to:
   (A)   Procedures. The Community Development Department may, at its
discretion, adopt such procedures not repugnant to law for the administration
and enforcement of this subchapter;
   (B)   Issue permits. To issue permits to construct, alter or repair signs
which conform to the provisions of this chapter. Work not started within 180
days will require a new permit;
   (C)   Determine conformance. To ascertain that all signs, constructions and
all reconstructions or modifications of existing signs are built or constructed
in conformance to the zoning ordinances and building restrictions and building
codes;
   (D)   Perform inspections.
      (1)   To make an inspection of any sign upon the completion, erection,
reconstruction or remodeling of the same. This inspection shall be made to
assure compliance with the provisions of these regulations, other ordinances of
the city and conditions precedent to the issuance of a conditional use permit,
if applicable;
      (2)   To inspect each sign for which a complaint of non-compliance with
local ordinances is made in writing to the Community Development Department;
and
      (3)   To make periodic inspections of all signs to assure compliance with
these regulations, ordinances of the city and conditions precedent to the
issuance of a conditional use permit, if applicable; and to ensure that signs
are properly painted and maintained in a safe condition.
   (E)   Issue notices. To issue a notice of violation to the person having
charge or control or benefit of any sign found by the Community Development
Department to be unsafe or dangerous, or in violation of the ordinances of the
city;
   (F)   Violation; purpose. To institute any appropriate action or proceeding
in any case where any sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or in any case where any sign is used in
violation of any ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to, the
zoning ordinances to accomplish the following purposes:
      (1)   To prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
      (2)   To restrain, to correct or abate such violation;
      (3)   To take steps to abate and remove pursuant to applicable ordinances
any unsafe or dangerous sign which is not repaired or made safe within five
working days after appropriate notice to the person having charge, control or
benefit of any such sign;
      (4)   To take steps to abate and remove pursuant to applicable ordinances
any illegal sign which is not made conforming within 30 working days after
giving appropriate notice to the person having charge, control or benefit of
any such sign; and
      (5)   To take steps to abate and remove pursuant to applicable ordinances
any non-maintained or abandoned sign which is not repaired or put into use
within ten working days after giving appropriate notice to the person having
charge, control or benefit of any such sign.
   (G)   Notice requirements.
      (1)   Notification by the city to persons having charge or control or
benefit of any sign found by the Community Development Department to be unsafe
or dangerous or in violation of the zoning ordinance or other ordinances of the
city and where the city is contemplating removal of said sign shall be
accomplished by utilizing written notices sent through the registered mail.
      (2)   Any such notice shall state the exact nature of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.485 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No legal conforming sign shall be erected, raised, moved, placed,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, or have the text of the sign
changed, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (B)   All signs hereafter erected in the city shall comply with the current
standards of the currently adopted state building codes, and all other
applicable ordinances of the city.
   (C)   All signs shall be maintained in good condition. Exposed parts of the
signs shall be painted or treated chemically in such a manner as to preserve
the condition and life of such signs. Moving parts shall be maintained in
operable condition, and signs designed to be lighted shall be maintained with a
full complement of the lighting facilities required by the design of each such
sign. The area around the base of free-standing signs shall be maintained in
good condition and kept free of weeds and debris. If it is in a landscaped
area, then the area shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the
surrounding landscaped area.
   (D)   The text and surface of legal non-conforming signs, if the use remains
the same, may be changed, subject to regulations in §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter, without affecting the legal non-conforming status of
any such sign; provided, there is no sign area increase.
   (E)   Roof signs shall be erected so as to appear as a wall sign applied to
an existing penthouse or gambrel roof that could have occurred as a part of the
building and are finished in such a manner that the visual appearance from all
sides is such that they appear to be a part of the building itself.
      (1)   Roof signs shall not exceed the maximum allowable height of the
building within the zone in which it is located.
      (2)   Roof signs shall be set back a distance of at least four feet from
all the outside walls of the building on or over which they are located,
allowing for clear passageway around the sign.
      (3)   No visual guy wires, braces or secondary supports are to be used.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the restrictions in divisions (E)(1) through (E)(3)
above, roof signs which do not meet the requirements therein stated may be
considered by the Planning Commission as a conditional use, only in
circumstances where the sign is integrated into the overall design of the
building and the Planning Commission finds that the aesthetic effect of the
building with the roof sign is more desirable than without the roof sign.
   (F)   (1)   No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision; or at any location where by reason of the position, shape or color, it
may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of the words “stop”, “drive-
in”, “danger” or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
      (2)   The provisions of §
156.346 of this chapter shall also apply.
   (G)   Canopies or awnings over public property shall conform to all
provisions of the currently adopted state building codes governing such
structures, and shall maintain a minimum eight feet clearance above the
sidewalk or public property.
   (H)   Electric awnings shall be constructed of a rigid frame material which
meets all building code specifications with fabric coverings approved by the
currently adopted state building codes, and shall maintain a minimum of eight
feet clearance above the sidewalk or public property.
   (I)   Signs attached to an approved marquee projecting over public property
with no copy on the sides of the sign shall be allowed to project a maximum of
12 inches from the face of said marquee.
   (J)   (1)   Temporary signs shall be removed within seven days after an
event which the sign advertises, except for construction signs which must be
removed within 30 days following the issuing of the final occupancy permit.
      (2)   Temporary signs shall be posted for a period of 30 days in one
calendar year or the duration of the event being advertised, whichever is less.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the 30-day limitation on temporary signs in
general, real estate signs may also remain on the property being advertised for
the duration of the period in which the property is being actively marketed for
sale, rent or lease.
      (4)   Political signs are exempt from the time limitations of this
division (J).
      (5)   Community event banners for a community event organized and
sponsored by the city may exceed the time limitations of this paragraph upon
receiving approval by the City Council. (See §
156.490 of this chapter.)
   (K)   An automatic changeable copy sign message shall travel or scroll at a
speed that is consistent with traffic safety in the viewing area of the sign,
as per the Police Chief and/or the Traffic Advisory Council and shall have the
illumination controlled by a multi-stage alternate dimmer.
   (L)   No illuminated sign shall be located within 20 feet of the property
line of a parcel or lot occupied by or zoned for an exclusively residential
use.
   (M)   An illuminated sign adjacent to the property line of a parcel or lot
occupied by or zoned for an exclusively residential use shall be subdued and
the light shall not exceed two-tenths foot candles or illumination at the
residence property line.
   (N)   Off-premises signs.
      (1)   (a)   Off-premises directional/informational signs for religious,
civic or fraternal organizations, or any educational institution or for a
historical site (as listed on the city’s Chamber of Commerce historical tour)
shall be permitted within the public right-of-way, except when such are used in
connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device, and shall
be of uniform size, color and shape.
         (b)   These signs shall not be larger than four square feet; be
limited to a total of two per organization, institution or historical site
(with no more than one sign on Main Street); shall be made and installed by the
City Street Division; and shall be mounted on individual pole supports.
      (2)   Permanent off-premises directional/information signs used in
connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device, except
billboards, shall be permitted on private property in zoning districts
specified in the sign/district regulations subject to the following standards.
         (a)   Permanent off-premises directional/informational signs shall
comply with all other regulations for the zoning district in which the sign is
located.
         (b)   Permanent off-premises directional/informational signs shall be
included in the calculation of allowable sign area for the premises on which
the sign is located.
         (c)   Permanent off-premises directional/informational signs are
limited in sign area to 64 square feet or the maximum allowed in the zoning
district in which the sign is located.
         (d)   Each premises is limited to one permanent off-premises
directional/informational sign.
         (e)   Shopping centers consisting of separately owned or leased
properties or pads may incorporate more than one permanent off-premises
directional/informational signs; provided:
            1.   Such signs are reviewed and approved as part of an overall
design review for the shopping center, subject to the criteria guiding design
review; and
            2.   The shopping center is managed under common ownership, or is
under separate ownership, but bound by a set of private covenants, having the
effect of making the shopping center function in a coordinated manner.
         (f)   Free-standing permanent off-premises directional/informational
signs shall be designed as low-profile signs; except that, the Planning
Commission may consider high profile permanent off-premises directional/
informational signs as conditional uses as part of a design review of a
shopping center consisting of separately owned or lease properties or pads.
         (g)   The owner of the property on which a permanent off-premises
directional/informational sign is to be placed shall submit with the sign
permit application a written statement, signed by the property owner,
acknowledging that the off-premises directional/informational sign will be
included in the allowable sign area calculation for the property, and that on-
premises sign area will be limited by the amount of off-premises sign area
used. This statement shall be included in the permanent sign permit record for
the property.
      (3)   Temporary off-premises directional/informational signs, except
billboards shall be permitted on private property subject to the provisions of
this subchapter and the procedures of the Community Development Department
governing temporary signs.
      (4)   Bus benches shall be approved as a conditional use pursuant to §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter. Signs may be incorporated into bus benches; provided,
the following requirements are met.
         (a)   Bus bench signs are limited to the front and/or rear area of the
back support of the bus bench.
         (b)   The bus bench is located within 50 feet of a sign identifying a
stop for a public transportation system located in a CBD, GC, M-D or M-G Zoning
District.
         (c)   Cumulative bus bench sign area is limited to 20 square feet per
bus stop. Individual sign areas on each bench are limited to a maximum of ten
square feet, with a maximum vertical dimension of two feet and a maximum
horizontal dimension of six feet.
         (d)   The design of the bus bench is subject to review and approval of
the city’s Planning Commission.
         (e)   Within the Historic Downtown area bounded by 100 North, 200
South, 100 West and 100 East, the design of the bus bench and sign is subject
to review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.
         (f)   Bus benches encroaching on the public right-of-way shall be
reviewed and approved and an encroachment permit obtained from the City
Council, and UDOT if located in a state right-of-way, prior to placement.
         (g)   The owner of the bus bench will sign a document prepared by the
City Attorney agreeing to hold the city harmless from liability arising as a
result of the placement of the bus bench on public property.
         (h)   The bus bench shall comply in all other respects with applicable
city, state or federal laws and regulations.
         (i)   The bus bench shall comply in all respects with Utah Transit
Authority guidelines for bus bench and shelter design, as modified by city
design review.
   (O)   All signs shall maintain a minimum of 15 feet clearance in any
direction from an electrical power line serving as a primary or secondary
conductor, or eight feet clearance in any direction from an electrical power
line serving as a service drop.
   (P)   Advertising in city parks in the city is not regulated by this
subchapter. Regulations of advertising within city parks and other similar
internal-oriented places of assembly are deemed an internal matter of the
Recreation Division.
   (Q)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following
requirements apply to signs used for a cannabis production facility.
      (1)   The only sign type allowed is a wall sign with an area no larger
than 20 square feet.
      (2)   Painted wall signs are not permitted.
      (3)   Signage shall not be displayed in any manner on or in exterior
windows.
      (4)   The sign is limited to the following:
         (a)   Name of business;
         (b)   Hours of operation; and
         (c)   A green cross.
   (R)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, signs used for a
medical cannabis pharmacy shall be regulated like any retail business within
the same zoning district for business identification purposes and subject to
the provisions of U.C.A. § 4-41a-109, where a medical cannabis pharmacy may:
      (1)   Not advertise in any medium;
      (2)   Advertise an employment opportunity at the pharmacy;
      (3)   Include the business name and hours of operation; and
      (4)   Include a green cross.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 17-08, passed 3-
16-2017; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-7-2019; Ord. 21-07, passed 6-17-2021; Ord. 22-
02, passed 3-3-2022)
§ 156.486 SIGN PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   (1)   All signs within the city shall be erected, reconstructed or
remodeled only in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, city
ordinances and the state-adopted Building and Fire Code.
      (2)   Application for a sign permit shall be made to the Community
Development Department and shall be accompanied by a fee to defray the expenses
incurred in administration of this chapter.
      (3)   Fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. A sign
permit shall be issued by the Community Development Department if the proposed
sign is found by the Community Development Department to be in compliance.
   (B)   (1)   In the event that a notice of violation is issued, a
reinspection fee shall be charged to defray the costs of reinspection.
      (2)   Said reinspection fees shall be charged for each inspection
required until applicable regulations of the city are complied with.
      (3)   The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.070) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.487 DIGITAL SIGNS (INCLUDING DIGITAL BILLBOARDS).
   Digital signs that are 300 feet or closer to any legally occupied dwelling
shall adhere to a curfew as required below.
   (A)   If a digital sign is within 300 feet of a legally occupied dwelling
and is within a 120-radius as measured from the center point of the digital
sign face (§
156.491 of this chapter), then this digital sign face shall adhere to the
curfew.
   (B)   (1)   If a digital sign is within 150 feet of a legally-occupied
dwelling and is within a 30-radius area measured from the center point of the
digital sign face and beginning at the 120-degree line, then this digital sign
face shall adhere to the curfew.
      (2)   Video animation shall be prohibited including text, image or
graphic scrolling and animated advertisement transitions.
   (C)   Digital sign advertisements shall have a minimum dwell time of eight
seconds and a maximum rotation time of one-quarter second.
   (D)   Digital sign advertisements shall not blink, flash, pulse, twinkle or
similar effect, or be lit by any outside light source.
   (E)   All digital signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control
or other mechanism that automatically controls the sign’s brightness.
   (F)   (1)   A digital sign shall not exceed a maximum illumination of three-
tenths footcandles above the ambient light level when measured from a distance
equal to the square root of the square footage of the sign multiplied by 100 as
illustrated in §
156.491 of this chapter (measurement distance = sign area X 100).
      (2)   All digital signs shall have ambient light monitors installed,
which automatically adjust the brightness level based on ambient light
conditions.
   (G)   Digital signs shall comply with the sign standards for non-digital
signs as to sign area, height and the like for the zoning district in which the
digital sign is located.
   (H)   Upon installation of a digital sign, the applicant shall certify that
the digital sign has been tested and complies with the motion, dwell time,
brightness, rotation time and all other requirements herein.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.080) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.488 DIGITAL BILLBOARDS, NON-CONFORMING BILLBOARDS, RELOCATION OF
BILLBOARDS.
   In addition to the following requirements, digital billboards shall adhere
to the same size, height, spacing, setbacks and locations as all other non-
digital billboards:
   (A)   (1)   Digital billboards shall be allowed as a conversion, replacement
or relocation of any billboard in a location provided for in this subchapter.
      (2)   Conversion of a non-conforming billboard to a non-conforming
digital billboard shall only be permitted in those corridors identified in §
156.491 of this chapter. Section
156.491 of this chapter is intended to illustrate billboard corridors. If there
is any conflict or inconsistency between the exhibit and this chapter, the
chapter shall prevail;
   (B)   Digital billboards shall comply with all requirements of digital signs
as specified in §
156.487 of this chapter;
   (C)   A building permit shall be required for the conversion of any
billboard face to a digital billboard; and
   (D)   Shall comply in all respects with Utah Code and federal codes and
regulations, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.090) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 22-02, passed 3-
3-2022)
§ 156.489 SIGN/DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   Signs are allowed in their applicable districts as permitted or conditional
uses together with size, locations and height regulations as designated and
listed in the following tables.
   (A)   Permitted uses are designated with a “P”.
   (B)   Conditional uses are designated with a “C”.
   (C)   Uses not allowed are designated with an “X”, with an “-”, or are not
named.
(Prior Code, § 29.27.100) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.490 SIGN/DISTRICT REGULATIONS TABLE.
          Allowed in the
Sign Type Following Districts Maximum Cumulative  Maximum Height Restrictions
          P = Permitted Use   Sign Area Permitted Permitted
          C = Conditional Use
                                                                           Allowed in the Following Districts     Maximum
Sign Type                                                                  P = Permitted Use                      Cumulative     Maximum Height Permitted                                           Restrictions
                                                                           C = Conditional Use                    Sign Area
                                                                                                                  Permitted
ON-PREMISES IDENTIFICATION
Wall                                                                                                              2 sq. ft.;
Flat                                                                                                              except that,
Ghost                                                                                                             bed and
Low profile                                                                                                       breakfast
                                                                                                                  facilities
                                                                                                                  located in an
                                                                                                                  R-1 Zone are
                                                                                                                  permitted on 8
                                                                                                                  sq. ft. sign.
                                                                                                                  For
                                                                                                                  institutional,
                                                                                                                  governmental,
                                                                                                                  religious or
                                                                                                                  educational
                                                                                                                  uses, up to 2
                                                                                                                  sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                  sign area for
                                                                                                                  every 1 lineal
                                                                                                                  foot of
                                                                                                                  building
                                                                                                                  frontage, or
                                                                                                                  up to 1 sq. ft
                                                                           Residential Single-Family – P        of sign area
                                                                                                                 for every 1
                                                                                                                 lineal foot of
                                                                                                                 lot frontage,
Changeable copy                                                            C (only for changeable copy)           whichever is
                                                                                                                  least
                                                                                                                  restrictive.
                                                                                                                  Maximum
                                                                                                                  allowed area
                                                                                                                  of any
                                                                                                                  individual
                                                                                                                  sign is 100
                                                                                                                  sq. ft. During
                                                                                                                  design review,
                                                                                                                  the Planning
                                                                                                                  Commission may
                                                                                                                  require a
                                                                                                                  smaller sign
                                                                                                                  if it finds
                                                                                                                  that a smaller
                                                                                                                  sign will more
                                                                                                                  adequately
                                                                                                                  protect the
                                                                                                                  residential
                                                                                                                  nature of the
                                                                                                                  neighborhood

Awning                                                                                                            8 sq. ft. for
Wall                                                                                                              multiple-
Flat                                                                                                              family                                                                            Except as otherwise approved by the Planning Commission through a design
Ghost                                                                                                             residences of                                                                     review or conditional use approval, signs shall not be closer than 10 feet to
Low profile                                                                                                       1-4 units                                                                         the front property line or the sidewalk located within the street right-of-
                                                                                                                                                                                                   way, whichever is the least restrictive, and shall not be closer than 10 feet
                                                                                                                                Low profile and changeable copy signs are restricted to a maximum  to the side property lines, nor be placed in a location that obstructs the
                                                                                                                                height of 6 feet from final grade, or from the top of a base       clear view as defined in §
                                                                                                                                rising a maximum of 3 feet and consisting of materials matching    156.346 of this chapter. Low profile signs shall be incorporated into a
                                                                                                                  32 sq. ft. for the predominant materials used in the construction of the          landscape design theme or planter box. Low profile signs may be mounted on a
                                                                                                                  multiple-      principal building on the premises where the sign is located       base rising a maximum of 3 feet and consisting of materials matching the
                                                                                                                  family                                                                            predominant materials used in the construction of the principal building on
                                                                                                                  residences of                                                                     the premises where the sign is located. In such cases, the area of the base
                                                                                                                  5 or more                                                                         shall not be included in the calculation of sign area or sign height
                                                                                                                  units and
                                                                                                                  property which
                                                                                                                  has a non-
                                                                                                                  dwelling use,
                                                                                                                  and bed and
                                                                                                                  breakfast
                                                                                                                  facilities
                                                                                                                  located in
                                                                                                                  other than an
                                                                                                                  R-1 Zone. For
                                                                                                                  institutional,
                                                                                                                  governmental,
                                                                                                                  religious or
                                                                                                                  educational
                                                                                                                  uses, up to 2
                                                                                                                  sq. ft. of
                                                                           Residential Multiple-Family - P        sign area for
                                                                                                                 every 1 lineal
                                                                                                                 foot of
                                                                                                                 building
                                                                                                                 frontage, or
Changeable copy                                                            C (only for changeable copy)           up to 1 sq.
                                                                                                                  ft. of sign
                                                                                                                  area for every
                                                                                                                  1 lineal foot
                                                                                                                  of lot
                                                                                                                  frontage,
                                                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                                                  least
                                                                                                                  restrictive.
                                                                                                                  Maximum
                                                                                                                  allowed area
                                                                                                                  of any
                                                                                                                  individual
                                                                                                                  sign is 100
                                                                                                                  sq. ft. During
                                                                                                                  design review,
                                                                                                                  the Planning
                                                                                                                  Commission may
                                                                                                                  require a
                                                                                                                  smaller
                                                                                                                  sign if it
                                                                                                                  finds that a
                                                                                                                  smaller sign
                                                                                                                  will more
                                                                                                                  adequately
                                                                                                                  protect the
                                                                                                                  residential
                                                                                                                  nature of the
                                                                                                                  neighborhood
                                                                                                                   

Awning                                                                                                            4 sq. ft. of
Cabinet                                                                                                           sign area for
Canopy                                                                                                            every 1 linear
Changeable copy                                                                                                   foot of
Electric awning                                                                                                   building
Flat                                                                                                              frontage or 2
Free-standing                                                                                                     sq. ft. of
Ghost                                                                                                             sign area for
Illuminated (externally or internally)                                                                            every 1 linear
Projecting                                                                                                        foot of lot
Roof                                                                                                              frontage,
Wall                                                                                                              whichever is
Window                                                                                                            the least
                                                                                                                  restrictive
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                  For buildings
                                                                                                                  that have
                                                                                                                  secondary
                                                                                                                  frontage along
                                                                                                                  1100 South
                                                                                                                  Street (SR-91)
                                                                                                                  or Interstate
                                                                                                                  15 (I-15) an
                                                                                                                  additional 2
                                                                                                                  sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                  sign area for
                                                                                                                  every 1 linear
                                                                                                                  foot of
                                                                                                                  secondary
                                                                                                                  building
                                                                                                                  frontage shall
                                                                                                                  be allowed.
                                                                                                                  For purposes
                                                                                                                  of this
                                                                                                                  section, a
                                                                                                                  secondary
                                                                                                                  frontage is
                                                                                                                  the backside
                                                                                                                  of a building
                                                                                                                  that faces
                                                                                                                  1100 South
                                                                                                                  Street (SR-91)
                                                                                                                  or Interstate
                                                                                                                  15 (I-15) with High profile: MU – 25 ft.                                        1. No canopy or awning signs allowed to project over property line, except as
                                                                                                                  no direct      GC & M-D – 35 ft.                                                specified under §
                                                                                                                  access.        M-G – 45 ft.                                                     116.027, and the maximum cumulative sign area as specified herein
                                                                                                                  Furthermore,                                                                      
                                                                                                                  the additional Additional height may be approved by the City Council for an on-   2. Free-standing sign poles shall not be closer than 2 ft. to the property
                                                                                                                  allotment      premises free- standing sign in the GC District within 1,000 ft.   line. See §
                                                                                                                  applies to     of an interstate interchange (see detailed in maximum cumulative   156.485(L) and (M) of this chapter
                                                                           GC, M-D, M-G, MU-40, MU-80, MU-160 – properties     sign area permitted section)                                        
                                                                                                                  that abut the                                                                    3. Clearance of 8 ft. required between ground and sign in areas of pedestrian
                                                                                                                  said public    Low profile signs are subject to the restrictions contained in §  or vehicular traffic except for window, wall and low-profile signs
                                                                                                                  rights-of-way. 156.480 of this chapter                                             
                                                                                                                  The additional                                                                   4. Low profile signs are subject to the restrictions contained in § 154.480
                                                                                                                  sign area may  Roof: See §                                                       of this chapter
                                                                                                                  not be applied 156.485(F) of this chapter                                          
Digital sign                                                                                                      to multiple                                                                      5. UDOT outdoor advertising controls and regulations shall be followed when
                                                                                                                  free-standing  See Note A                                                         applicable
                                                                                                                  signs. The
                                                                                                                  sign area is
                                                                                                                  not to exceed
                                                                                                                  4 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                  sign area for
                                                                                                                  1 linear foot
                                                                                                                  of building
                                                                                                                  frontage on
                                                                                                                  any one side
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                  Additional
                                                                                                                  sign area and
                                                                                                                  height may be
                                                                                                                  approved by
                                                                                                                  the City
                                                                                                                  Council for an
                                                                                                                  on-premises
                                                                                                                  free-standing
                                                                                                                  sign in the GC
                                                                                                                  District
                                                                                                                  within 1,000
                                                                                                                  ft. of an
                                                                                                                  interstate
                                                                                                                  interchange
                                                                                                                  measured from
                                                                                                                  the edge of
                                                                                                                  UDOT right-of-
                                                                                                                  way. Prior to
                                                                                                                  the City
                                                                                                                  Council
                                                                                                                  consideration,
                                                                                                                  an overall
                                                                                                                  project
                                                                                                                  signage plan
                                                                                                                  must be
                                                                                                                  submitted to
                                                                                                                  the Planning
                                                                                                                  Commission for
                                                                                                                  their review
                                                                                                                  and
                                                                                                                  recommendation
                                                                                                                  to the Council

Awning                                                                                                            4 sq. ft. of
Canopy                                                                                                            sign area for
Flat                                                                                                              every 1 linear
Ghost                                                                                                             foot of
Illuminated (externally or internally)                                                                            building                                                                          Signs in the CBD Zoning District are subject to restrictions contained in the
Low profile                                                                                                       frontage or 2  Awning, canopy, flat, ghost, illuminated, projecting, wall, and    City Historic Downtown Guidelines for Historic Downtown. Billboards, high
Projecting                                                                                                        sq. ft. of     window signs are limited in height to the height of the building.  profile, electric awning and cabinet signs are specifically prohibited in the
Wall                                                                       CBD - P                                sign area for  The restrictions contained in the Brigham City Historic Downtown   CBD Zone. Low profile signs may be internally illuminated, however, they
Window                                                                                                            every 1 linear Guidelines shall apply. Low Profile signs are subject to the       shall be designed in such a manner that copy and logos are contained within a
                                                                                                                  foot of lot    restrictions contained in the Definitions Section 29.27.010.       field that is opaque or of a darker color than the copy or logos. Digital
                                                                                                                  frontage,                                                                         signs in the CBD Zone shall be restricted to low profile signs.
Digital sign                                                                                                      whichever is
                                                                                                                  the least
                                                                                                                  restrictive

BILLBOARDS
Billboard                                                                                                                                                                                           1. Signs shall be at least 1,000 ft. apart (lineal distance measured along 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    side of a street). Written notification shall be provided to owners of
                                                                                                                                                                                                    property located within 500 ft. from an applicant’s property line
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2. Signs shall not project over property line
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    3. Sign poles shall be erected a minimum of 10 ft. from the property line
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4. Shall be reviewed through conditional use permit to avoid “blanketing” of
                                                                                                                                                                                                    signs
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                           M-D & M-G – C                                                                                                          5. UDOT outdoor advertising controls and regulations shall be followed where
                                                                                                                                                                                                   applicable
                                                                           Excludes the following corridors:                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                   6. Relocation of legal non-conforming billboards is subject to provisions of
                                                                           1. U.S. Highway 89/91                                 M-D - 35 ft.                                                       Utah Code. Conversion of a legal non-confirming billboard to a digital
                                                                                                                                                                                                  billboard is subject to the location criteria in § 154.491 of this chapter.
                                                                           2. Main Street                         M-D & M-G 672  M-G - 45 ft.                                                       Legal non-conforming billboards converted to a digital billboard shall still
Digital billboard                                                                                                sq. ft.                                                                          be treated as legal non- conforming billboards and shall be subject to
                                                                           3. SR 38                                              See Note A.                                                        provisions related to legal non- confirming billboards contained in Utah Code
                                                                                                                                                                                                   and this chapter
                                                                           4. 1100 S./U.S. Highway 91                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                   7. Back-to-back or V-shaped configurations are permitted when the following
                                                                           5. Forest Street from Main Street to                                                                                     apply:
                                                                           UPRR Corridor                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a. For relocation or conversion of a legal non-conforming billboard the
                                                                                                                                                                                                    existing billboard has a back-to-back or V-shaped configuration
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    b. For a billboard located in a zoning district that permits billboards, in
                                                                                                                                                                                                    all instances
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    c. The angle between the faces shall not exceed 90 degrees as illustrated in
                                                                                                                                                                                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                    156.491 of this chapter
                                                                                                                                                                                                     

TEMPORARY ON- OR OFF-PREMISES (includes political, construction, real estate, project marketing, yard sale, civic and the like)
Flat                                                                                                              32 sq. ft.
Free-standing                                                                                                     (construction
Illuminated                                                                                                       may be 64 sq.  8 ft.
Low profile                                                                                                       ft.)            
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1. No temporary sign shall extend over property line, nor be placed in a
                                                                           Residential - P, Agricultural - P                    10 ft.                                                             location that obstructs the view as defined in §
                                                                                                                 64 sq. ft.                                                                        156.346 of this chapter
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                           The City Council may approve additional sign area and                                                                    2. Community event banners for community events organized and sponsored by
                                                                           height for community event banners for community                                                                         the city must be approved by the City Council as an overall plan addressing
Digital sign                                                               events organized and sponsored by the city. It is                                                                        size, type, time frame and locations
                                                                           anticipated these signs will be placed on city                                                                            
                                                                           property. Banners shall not be placed within the                                                                         3. Digital signs shall be permitted only in Commercial and Manufacturing
                                                                           public right-of-way, which includes the park strip                                                                       Zones subject to provisions contained in this chapter
                                                                           between sidewalk and curb. In the event any signs
                                                                           would better serve the community by placement on
                                                                           private property, the property owner must give
                                                                           permission and the community vent banner would not
                                                                           count toward the overall maximum cumulative sign area
                                                                           for the said property in which the sigh would be
                                                                           placed
DIRECTONAL/INFORMATIONAL
Off-premises (non-profit organizations or historical sites, see § 156.485                                                                                                                          Shall be erected on poles by City Street Division on public rights-of-way.
(N)(1) of this chapter                                                     All Zones - P                          4 sq. ft.      10 ft.                                                             Maximum of 2 allowed per organization. Limited to 1 on Main Street. Not more
                                                                                                                                                                                                    than 1 per pole
Off-premises (other than for non-profit organizations or historical sites) CBD, GC, M-D, M-G - P                  64 sq. ft.     See §                                                             See §
                                                                                                                                 156.485(N)(2) of this chapter                                      156.485(N)(2) of this chapter
Bus bench signs                                                            CBD, GC, M-D, MB - C                   10 sq. ft.     See §                                                             See §
                                                                                                                                 156.485(N)(4) of this chapter                                      156.485(N)(4)of this chapter
                                                                                                                  Shall be
                                                                                                                  deducted from
On-premises                                                                Commercial Manufacturing - P &         maximum        N/A                                                                N/A
                                                                           Multiple Use                           cumulative on-
                                                                                                                  premises sign
                                                                                                                  area
NOTES TO TABLE:
65 feet if located within 660 feet of the centerline of an interstate freeway, or within 300 feet of the center line of the right-of-way of a federal highway; provided that, the height may be measured from the highest road level of the I-15 freeway interchange either along
the freeway or fronting the approach highway if located within 1,500 feet of the interchange
 
(Prior Code, § 29.27.110) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-15, passed 11-
6-2014; Ord. 15-12, passed 7-16-2015; Ord. 17-08, passed 3-16-2017; Ord. 22-02,
passed 3-3-2022)
§ 156.491 IMAGES AND EXAMPLES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3075.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3077.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 29.27.110) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
NATURAL RESOURCE EXCAVATION
§ 156.505 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to permit natural resource extractive and
related uses such as mines, quarries, gravel pits, rock crushers, concrete
batching plants and asphalt plants, and to provide for the orderly removal of
mineral resources and the reclamation of the areas from which mineral resources
are taken. This subchapter is further intended to protect the environmental,
ecological, scenic and visual resources of the city from undue impacts
resulting from such uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.010) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.506 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The application of this subchapter and a conditional use permit for natural
resource excavation and related uses as specified in §
156.088 of this chapter will be considered only where all of the following
tests are met:
   (A)   The resource is available;
   (B)   Existing land uses are buffered; and
   (C)   Natural resource excavation and related uses are consistent with the
goals of the city’s General Plan.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.020) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.507 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
phrases not defined in this section, but defined in §
156.020 of this chapter, shall be given the meanings thus set forth. All other
words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for
reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this
subchapter.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, fiduciary, agent or other
organization or representative of any kind either public or private, submitting
an application for natural resource excavation approval.
   EXCAVATION. The removal of natural resources by excavating, stripping,
leveling or any other process, together with all other types of mining
operations where natural resources are removed from the earth. The provisions
of this subchapter shall not apply to the removal of sod or topsoil; provided
that, any removal of sod or topsoil shall not be closer than ten feet to any
property line, involve excavation depths in excess of 18 inches or adversely
affect the drainage, stability, vegetation or air quality of the area. Further,
this subchapter shall not apply to ditching and land leveling for agricultural
purposes, so long as such land leveling for agricultural purposes does not
include the removal of natural resources from the site for other uses.
   OPERATION. Those activities conducted on the surface of the land directly
involved in or incidental to the exploration for, or development or extraction
of, natural resources from their natural occurrences, including surface mining
and surface effects of underground mining, on-site transportation and other
processing.
   OPERATOR. Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, receiver,
trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, fiduciary, agent or other
organization or representative of any kind either public or private, owning,
controlling or managing natural resource excavation operations or proposed
operations, including exploring for or developing of a mineral deposit.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, receiver,
trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, fiduciary, agent or other
organization or representative of any kind either public or private, owning,
controlling or managing a mineral deposit or the surface of lands employed in
natural resource excavation operations.
   PARCEL. A parcel of property shall mean a contiguous quantity of land,
existing as a separate legal description with a separate tax identification
number on or before 2-19-1998. Land in one ownership, but with more than one
legal description or tax identification number, shall not be considered one
PARCEL. Land assembled into one legal description or tax identification number
after 2-19-1998 shall not be considered one PARCEL for purposes of this zoning
regulation. Land in one ownership, but physically divided by a public or
private highway, road or street, is not considered contiguous under this
definition.
   PERMITTEE. An owner or operator who has received or is in the process of
applying for a conditional use permit for natural resource excavation.
   RECLAMATION. Actions performed during and after natural resource excavation
operations to shape, stabilize, re-vegetate or otherwise treat the land
affected in order to achieve a safe, stable, ecological condition.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.030) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.508 APPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL OF NATURAL RESOURCE EXCAVATION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Applications for a conditional use permit for natural resource
excavation and/or related activities shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department on forms provided for that purpose, and shall include as
a minimum the following information: the name of the mineral property, property
owners, lessee, proposed operations, agent of process, location of mineral
property and legal description.
   (B)   Conditional uses listed under §
156.088 of this chapter for any parcel of land in the corporate boundary of the
city, and which are not valid and legal non-conforming uses, shall be subject
to this chapter and §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter, and shall occur only pursuant to the provisions of
said chapters.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.040) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.509 REQUIRED DOCUMENTS.
   The following are documents that are required during the review process for
all applications for final conditional use approval pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (A)   Pre-mining site inventory and analysis. A pre-mining inventory and
analysis shall be performed by the applicant containing the following
information both on-site and extending off-site beyond the site to the nearest
public street or highway or to a minimum distance of 500 feet:
      (1)   A written regional vicinity analysis describing site hydrology and
geology, the visual characteristics with particular concern given to the use of
natural topography and vegetation to shield site operations;
      (2)   A description of other land uses surrounding the site, the possible
impacts of the proposed excavation on surrounding land, its economic value and
the methods to be employed to mitigate any potentially negative effects of
mining and associated impacts;
      (3)   A topographic map at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet with a
maximum contour interval that provides adequate detail for review while
retaining visual clarity. The area to be included in the map shall extend
beyond the site to the nearest public street or highway or to a minimum
distance of 500 feet beyond the limits of the proposed operation; and
      (4)   A geological survey of the area, in plan and profile, including
information relating to depths of deposits of the mineral proposed for mining,
including a soils survey to include a soils profile.
   (B)   Mining operations plan. The applicant shall provide a mining
operations plan which describes in written and/or graphic form the following:
      (1)   Proposed starting date, the anticipated period of operation,
including a full and adequate description of all phases and the amount of
material to be removed;
      (2)   Operations development plan in written and graphic form showing the
following proposed operations:
         (a)   A description of transportation routes used in the site,
schedule of proposed operations, and an overlay to the topographic map
(division (A)(2) above) showing existing and proposed location of buildings,
storage areas, process equipment and material stockpiles;
         (b)   A description of the type and kinds of machinery, equipment,
milling and processing systems which will be or might be necessary to carry on
the operation and waste disposal systems;
         (c)   The water to be used in the operation, its source, quantity and
methods of control and disposal; and
         (d)   Wind and air movement patterns with a description of techniques
used to control dust and noise.
      (3)   A traffic study in accordance with §
156.515 of this chapter. The graphic portion of the operations development plan
shall be superimposed on a topographic map (to a scale of one inch equals 200
feet) of the area extending beyond the site to the nearest public street or
highway or to a minimum distance of 500 feet beyond the proposed excavation.
   (C)   Reclamation plan. The applicant shall provide a reclamation plan in
written and graphic form with the use of maps, imagery, and renderings, at a
scale equal to that of the topographic map (see division (A)(3) above), and
including the following as a minimum:
      (1)   A grading plan drawn and certified by a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor indicating the areas to be excavated and the proposed
finished grades;
      (2)   A description of the methods and plans to be employed for
simultaneous reclamation of the site during and after the mining operation
including proposed phasing of simultaneous mining and reclamation;
      (3)   A landscape plan in accordance with §
156.515 of this chapter, including a description of the top soil requirements
and application, planting schedule, specifications for plat applications,
mulching and type of irrigation to be used;
      (4)   A description of the hydrologic environment of the reclaimed site
to include a map illustrating the water drainage areas such as lakes, springs,
ponds, streams, wells, pipe lines, culverts, ditches, canals;
      (5)   A description of all permanent roads and other human-made
structures which are to remain after reclamation; and
      (6)   Signature blocks for the operator, property owner or owners, City
Engineer, Planning Commission Chairperson and Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.050) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.510 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting. The applicant shall meet with the Community
Development Department to review the application plans and submittal documents
for the proposed operation. The Community Development Department shall
determine the number of application plans to be submitted consistent with the
number of reviewing agencies and individuals. Applicants are encouraged to
submit all documentation required by §
156.509 of this chapter; however, initial review and preliminary approval may
be granted upon submittal and review of the information outlined in §
156.509(A) of this chapter, plus the following:
      (1)   A written description of the anticipated amount of material to be
removed and the equipment and machinery to be employed in the removal process;
and
      (2)   An overlay sketch to the topographic map of the site contours after
excavation is complete showing drainage channels, vegetation and roadways.
   (B)   Initial review of application plans.
      (1)   The Community Development Department shall distribute copies of the
application plans, documents and statements to other interested county, city,
and state agencies as determined by the Community Development Department and
shall ask for comments and recommendations.
      (2)   Within 60 days of receipt by the Community Development Department
the application plans shall be formally considered at a regularly scheduled or
specially scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission with the applicant.
Following consideration of the excavation proposal, the Planning Commission
shall notify the operator or owner of its findings as to preliminary approval,
disapproval or request for additional information prior to final review.
   (C)   Review of final plans.
      (1)   Following initial review by the Planning Commission, the applicant
shall provide any additional information requested by the Planning Commission
and any documentation required in §
156.509 of this chapter not submitted with the initial application. The
Community Development Department shall determine the number of copies of maps,
drawings and plans to be submitted. The Community Development Department shall
distribute copies of the final application and accompanying plans and
statements to other interested county, city and state agencies as determined by
the Community Development Department, and shall ask for comments and
recommendations.
      (2)   Within a period of not more than 60 days of receipt of the final
application, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing through proper
notice as prescribed by law to consider said final application. Following the
public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and shall
approve or deny the application. If the Planning Commission finds that the
information provided is insufficient or that additional public or other input
is necessary for a final decision, it may continue the hearing or decision
until such information or input is provided.
   (D)   Authorization of permit. The conditional use permit, and associated
reclamation maps and plans shall include signature lines and blocks for the
operator, property owner or owners, City Engineer, Planning Commission
Chairperson and Mayor. Upon obtaining signatures of the above individuals, the
permit shall be authorized.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.060) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.511 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT FORMAT.
   (A)   Conditional use permits for natural resource excavation shall include
the following documents:
      (1)   A written permit following the format outlined below and containing
the signatures of the operator, the property owner or owners, City Engineer,
Planning Commission Chairperson and Mayor;
      (2)   A complete copy of the application as submitted for final review;
      (3)   Any additional permits, licenses, or documentation pertaining to
the permittee’s operation, which may be required by other agencies will be
incorporated into and become a condition of the conditional use permit; and
      (4)   A list of all parcels of land included in the application.
   (B)   The written permit shall specify the conditions and requirements
imposed upon the operation by the Planning Commission and shall include as a
minimum the following:
      (1)   A statement by the operator and the owner or owners of the subject
property acknowledging and accepting the obligations created by the permit and
agreeing to the conditions imposed;
      (2)   Conditions relating to transfer to successor operations pursuant to
§
156.513 of this chapter;
      (3)   Conditions relating to the permit term and renewal periods, if any,
pursuant to §
156.514 of this chapter;
      (4)   Conditions relating to mining operations and conditional use
standards pursuant to §
156.515 of this chapter;
      (5)   Conditions relating to reclamation pursuant to §
156.516 of this chapter;
      (6)   Conditions relating to monitoring of requirements of the
conditional use permit;
      (7)   Conditions relating to the provision of surety pursuant to §
156.517 of this chapter; and
      (8)   Conditions relating to enforcement and penalties for violation of
terms of the conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.070) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.512 REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMIT.
   Any conditional use permit issued for natural resource excavation shall be
subject to revocation or modification by the Planning Commission, for cause,
and in the following manner.
   (A)   Notice of failure to comply. A notice shall be served on the owner or
the permittee by the Community Development Department or his or her
representative specifying the failure to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter or with any of the conditions set forth in the conditional use
permit or city code and state law, requiring him or her to appear before the
Planning Commission at a designated date and hour to show cause why said permit
should not be revoked or modified.
   (B)   Hearing. Upon the date set for hearing, the Planning Commission shall
hear all charges and other testimony relating to the matter under
consideration. The Planning Commission shall then decide to either continue,
revoke or modify the permit, or refer the matter to the City Attorney for
further action.
   (C)   Modification of the natural resources permit plans. Modification of
the conditional use permit plans for natural resource excavation may be
initiated by the Planning Commission or by the permittee where it is merely
sought to affect minor revisions in the approved grading plan, schedule of
proposed operation, proposed reuse plan or landscape plan. Consideration of
such revisions need not require a public hearing provided that in the judgment
of the Planning Commission the proposed revisions would not constitute
significant changes, and providing also, that the permittee has not expressly
requested that a public hearing be held.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.080) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.513 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR OPERATION.
   (A)   Whenever an operator succeeds to the interest of another operator by
sale, assignment, lease or other means, the Planning Commission may release the
first operator from its responsibilities under its approved plans, including
surety; provided, the successor assumes all of the responsibilities of the
former operator, to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission under the
approved operations and reclamation plans and the posting of surety.
   (B)   Upon satisfactory assumption of such responsibilities by the successor
operator, under conditions approved by the Planning Commission the
responsibility of the total excavation site shall be transferred to the
successor operator.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.090) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.514 PERMIT TERM.
   Notwithstanding §
156.513 of this chapter, a conditional use permit for natural resource
excavation may be approved for a specific term with subsequent renewals as
approved by the Planning Commission. The intent of this subchapter is to allow
the Planning Commission to conduct a review of a natural resource excavation
operation following an initial approval term to determine if impacts have
exceeded those foreseen in the initial review process and to allow conditions
to be added to the original approval to mitigate those impacts.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.100) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.515 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS FOR NATURAL RESOURCE EXCAVATION.
   The following standards shall apply to all conditional use permits granted
under this subchapter. The Planning Commission may modify these standards or
attach additional conditions upon a finding by the Planning Commission that
such modifications or additional conditions are necessary to mitigate impacts
of natural resource excavation operations, as determined during a conditional
use permit review procedure.
   (A)   Buffer distances.
      (1)   All extractive operations, roads, machinery, equipment and
stockpiles (excluding top soil used for reclamation and screening and rock
crushing) shall be kept at least 100 feet horizontal distance from the boundary
with any other property owner, except as may be reduced by the Planning
Commission, but in no event should the operation be closer than 40 feet to the
property line, except as provided in §
156.517(C)(5) of this chapter.
      (2)   All screening and rock crushing operations shall be conducted at
least 400 feet horizontal distance from the boundary of any other property
owner (except as may be reduced by the Planning Commission, but in no event
shall the operation be closer than 50 feet to the property).
      (3)   All excavations shall be kept at least 100 feet from a public road,
except where the Planning Commission determines the excavations may be moved
closer if it will not endanger the users of the road.
   (B)   Fencing. Areas of excavation with serious or hazardous conditions
shall be reasonably fenced, except where in the determination of the Planning
Commission other suitable devices may be used.
   (C)   Grading. All grading, including slope stabilization, shall be done in
accordance with the latest reclamation plans, with the concurrence of the City
Engineer.
   (D)   Air quality. All air quality plans and actions shall be monitored and
approved by the state’s Division of Air Quality. The permittee shall obtain an
air quality approval order from the state’s Division of Air Quality prior to
the final approval of a conditional use permit. The air quality permit and
application for the permit shall be incorporated by reference into a
conditional use permit and shall be on file with the city. The permittee shall
establish to the satisfaction of the city, and as certified by the City
Engineer, the availability of water sufficient for required dust suppression
activities and reclamation. Acceptable opacity on-site shall be established
through the conditional use process and in consultation with the state’s
Division of Air Quality. All equipment and machinery, on-site and off-site,
utilized in the excavation and processing of native natural resources shall be
constructed, operated and maintained in such a manner as to minimize on-site
dust, smoke and odor, and to minimize off-site drift of dust, smoke and odor.
The Planning Commission may impose particular conditions to ensure that
fugitive dust suppression utilizes best available control technologies and to
establish air quality and fugitive dust monitoring and reporting procedures.
   (E)   Water quality. The washing of sand and gravel shall be done so as to
prevent the discharge of waste water onto any public or private roads or any
private property, or into a public or private river, stream, canal or waterway,
without the written consent of the owner and/or appropriate local, state or
federal jurisdiction. Water from wash plants shall be collected in evaporating
ponds and shall not be permitted to drain into waterways.
   (F)   Storm water. The entire area subject to a conditional use permit shall
be graded so that storm water remains on site. The site shall be graded so that
as the area is eventually reclaimed, storm drainage is properly managed in a
manner reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and Planning Commission. A
storm water discharge plan shall be incorporated into the conditional use
permit by reference.
   (G)   Tracking of material onto public streets. Trucks or other equipment
which exit the operations approved under a conditional use permit, whether
owned and operated by the permittee or others, and whether loaded or unloaded,
shall adhere to all laws (state, county or city) requiring that loads be
contained within the hauling vehicles. All vehicles exiting the operation site,
whether owned or operated by the permittee or others, and whether loaded or
unloaded shall be checked for material on the wheels before leaving the pit.
Any material outside a truck or other equipment exiting the operations approved
under a conditional use permit, whether owned or operated by permittee or
others, and whether loaded or unloaded shall be cleaned from the truck or
equipment.
   (H)   Hours and days of operation. Hours and days of operation shall be
established through the conditional use process as follows.
      (1)   The hours for mining operations, crushing and screening, and
hauling, except for the maintenance and repair of vehicles and equipment, shall
be established during the review of the applicant’s operation plan, but shall
not exceed the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
      (2)   Mining operations, crushing and screening, and hauling, except for
the maintenance and repair of vehicles and equipment, are prohibited on Sundays
and on the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Pioneer Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may vary these days and/or hours of
operation in specific cases upon a finding that unusual circumstances
associated with the particular case warrant such a variance and upon a finding
that no existing or anticipated residential use will be unduly impacted by such
varied hours and/or days of operation.
      (4)   During periods of national or unusual emergency, or in instances of
unusual contractual obligations or other factors, time and hours of operation
may be altered at the discretion of, and following formal approval by, the City
Council.
   (I)   Landscaping. Properties containing uses for which a conditional use
permit for natural resource excavation is required shall be landscaped for
purposes of screening such uses from public streets and abutting properties,
and providing for site reclamation planting. Vegetative materials shall be
planted together with necessary top soil as per the schedule approved in the
granting of the conditional use permit and shall be maintained in a healthy,
growing condition. The reclamation plan shall include a landscaping plan
prepared by a licensed landscape architect, and shall include a planting plan
and an irrigation plan. Landscaping shall be accomplished and maintained in
accordance with the approved Reclamation Plan and the guidelines established in
§
156.516 of this chapter.
   (J)   Lighting. Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other light sources
may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and loading
areas; provided, they are equipped with proper lenses or other devices
concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking
and loading areas and preventing any bright, direct illumination upon adjacent
property or any public right-of-way. No unshielded lights of any color,
reflectors, spotlights, strobe lights or searchlights shall be located in such
a manner that they are pointed toward or are directly visible from frequently
traveled public rights-of-way or adjacent properties.
   (K)   Noise.
      (1)   Natural resource excavation operations shall be performed in such a
manner that noise emissions do not exceed the following dBA levels at the
boundary of the parcel containing the operation:
 
                                                Night Time 7:00 p.m. to 6:
Zoning of Adjacent   Day Time 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 00 a.m. (only when night
Property             p.m.                       operations are previously
                                                approved as specified
                                                above)
Commercially zoned   60 dB A                    55 dB A
Industrially zoned   80 dB A                    75 dB A
Multiple use zoned   50 dB A                    40 dB A
Residentially or     50 dB A                    40 dB A
agriculturally zoned
 
      (2)   Blasting and/or the use of explosives of any kind are strictly and
completely prohibited.
      (3)   Best available control technologies shall be used to minimize noise
and vibration from being perceptible on adjacent property.
      (4)   Strobe lights shall be used instead of backup alarms when it is
dark to mitigate noise impacts on the surrounding properties.
   (L)   Haul roads. All permanent haul roads, and temporary haul roads within
500 feet of public streets, shall be regularly surfaced with asphalt or oil,
and all permanent or temporary roadways shall be regularly watered, swept or
surfaced with a dust palliative. Any haul road accessing a public street, or a
state or federal road or highway, shall be approved by UDOT and the Planning
Commission prior to construction.
   (M)   Traffic.
      (1)   Trucks or other equipment which exit onto a city street from the
operations approved under a conditional use permit, whether owned and operated
by the permittee or others, and whether loaded or unloaded, shall travel only
on truck routes established by ordinance. The Planning Commission may establish
conditions mitigating the impact of traffic on city streets, school zones and
pedestrian routes. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
restrictions on hours of truck traffic, restrictions on vehicle size and
restrictions on speed.
      (2)   A traffic study shall be required as part of a mining operations
plan submittal. the traffic study shall address the following issues:
         (a)   Identify peak volumes;
         (b)   Identify measures to mitigate traffic impacts during critical
school times;
         (c)   Projected traffic generated by the operation; and
         (d)   Projected traffic levels on routes traveled by traffic generated
by the operation.
      (3)   Traffic and speed shall be monitored over the first year of
operations, and the Planning Commission shall conduct a review of traffic
routing following the first year of operation. At that time, the Planning
Commission may establish additional conditions related to transportation and
any such conditions shall become binding on the permittee, the property owner
or owners and any successors.
   (N)   Related manufacturing operations. The manufacture of concrete building
blocks or other similar items, the production or manufacture of lime products,
the production of ready-mixed concrete, the production of asphalt mixes and any
similar production or manufacturing processes which might be related to an
excavation operation shall not be permitted in association with such an
operation, except as expressly provided by a conditional use permit under this
subchapter.
   (O)   Monumentation. Monuments or other means of identification shall be
placed and maintained around the perimeter of the excavation site so as to
enable reasonable identification of the property line separating the excavation
property from adjoining land owners.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.110) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.516 RECLAMATION.
   (A)   Objectives. The objectives of excavation reclamation shall be:
      (1)   To return the land, concurrently with the mining operation or
within a reasonable amount of time thereafter to a predetermined condition
defined by the reclamation plan as submitted and approved, compatible with
past, present or probable future local land uses, and consistent with the
city’s General Plan;
      (2)   To minimize or prevent present and future on-site or off-site
environmental degradation to the ecological and hydrological regimes caused by
mining operations, and to meet other pertinent state and federal regulations
regarding air and water quality standards and health and safety criteria;
      (3)   To minimize or prevent present and future hazards to public safety
and welfare; and
      (4)   To ensure that the area of excavation shall be rehabilitated to a
condition of practical usefulness and reasonable physical attractiveness.
   (B)   Simultaneous excavation and reclamation.
      (1)   The reclamation or rehabilitation of natural resources sites with a
projected life of more than one year shall be carried out simultaneously with
the excavation of the resource. The purpose and intent of simultaneous
excavation and reclamation includes but is not limited to the creation of a
usable land resource and the elimination of waste heaps, and the prevention of
shallow, stagnant, small bodies of water, small unusable remnants of land and
eroding, barren slopes all normally associated with open pit operations, except
as providing storm water detention facilities as described in a hydrological
report.
      (2)   Excavations shall be planned so as to progressively develop the
proposed final land forms by grading and by stockpiling overburden materials in
areas designated for future land forms or in excavations where the material
will be spread over the pit floor where no future excavation is anticipated.
Such areas are to be seeded and planted immediately after grading is completed
or within appropriate planting seasons, but in any case, the grading and
planting shall be completed within one year. The reclamation plan shall contain
a description of the phased reclamation process throughout the anticipated life
of the mine.
   (C)   Final reclamation. Final reclamation shall begin immediately for any
site where operations authorized under a conditional use permit have been
abandoned for a period of at least one year, or otherwise terminated, as
determined by the Community Development Department. The final reclamation shall
conform to the plan approved (including approved modifications) in the
conditional use permit for natural resource excavation. All reclamation plans
shall conform at least to the below listed minimum standards and requirements
listed elsewhere in the ordinance; provided, however, that, the Planning
Commission may require more stringent standards where special hazards exist in
order to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the public, and to
prevent injury to property or improvements.
      (1)   Grading. Slopes, overburden stockpiles and abandoned soil piles
shall be graded and smoothed so as to control erosion and prevent the creation
of potentially dangerous areas in accordance with the direction of the City
Engineer. The peaks and depressions of the reclamation area shall be reduced to
a surface which will result in topography in substantial conformity to the land
area generally surrounding and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall. In
no case shall any slope of a reclamation site exceed the normal angle of repose
of the material involved.
      (2)   Water-filled areas. All excavations which create standing water or
ponds shall be refilled with inert materials. This requirement shall not apply,
however, to any water-filled excavations scheduled to become an integral part
of the final reclamation plan. The rehabilitation of these areas shall be done
in such a manner that the ground water is not polluted as determined through
consultation with the county’s Health Department. Fill material shall be porous
to allow for water dispersion unless otherwise specified in the reclamation
plan.
      (3)   Landscaping. Unless inconsistent with the final proposed use of the
reclaimed land, the excavated areas and all other disturbed areas shall be
replanted and maintained with trees, shrubs, grasses or other vegetative ground
cover, native to the area, in order to minimize erosion and to restore the land
to a natural appearance, or to an appearance previously approved by the
Planning Commission.
      (4)   Removal of buildings and equipment. Upon termination of excavation
and/or manufacturing, all buildings, equipment (including electrical conduits),
temporary structures (except fences), rock piles, rubble heaps or other debris
used in the excavation and/or mining operations, shall be removed unless deemed
necessary to the approved final use of the reclaimed site. If determined by the
City Engineer and Community Development Department to be acceptable, these
materials may be back-filled into the excavation.
      (5)   Reclamation. In the final year of excavation, the mining operation
may, as part of the reclamation project, excavate closer than 40 feet to any
property lines, but only upon a showing of compelling mutual good and the
approval of the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Reclamation verification. At the conclusion of mining operation and
reclamation of the excavation site, the Community Development Department and
City Engineer shall present to the Planning Commission a statement verifying
the permit area has been reclaimed in compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter and reclamation plans previously submitted in compliance with this
subchapter. The Planning Commission shall certify to the City Council that all
requirements of this subchapter have been met.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.120) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
§ 156.517 PROVISION OF SURETY.
   (A)   Provision of surety before operations begin. After receiving
notification that the application for a natural resource permit has been
approved, but prior to commencement of such operation, the operator shall
provide surety to the city, in a form and amount to be determined by the
Planning Commission in consultation with the City Engineer.
   (B)   Amount of surety. In determining the amount of surety to be provided,
the Planning Commission shall consider factual information as to the magnitude,
type and costs of approved reclamation activities planned for the land affected
and the nature, extent and duration of operations under the approval notice.
The Planning Commission shall fix the amount of the bond at an amount
reasonably related thereto, to protect the city and ensure compliance with the
requirements of the conditional use permit; however, the amount of the bond
shall not exceed 125% of the estimated cost of rehabilitating the excavation.
The bond shall be periodically reviewed to insure that the amount of the bond
is capable of ensuring adequate reclamation.
   (C)   Form of surety. In determining the form of surety to be provided by
the owner, the Planning Commission shall approve a method acceptable to the
owner and consistent with the requirements of this subchapter which may be one
or a combination of corporate surety bond, land, cash or other deposited
securities.
   (D)   Release of surety. The liability under surety provisions shall
continue until such time as it is released as to part, or in its entirety, by
the City Council.
   (E)   Forfeiture of surety. If the operator fails or refuses to carry out
the necessary land reclamation as outlined in the approved operation and
reclamation plans, the Planning Commission may, after notice and hearing,
declare any surety filed for this purpose forfeited, or in case of a corporate
bond file suit against the owner and his or her bonding company. The city shall
also have the right to file suit against the defaulting permittee for costs of
rehabilitation and reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 29.28.130) (Ord. 00-03, passed 1-20-2000)
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS AND PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
§ 156.530 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
   (A)   Comply with Utah Code; and
   (B)   Avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities
pursuant to the state’s Fair Housing Act, being U.C.A. Title 57, Chapter 21, or
its successor statutes, and the Federal Fair Housing Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§
3601 et seq., or its successor statutes, as interpreted by courts whose
decisions are binding in the state.
(Prior Code, § 29.29.010) (Ord. 01-14, passed 2-15-2001)
§ 156.531 SCOPE.
   (A)   If any facility, residence, congregate living or other housing
arrangement meets the definition of a residential facility for elderly persons
or a residential facility for persons with a disability as set forth in this
chapter, the requirements of this subchapter shall govern the same
notwithstanding any conflicting provision of this chapter or the city code.
   (B)   Except as provided herein, the requirements of this subchapter shall
not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this
chapter, the city code or other laws.
(Prior Code, § 29.29.020) (Ord. 01-14, passed 2-15-2001)
§ 156.532 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this
chapter, a residential facility for elderly persons and a residential facility
for persons with a disability shall be permitted uses in any zone where a
dwelling is allowed as a permitted or conditional use subject to the
development standards in §
156.533 of this chapter.
   (B)   Termination. A use permitted by this subchapter is nontransferable and
shall terminate if:
      (1)   The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential facility
for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability;
      (2)   Any license or certification issued by the state’s Department of
Health or the Department of Human Services for such facility terminates or is
revoked; or
      (3)   The facility fails to comply with requirements set forth in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.29.030) (Ord. 01-14, passed 2-15-2001)
§ 156.533 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any
residential facility for elderly persons or residential facility for persons
with a disability.
   (A)   Building, safety and health regulations. The facility shall comply
with building, safety and health regulations applicable to similar structures.
      (1)   Each facility shall be subject to the same development standards
applicable to similar structures located in the same zoning district in which
the facility is located.
      (2)   The minimum number of parking spaces required for a facility shall
be the same as for similar structures located in the same zoning district in
which the facility is located.
   (B)   No dangerous persons permitted. No facility shall be made available to
an individual whose tendency would:
      (1)   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals; or
      (2)   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
   (C)   License and certification. Prior to occupancy of any facility, the
person or entity operating the facility shall:
      (1)   Provide to the city a copy of any license or certification required
by the state’s Department of Health or the state’s Department of Human
Services; and
      (2)   Certify in a sworn statement that no person will reside or remain
in the facility whose tendency would:
         (a)   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals; or
         (b)   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Prior Code, § 29.29.040) (Ord. 01-14, passed 2-15-2001)
§ 156.534 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Reasonable accommodation required. None of the requirements of this
subchapter shall be interpreted to limit any reasonable accommodation necessary
to allow the establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for persons
with a disability.
   (B)   Application. Any person or entity wanting a reasonable accommodation
shall make application therefore to the Community Development Department and
shall articulate in writing the nature of the required accommodation and the
basis for the request.
   (C)   Decision. The Community Development Department shall render a decision
on each application for a reasonable accommodation within 30 days of its
receipt.
   (D)   Appeal. If a reasonable accommodation request is denied, the decision
may be appealed to the Appeal Authority in the manner provided for appeals of
administrative decisions set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.29.050) (Ord. 01-14, passed 2-15-2001)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 156.545 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to allow persons residing in
dwellings to use their mental or physical expertise and talent in providing a
service, developing a product for sale to the public, operating certain kinds
of small businesses or maintaining a professional or business office work space
in the dwelling or in an attached or detached garage or accessory building, or
yard space, while at the same time maintaining the peace, quiet and domestic
tranquility within all residential areas of the city, guaranteeing to all
residents freedom from excessive noise, traffic, nuisances, hazards and other
possible adverse effects of limited business activities being conducted in such
areas, and improving and maintaining the aesthetic quality of the neighborhood
and the lot or parcel upon which the dwelling and home occupation are located.
It is further the purpose and intent of this subchapter that home occupations
shall be clearly accessory and subordinate to the principal use of the property
for dwelling purposes.
(Prior Code, § 29.30.010) (Ord. 00-32, passed 8-17-2000)
§ 156.546 STANDARDS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   The following standards shall be observed in the operation of all home
occupations.
   (A)   The home occupation shall be conducted primarily by residents of the
premises. A home occupation may have employees; however, only one employee who
does not live in the home may come to the home at any one time for purposes of
employment, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. One
additional off-street parking stall shall be provided for any employee coming
to the home who is not a resident of the premises. This parking stall shall be
subject to setback standards for the zoning district in which the home
occupation is located.
   (B)   The home occupation shall not physically change the dwelling or
accessory structure or attached or detached garage or yard space to the extent
that it would alter the residential or aesthetic character of the dwelling,
accessory structure, attached or detached garage, yard or neighborhood.
   (C)   The home occupation shall be allowed one name plate sign which shall
be consistent with §§
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter. Temporary signs shall not be permitted for home
occupations.
   (D)   The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic
in excess of that customarily associated with the zone in which the use is
located, as determined by the Community Development Department and appropriate
regulatory authorities. Occupancy load, as defined by the currently adopted
Uniform Building Code, shall not be exceeded.
   (E)   The home occupation shall not cause a demand for municipal or utility
services or community facilities in excess of those usually and customarily
provided for residential use, as determined by the Community Development
Department and appropriate regulatory authorities. No electrical equipment
shall be permitted which exceeds three horsepower.
   (F)   Sale of commodities produced on the premises shall be permitted. The
sale of commodities not produced on the premises shall be by prior individual
invitation only.
   (G)   Home occupations shall conform to business license requirements of
Title XI of this code of ordinances.
   (H)   There shall be complete conformity with all applicable city, county,
state and federal laws and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 29.30.020) (Ord. 01-22, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 02-08, passed 3-
7-2002) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.547 STANDARDS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS USING ATTACHED OR DETACHED GARAGES,
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OR YARD SPACE.
   (A)   The use of an accessory structure or an attached or detached garage,
or yard space, for a home occupation may be considered as a conditional use
only under the following conditions.
      (1)   The Planning Commission finds that the proposed home occupation
will be clearly accessory and subordinate to the principal use of the property
for dwelling purposes.
      (2)   The Planning Commission finds that the proposed home occupation
will not adversely affect the residential nature and aesthetic quality of the
neighborhood.
      (3)   Any off-street parking displaced by the home occupation is
relocated elsewhere on the lot or parcel in compliance with setback standards
for the zoning district in which the property is located.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may impose any conditions it deems
necessary to mitigate impacts of the home occupation on the neighborhood.
   (B)   (1)   In determining whether to grant a conditional use approval for
the use of an attached or detached garage, accessory structure or yard space
for a home occupation, the Planning Commission shall consider the effect of
such use on the residential character of the property upon which the home
occupation is proposed to be located.
      (2)   In making a determination, the Planning Commission may consider
factors including, but not limited to, displacement of normally residential
functions of yard space and building or structure usage; the potential for
generation of noise, dust, vapors, fumes, odors and light; the potential for
generation of excess traffic; the potential impact of the proposed home
occupation on the aesthetic quality of the neighborhood and the property upon
which the home occupation is proposed to be located.
   (C)   Due to the special nature of home occupations, their potential to
create adverse impacts to the neighborhood, and the potential for significant
unforeseen impacts to occur, the Planning Commission reserves the right to
review any home occupation granted conditional use approval pursuant to this
paragraph. The conditional use permit for the home occupation may be reviewed
and modified or revoked by the Planning Commission due to failure of the owner
or operator of the home occupation to observe all conditions specified in
issuing the permit, failure to observe the purpose and intent of this
subchapter, other requirements of this chapter in regards to the maintenance of
improvements, conduct of the home occupation as approved or significant
unforeseen impacts resulting from the operation of the home occupation in
conflict with the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
   (D)   Home occupations which may be considered under §
156.546 of this chapter may include the following uses or uses which are
similar in character, origin or impact, as determined by the Community
Development Department:
      (1)   Artist, author;
      (2)   Architectural service;
      (3)   Barber shop, beauty service;
      (4)   Consulting service;
      (5)   Craft sale;
      (6)   Dance studio; aerobic exercise, music lessons, tutoring and general
educational instruction;
      (7)   Direct sales distribution;
      (8)   Data processing, computer programming;
      (9)   Home crafts;
      (10)   Garden plants and produce;
      (11)   Janitorial service;
      (12)   Insurance sales or broker;
      (13)   Interior design;
      (14)   Mail order (not including retail sales form site);
      (15)   Real estate sales or broker; and
      (16)   Sales representative.
   (E)   Home occupations which shall not be considered under §
156.546 of this chapter include the following uses or uses which are similar in
character, original or impact, as determined by the Community Development
Department:
      (1)   Agricultural uses that involve the keeping of animals, unless in a
zoning district where the keeping of such animals is allowed:
      (2)   Agricultural uses that use more than 25% of the area of the lot
when the lot is less than one acre in size;
      (3)   Automatic or manual car wash;
      (4)   Building material sales, lumber yard;
      (5)   Contractor’s storage yard;
      (6)   Kennel, animal hospital;
      (7)   Machine shop (unless located within a multiple use, agricultural or
rural residential zoning district and on a parcel two or more acres in size);
      (8)   Manufacture, curing, compounding, processing, packaging and
treatment uses which utilize yard space or which generate noise, smoke, fumes
or odors;
      (9)   Mortuary;
      (10)   Rock crusher;
      (11)   Saw mill;
      (12)   Storage and warehousing uses as listed in §
156.156 of this chapter;
      (13)   Tattoo establishment;
      (14)   Transportation uses as listed in §
156.156 of this chapter; and
      (15)   Uses which involve the storage, display or repair of motor
vehicles, or body and fender work on such vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 29.30.040) (Ord. 01-22, passed 4-19-2001; Ord. 02-22, passed 6-
27-2002; Ord. 04-03, passed 1-15-2004)
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS
§ 156.560 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and objective of this subchapter is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually-oriented business
or their location in areas deleterious to the city, regulate the signage of
such businesses, control the adverse effects of such signage and prevent
inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the community. This subchapter is
to be construed as a regulation of time, place and manner of the operation of
these businesses, consistent with the United States and Utah Constitutions.
(Prior Code, § 29.31.010)
§ 156.561 LOCATION OF BUSINESSES; RESTRICTIONS.
   Sexually-oriented businesses shall only be permitted in areas zoned M-D
(Manufacturing/ Distribution) and M-G (General Manufacturing) under this
chapter, subject to the following additional restrictions.
   (A)   No sexually-oriented business shall be located:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of any public or private school or educational
institution, child day care facility, public or private park or plaza, library
or religious institution;
      (2)   Within 1,000 feet of any residential use, adult day care facility,
community correctional facility, fraternity or sorority house, homeless
shelter, juvenile detention facility, nursing home, protective housing
facility, rehabilitation/treatment facility, sheltered workshop, transitional
housing facility or any agricultural or residential zoning boundary;
      (3)   Within 600 feet of any other sexually-oriented businesses, except
outcall services;
      (4)   Within 350 feet of any gateway corridor. Gateway corridors include
Main Street, S.R. 13, 200 South, Forest Street, 1100 South (Highway 91), Watery
Lane, 1200 West and 600 North. The distance shall be measured from the right-
of-way boundary of an improved street or the future right-of-way boundary of
unimproved streets.
   (B)   Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this
section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or zoning districts, from the property boundaries of the school,
public park, religious or cultural activity, residential use or other sexually-
oriented businesses or from the right-of-way line of a gateway to the structure
of the sexually-oriented business.
   (C)   Distance requirements from zoning districts for this section shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures of zoning
districts, from the closest zoning boundary of a residential or agricultural
district to the sexually-oriented business structure.
(Prior Code, § 29.31.020) (Ord. 01-13, passed 2-15-2001)
§ 156.562 SIGNS.
   Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in §§
156.480 through
156.491 of this chapter, the more restrictive requirements for signs shall
prevail. Signs for sexually-oriented businesses located in M-D (Manufacturing/
Distribution) and M-G (General Industrial) shall be limited as follows.
   (A)   No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed.
   (B)   No sign shall be allowed to exceed 18 square feet.
   (C)   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the
exterior walls or roof of such premises.
   (D)   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or
inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs
shall contain alphanumeric copy only.
   (E)   Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted.
   (F)   Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed.
   (G)   Other than the signs specifically allowed by this subchapter, the
sexually-oriented business shall not attach, construct or allow to be attached
or constructed any temporary sign, banner, light or other device designed to
draw attention to the business location.
(Prior Code, § 29.31.030) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.563 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms involving sexually-oriented businesses which are not defined in this
chapter shall have the meanings set forth in
Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 29.31.040)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ 156.575 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide specific regulations for
the placement, construction and modification of commercial personal wireless
telecommunications facilities on public and private property, and in the public
right-of-way. The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to and shall
not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this
subchapter be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between
providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. To the extent
that any provision or provisions of this subchapter are inconsistent or in
conflict with any other provision of the city code or any ordinance of the
city, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to control.
   (B)   In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under
this subchapter made by an applicant to provide commercial personal wireless
service or to install commercial personal wireless service facilities, the
Planning Commission shall act within a reasonable period of time after the
request is duly filed with the city, taking into account the nature and scope
of the request, and any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
   (C)   Should the application of this subchapter have the effect of
prohibiting a person or entity from providing commercial personal wireless
service to all or a portion of the city, such provider may petition the city
for an amendment to this subchapter. The city, upon receipt of such a petition,
shall promptly undertake review of the petition pursuant to the standard
procedure for amendment of this chapter in accordance with state law and city
ordinances, and shall make a determination on the petition within a reasonable
period of time, taking into account the nature and scope of the petition and
any decision to deny such petition shall be in writing and supported by
substantial evidence contained in a written record.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.010) (Ord. 04-09, passed 3-4-2004; Ord. 14-14, passed 11-
6-2014)
§ 156.576 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior apparatus designed for commercial telephonic, radio or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves including equipment attached to a tower or building for
the purpose of providing personal wireless services.
   ANTENNA HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even if said
highest point is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna,
base pad and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade
of the parcel. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average
between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the ANTENNA
HEIGHT.
   ANTENNA, LATTICE TOWER or LATTICE TOWER. A wireless communications support
structure consisting of a single pole to which consists of metal crossed strips
or bars to support antennas and connecting appurtenances.
   ANTENNA, MONOPOLE or MONOPOLE. A wireless communications support structure
consisting of a single pole to support antennas and connecting appurtenances.
   ANTENNA, ROOF MOUNT or ROOF MOUNT. Any antenna that is attached to the roof
of a building or structure.
   ANTENNA, WALL MOUNT or WALL MOUNT. Any antenna that is attached to the wall
of a building or structure.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or
other structure which supports an antenna.
   CELL SITE. A tract or parcel of land that contains the commercial cellular
communications or commercial personal wireless services antenna, its support
structure, accessory buildings and parking, and may include other uses
associated with an ancillary to commercial cellular communications or
commercial personal wireless services transmission.
   COMMERCIAL. Of or engaged in a for-profit venture, or operated as a business
subject to regulation by Title XI of this code of ordinances.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Brigham City Council.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE AND PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. As used
in this subchapter, shall be defined in the same manner as in 47 U.S.C. § 332
(c)(7)(C), as they may be amended now or in the future.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. One or more radio transceivers, antennas,
interconnecting cables, power supply, other associated electronics and
equipment which are attached to a structure such as a pole or a building, and
which meets the following parameters: in divisions (1) and (2) of this
definition below. For purposes of these definitions, volume is a measure of the
exterior displacement, not the interior volume of the enclosures. Antennas or
equipment concealed from public view in or behind an otherwise approved
structure of concealment are not included in calculating volume.
      (1)   SMALL CELL ANTENNA. Each antenna shall be no more than three cubic
feet in volume.
      (2)   SMALL CELL EQUIPMENT. Each equipment enclosure shall be no larger
than 17 cubic feet in volume. Associated conduit, mountain bracket or extension
arm, electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-
based enclosures, battery back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power
transfer switch and cut-off switch may be located outside the primary equipment
enclosure(s) and are not included in the calculation of equipment volume.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY UPGRADE. The addition of a new small cell facility,
removal of an existing small cell facility or the replacement of an existing
small cell facility.
   SMALL CELL NETWORK. A collection of interrelated small cell facilities
designed to deliver wireless communication service. The small cell facilities
in a SMALL CELL NETWORK may be located on one or more structures within and/or
outside of public ways.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers.
      (1)   The term encompasses commercial personal wireless facilities,
including radio and television transmission towers, commercial microwave
towers, commercial common-carrier towers, commercial cellular telephone towers
or commercial personal communications services towers, alternative commercial
tower structures and the like.
      (2)   This term does not encompass structures designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting non-commercial antennas.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.020) (Ord. 04-09, passed 3-4-2004; Ord. 14-14, passed 11-
6-2014)
§ 156.577 POLICY STATEMENT.
   (A)   The Planning Commission and City Council have on occasion and with
increasing frequency received requests to site communications towers and
antennas. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general guidelines for
the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this subchapter are to:
      (1)   Encourage the location of towers on public property and in non-
residential areas and to minimize the total number of towers throughout the
city;
      (2)   Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sties;
      (3)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the city is minimal;
      (4)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and
      (5)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services throughout the city quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
   (B)   Accordingly, the City Council finds that the promulgation of this
subchapter is warranted and necessary:
      (1)   To manage the location of towers and antennas in the city and
encourage the use of public property for the placement thereof;
      (2)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers, including support structure failure and falling ice;
      (3)   To minimize adverse visual impacts of towers through careful
design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;
      (4)   To accommodate the growing need for towers;
      (5)   To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of existing and new
towers as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers, and to reduce the number of such structures needed in the future;
      (6)   To consider the public health and safety of towers to the extent
allowed by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, being Pub. L. No. 104-104, or
its successor statute; and
      (7)   To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna
support structure failure and falling ice, through engineering and proper
siting of antenna support structure.
   (C)   All new antennas shall comply with this subchapter after the date of
passage.
   (D)   All towers existing on the date of passage of this subchapter shall be
allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance
shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine
maintenance on existing towers shall comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.030)
§ 156.578 INDUSTRY SITE SELECTION CRITERIA.
   (A)   In siting a new antenna, the industry requires a location that is
technically compatible with the established network. A general area is to be
identified based upon engineering constraints and the desired area of service.
   (B)   Specific locations within that general area will be evaluated using
the following criteria which are not listed in order of priority:
      (1)   Topography as it relates to line of sight transmissions for optimum
efficiency in telephone service;
      (2)   Availability of road access;
      (3)   Availability of electric power;
      (4)   Availability of land-based telephone lines or microwave link
capability;
      (5)   Leasable lands, and landlords who want facilities to be located on
their properties consistent with zoning regulations;
      (6)   Screening potential of existing vegetation, structures and
topographic features;
      (7)   Zoning that will allow low power mobile radio service facilities;
      (8)   Compatibility with adjacent land uses;
      (9)   The least number of sites to cover the desired area;
      (10)   The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical
requirements;
      (11)   Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact; and
      (12)   Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.040)
§ 156.579 CITY SITE SELECTION CRITERIA.
   (A)   As a fundamental element of this subchapter, the telecommunications
company proposing to construct an antenna support structure, or mount an
antenna on an existing structure, is required to demonstrate, using
technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order
to satisfy its function in the company’s grid system. Further, the company must
demonstrate by technological evidence that the height requested is the minimum
height necessary to fulfill the cell site’s function within the grid system.
   (B)   Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the
applicant demonstrates that it is either an FCC licensed telecommunications
provider or has in place agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications
provider for use or lease of the support structure.
   (C)   Low power mobile radio service facilities should be located and
designed to minimize any adverse effect they may have on residential property
values. Sites should be placed in locations where the existing topography,
vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of
screening. Sites should be located on bare ground without visual mitigation
only in M-D and M-G Districts, based on the design standards articulated in
this subchapter.
   (D)   Location and design of sites in all districts should consider the
impact of the site on the surrounding neighborhood and the visual impact within
the zone district. In residential districts and residential land use areas, the
minimum lot size for commercial communications towers shall be three acres.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.050)
§ 156.580 PRIORITIES.
   (A)   (1)   The following establishes the order of priorities for locating
new communications facilities:
         (a)   Place antennas and towers on public property;
         (b)   Place antennas and towers in districts zoned M-D or M-G;
         (c)   Place antennas and towers in districts zoned GC which do not
adjoin or adversely impact residential neighborhoods;
         (d)   Place antennas on appropriate existing structures, such as
buildings, communications towers, water towers and smokestacks in other zoned
districts;
         (e)   Place antennas and towers on other private nonresidential
property; and
         (f)   Place antennas and towers in:
            1.   Residential districts only if the installation is a small cell
facility, or locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not available
on existing structures or in nonresidential districts; and
            2.   Only on or in existing churches, parks, schools, utility
facilities or other public facilities.
      (2)   An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a
residential zoning district shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been
made to locate the proposed communications facilities on a government
structure, a private institutional structure or other appropriate existing
structures within a non-residential zoning district, and that due to valid
considerations including physical constraints, and economic or technological
feasibility, no appropriate location is available. The telecommunications
company is required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall
structures within a one-mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission
to install the antenna on those structures, and was denied for reasons other
than economic ones. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a
map of the area to be served by the tower, its relationship to other antenna
sites in the applicant’s network, and an evaluation of existing buildings
taller than 20 feet, communications towers and water tanks within one mile of
the proposed tower. The requirements in this division (A)(2) do not apply to a
small cell network or facility.
   (B)   Priority for the use of city-owned land for antennas and towers will
be given to the following entities in descending order:
      (1)   City of Brigham City;
      (2)   Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and
ambulance services, which are not part of the city and private entities with a
public safety agreement with the city;
      (3)   Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to
public safety; and
      (4)   Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobilized raid (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized raid (ESMR), paging and
similar services that are marketed to the general public.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.060) (Ord. 14-14, passed 11-6-2014)
§ 156.581 USE OF CITY OWNED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The placement of antennas or towers on city-
owned property, including power and/or light poles, must comply with the
following requirements.
      (1)   The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which
the city-owned property is intended.
      (2)   The antennas or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding
private property.
      (3)   The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and
commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use
of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. Fees shall be
established by the City Council after considering comparable rates in other
cities, potential expenses, risks to the city and other appropriate factors.
      (4)   The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or
other security acceptable to the city to cover the costs of antenna or tower’s
removal.
      (5)   The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have
a higher priority as outlined above.
      (6)   Upon reasonable notice, the antennas or tower may be required to be
removed at the antenna owner’s expense.
      (7)   The applicant must reimburse the city for any costs which the city
incurs because of the presence of the applicant’s antennas or tower.
      (8)   The applicant must obtain all necessary land use approvals.
      (9)   The applicant will cooperate with the city’s objective to promote
co-locations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested
unless co-location is demonstrated to be infeasible or otherwise not in the
best interest of the city. The number of separate antennas in small cell
networks need not be limited so long as the small cell network meets the
concentration standards provided in §
156.583(B)(5) of this chapter.
   (B)   Special requirements. The use of certain city-owned property, such as
water tower sites and parks, for antennas or towers brings with it special
concerns due to the unique nature of these sites. The placement of antennas or
towers on these special city-owned sites will be allowed only when the
following additional requirements are met.
      (1)   Water tower or reservoir sites. The city’s water towers and
reservoirs represent a large public investment in water pressure stabilization
and peak capacity reserves. Protection of the quality of the city’s water
supply is of prime importance to the city. As access to the city’s water
storage systems increase so too the potential for contamination of the public
water supply is increased. For these reasons, the placement of antennas or
towers on water tower or reservoir sites will be allowed only when the city is
fully satisfied that the following requirements are met.
         (a)   The applicant’s access to the facility will not increase the
risks of contamination to the city’s water supply.
         (b)   There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds
to accommodate the applicant’s facility.
         (c)   The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower
or reservoir maintenance cost to the city.
         (d)   The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health
of workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir.
      (2)   Parks. The presence of certain antennas or towers represent a
potential conflict with the purpose of some city-owned parks. In no case shall
towers be allowed in designated conservation areas unless they are to be
installed in areas which currently contain tower facilities. Antennas or towers
will be considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of the
Planning Commission and approval of the City Council:
         (a)   Public parks of a sufficient scale and character that are
adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use;
         (b)   Commercial recreation areas and major play field; and
         (c)   Park maintenance facilities.
      (3)   Power poles and/or light poles. The city owns and operates an
electrical utility. As a public power provider, the city necessarily owns and
manages a substantial number of poles. This inventory of poles represents a
significant investment on the part of the city for the purpose of deploying a
system that delivers an essential electrical service to its resident’s and
customer’s primary considerations in the use of these poles includes safety and
security of city personnel, efficient and effective operation of the city’s
electrical utility, and the provision of electrical service to the city’s
residents and customers. city-owned power and/or light poles also provide
access for telephone services, telecommunications services and cable television
services. Attachment of antennas to city-owned power and/or light poles will be
allowed only when the city is fully satisfied that the following requirements
are met.
         (a)   The attached antenna is a small cell facility.
         (b)   The applicant’s attachment of an antenna to the pole will not
increase the risk of harm or injury to city staff or personnel of other users
of the pole.
         (c)   The applicant’s attachment of an antenna to the pole will not
harm the city’s ability to provide electrical service to its residents and
customers.
         (d)   There is sufficient room on the pole to accommodate the
applicant’s facility.
         (e)   The presence of the facility will not increase the electrical
utility’s maintenance cost to the city.
         (f)   The presence of the facility will not interfere with other
valid, existing pole attachments.
         (g)   The applicant has entered into a pole attachment agreement with
the city.
         (h)   The applicant has obtained a franchise agreement with the city,
if applicable.
   (C)   Application process. All applicants who wish to locate an antenna or
tower on city-owned property must submit to the Community Development
Department a complete application and detailed plan that complies with the
submittal requirements of this subchapter, this chapter,
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances, General Plan and other regulations and
ordinances of the city along with other pertinent information requested by the
city. Small cell facilities may be considered for attachment on city-owned
power and/or light poles subject to execution of an appropriate pole attachment
agreement.
   (D)   Termination.
      (1)   The City Council may terminate any lease if it determines that any
one of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another
adequate location and the potential use would be incompatible with the existing
use;
         (b)   A user’s frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other
users of higher priority, regardless of whether or not this interference was
adequately predicted in the technical analysis; or
         (c)   A user violates any of the standards in this subchapter or the
conditions attached to the city’s lease, pole attachment or other
authorization.
      (2)   Before taking action, the city will provide notice to the user of
the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide an opportunity for
the user to address the City Council regarding the proposed action. This
procedure need not be followed in emergency situations.
   (E)   Reservation of right. Notwithstanding the above, the City Council
reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the use of any or all city-owned
property, including power and/or light poles, by anyone or all applicants.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.065) (Ord. 14-14, passed 11-6-2014; Ord. 16-01, passed 1-
21-2016)
§ 156.582 CO-LOCATION; USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of
towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on existing or new
towers and location of such antennas on public property shall take precedent
over the construction of new single-use towers as follows:
   (A)   Proposed antenna may, and are encouraged to, co-locate onto existing
towers; provided, such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the policy, design criteria and landscape/screening provisions contained in
this subchapter, then such co-locations are permitted by right and new or
additional special use approval is not required; except that, any other permit,
license, lease or franchise requirements must be satisfied.
   (B)   The conditional use requirement for an antenna may be waived in
nonresidential zones if the applicant locates the antenna on an existing
structure other than an existing tower and/or if the antenna is proposed to be
located on suitable public property such as a water tower, government building
or other public tower or pole. Suitability of public property shall be
determined at the city’s sole discretion. The applicant must submit detailed
plans to the Community Development Department for an administrative review to
determine if the conditional use permit process and public hearing can be
waived. No building permit will be issued until approval is granted through the
administrative review.
   (C)   The city may deny the application to construct a new tower if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing
structure and/or public property.
   (D)   In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in
the city in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to
accommodate antennas for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates
why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.
   (E)   Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be infeasible, the site
plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the
placement of additional equipment buildings for other users. The site plan for
towers in excess of 100 feet must propose space for two comparable tower users
while the site plan for towers under 100 feet must propose space for one
comparable tower user. To provide further incentive for co-location as a
primary option, an existing tower may be modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna; provided, the additional
antenna shall be of the same type as that on the existing tower. This is
permitted by right for existing towers in all zoning districts, subject to the
following criteria being met.
      (1)   Height. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed 20 feet over the tower’s existing height, to accommodate
the co-location of an additional antenna. The height change may occur only once
per tower.
      (2)   On-site location. A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its
existing location so long as it remains within the same zone and complies with
the other provisions of this subchapter. After the tower is rebuilt to co-
location, only one tower may remain on site.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.070)
§ 156.583 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   General. As provided above, new towers shall be designed to
accommodate antennas for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates
why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.
   (B)   Compatibility. Facilities should be architecturally compatible with
the surrounding buildings and land uses in the zoning district or otherwise
integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing
characteristics of the site to the extent practical.
      (1)   Setback. Tower setbacks shall be measured from the base of the
tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. Unless there
are unusual geographical limitations as determined in the city’s sole
discretion, in residential districts and residential land use areas, where
permitted, towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to
300% of tower height as measured from ground level. Towers shall comply with
the minimum setback requirements of the area in which they are located in all
other zoning districts.
      (2)   Color. Towers shall have a color generally matching the
surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility, unless a different
color is required by the FCC or FAA.
      (3)   Lights, signals and signs. No signals, lights or signs shall be
permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA. Should lighting be
required, at the time of construction of the tower in cases where there are
residential users located within a distance which 300% of the height of the
tower from the tower, then dual mode lighting shall be required from the FAA.
      (4)   Equipment structures.
         (a)   Ground level equipment and buildings and the tower base shall be
screened from public streets and residentially zoned properties. The standards
for the equipment buildings are as follows.
            1.   The maximum floor area is 300 feet and the maximum height is
12 feet.
            2.   Ground level buildings shall be screened from adjacent
properties by landscape plantings, fencing or other appropriate means, as
specified herein or in the city code.
            3.   Equipment buildings mounted on a roof shall have a finish
similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof-mounted antenna may
also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted.
         (b)   Equipment buildings, antenna and related equipment shall occupy
no more than 25% of the total roof area of a building.
         (c)   Antenna or equipment buildings not meeting these standards
require a special exception. The use must be approved on a comprehensive sketch
plan or final development plan, as applicable.
      (5)   Concentration of small cell facilities. In order to avoid excessive
concentration of small cell facilities on city-owned power and/or light poles,
such facilities shall be located no closer than 500 feet to any other small
cell facility in the same small cell network; provided that, small cell
networks approved through a conditional use permit may include more highly
concentrated small cell facilities when the applicant demonstrates that the
proposed locations are needed to adequately serve the coverage area.
   (C)   Federal requirements. All towers and antennas, including small cell
facilities, must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA,
the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this subchapter shall
bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within three months of the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds
for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owners’ expense.
   (D)   Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable city building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association (“EIA”), as amended from time to time.
      (1)   If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner
shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
      (2)   If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said
30 days, the city may remove such tower at the owner’s expense.
   (E)   Structural design. Towers shall be constructed to the EIA standards,
which may be amended from time to time, and all applicable construction/
building codes. Further, any improvements and/or additions to existing towers
shall require submission of site plans sealed and verified by a professional
engineer which demonstrate compliance with the EIA Standards and all other good
industry practices in effect at the time of said improvement or addition. Said
plans shall be submitted to and reviewed at the time building permits are
required.
   (F)   Fencing. A well-constructed masonry or stone wall in all zones, except
M-D, M-G, MU-40, MU-80 or MU-160, or chain link in M-D, M-G, MU-40, MU-80 or
MU-160 zones, not less than eight feet in height from finished grade shall be
provided around each tower. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate.
   (G)   Antenna height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is
the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is
taller than this minimum height shall be approved.
   (H)   Antenna support structure safety. The applicant shall demonstrate that
the proposed antenna and support structure are safe and the surrounding areas
will not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice or
other debris or interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-
climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
   (I)   Required parking. If the cell site is fully automated, adequate
parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the site is not
automated, arrangements for adequate off-street parking shall be made and
documentation thereof provided to the city. Security fencing should be colored
or should be of a design which blends into the character of the existing
environment.
   (J)   Antenna criteria. Antennas on or above a building shall be subject to
the following.
      (1)   The antenna must be architecturally compatible with the building
and wall on which it is mounted and designed and located so as to minimize any
adverse aesthetic impact.
      (2)   The antenna shall be mounted on a wall of an existing building in a
configuration as flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not
project above the wall on which it is mounted unless for technical reasons the
antenna needs to project above the roof line. In no event shall an antenna
project more than ten feet above the roof line.
      (3)   The antenna shall be constructed, painted or fully screened to
match as closely as possible the color and texture of the building and wall on
which it is mounted.
      (4)   The antenna may be attached to an existing conforming mechanical
equipment enclosure which projects above the roof of the building, but may not
project any higher than the enclosure.
      (5)   If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with
the surrounding buildings in architectural character and color.
      (6)   The structure must be architecturally and visually (color, size,
bulk) compatible with surrounding existing buildings, structures, vegetation
and/or uses or those likely to exist under the terms of the underlying zoning.
Such facilities will be considered architecturally and visually compatible if
they are camouflaged to disguise the facility.
      (7)   Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing
character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be
preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site
should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact
of the site on the surrounding area. The effectiveness of visual mitigation
techniques must be evaluated by city, in city’s sole discretion, taking into
consideration the site as built.
      (8)   On buildings 30 feet or less in height, the antenna may be mounted
on the roof it:
         (a)   The city finds that it is not technically possible or
aesthetically desirable to mount the antenna on a wall;
         (b)   No portion of the antenna or base station causes the height of
the building to exceed the limitations set forth herein;
         (c)   The antenna or antennas and related base stations cover no more
than an aggregate total of 25% of the roof area of a building;
         (d)   Roof-mounted antenna and related base stations are completely
screened from view by materials that are consistent and compatible with the
design, color and materials of the building; and
         (e)   No portion of the antenna may exceed ten feet above the height
of the existing building.
      (9)   If a proposed antenna is located on a building or a lot subject to
a site review, approval is required prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (10)   No antenna shall be permitted on property designated as an
individual landmark or as a part of a historic district, unless such antenna
has been approved in accordance with the city code.
      (11)   No antenna owner or lessee or officer or employee thereof shall
fail to cooperate in good faith to accommodate other competitors in their
attempts to use the same building for other antennas. If a dispute arises about
the feasibility of accommodating another competitor, the City Administrator may
require a third-party technical study, at the expense of either or both
parties, to resolve the dispute.
      (12)   No antenna owner or lessee shall fail to assure that the antenna
complies at all times with the then current applicable American National
Standards Institute or FCC standards, whichever is more stringent. After
installation, but prior to putting the antenna in service, each antenna owner
shall provide a certification by an independent professional engineer to that
effect.
      (13)   No antenna shall cause localized interference with the reception
of any other communications signals including, but not limited to, public
safety signals, and television and radio broadcast signals.
      (14)   No person shall locate an antenna or tower upon any lot or parcel
except as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.080) (Ord. 14-14, passed 11-6-2014) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.584 OTHER PERMITTED USES.
   In M-D and M-G Zoning Districts, antenna and associated unmanned equipment
buildings are permitted as a matter of rights subject to the requirements of
this subchapter and the following standards.
   (A)   The antenna is attached to the roof or sides of a building at least 30
feet in height, and existing tower, a water tank or a similar structure.
   (B)   The following antennas are permitted under the provisions of this
section:
      (1)   An omnidirectional or whip antenna no more than seven inches in
diameter and extending no more than ten feet above the structure to which they
are attached; or
      (2)   Panel antennas no more than two feet wide and six feet long,
extending above the structure to which they are attached by no more than ten
feet; or
   (C)   Antenna, antenna array and support structures not on publicly-owned
property which shall not extend more than ten feet above the highest point of
the structure on which it is mounted. The antenna, antenna array and its
support structure shall be mounted so as to blend with the structure to which
the antenna is attached. The antenna and its support structure shall be
designed to withstand a wind force of 100 mph without the use of supporting guy
wires. The antenna, antenna array and its support structure shall be a color
that blends with the structure on which they are mounted.
   (D)   No such antenna, antenna array or its support structure shall be
erected or maintained closer to any street than the minimum setback for the
zone in which it is located.
   (E)   No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such
antenna, antenna array or its support structure, except when used to anchor the
antenna, antenna array or support structure to an existing building to which
such antenna, antenna array or support structure is attached.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.090) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.585 INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Each year after a facility becomes operational, the facility operator shall
conduct a safety inspection in accordance with the EIA and FCC Standards and
within 60 days of the inspection, file a report with the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.100)
§ 156.586 LANDSCAPING/SCREENING.
   (A)   Landscaping, as described herein, shall be required to screen as much
of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding the support
structure and any other ground level features (such as a building), and in
general soften the appearance of the cell site. The city may permit any
combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or
other features instead of landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of
screening as the required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted flush on an
existing building, and other equipment is housed inside an existing structure,
or if the antenna is part of a small cell network, landscaping shall not be
required.
   (B)   The visual impacts of a tower shall be mitigated through landscaping
or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures.
The following landscaping and buffering of towers shall be required around the
perimeter of the tower and accessory structures; except that, the standards may
be waived by the city for those sides of the proposed tower that are located
adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public view. Landscaping shall
be installed on the outside of fences. Further, existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for
or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements.
      (1)   A row of evergreen trees a minimum of ten feet tall at planting a
maximum of six feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence.
      (2)   A continuous hedge at least 36 inches high at planting capable of
growing to at least 48 inches in height within 18 months shall be planted in
front of the tree line referenced above.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.110)
§ 156.587 NON-USE/ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   In the event the use of any tower or small cell facility has been
discontinued for a period of 60 consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to
be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the
city which shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from
the tower or small cell facility owner/operator regarding the issue of tower
usage.
   (B)   Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an
additional 60 days within which to:
      (1)   Reactivate the use of the tower or small cell facility or transfer
the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower or small
cell facility; or
      (2)   (a)   Dismantle and remove the tower or small cell facility. If
such tower or small cell facility is not removed within said 60 days, the city
may remove such tower or small cell facility at the owner’s expense.
         (b)   If there are two or more users of a single tower or small cell
facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the tower.
   (C)   At the earlier of 60 days from the date of abandonment without
reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, city approval for
the tower shall automatically expire.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.120)
§ 156.588 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Application submission for special use, variance and building permit
requests may utilize any combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical
reports or written narratives necessary to convey the following information:
   (A)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property
lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other proposed
structures;
   (B)   A current map and aerial photograph showing the location of the
proposed tower or small cell facility;
   (C)   Legal description of the parcel, if applicable;
   (D)   (1)   If not within the separation distance from residential areas,
approximate distance between the proposed tower or small cell facility and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties and un-platted
residentially zoned properties.
      (2)   If, within the separation distance requirements, then exact
distances, locations and identifications of said properties shall be shown on
an updated city map;
   (E)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;
   (F)   Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination;
   (G)   A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating the tower will
comply with all EIA standards and all applicable federal and state laws and
regulations and the city code, including, specifically, FAA regulations;
   (H)   A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower
will accommodate co-location of additional antenna for future users;
   (I)   Certification that the antenna usage will not interfere with other
adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions;
   (J)   The telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by
the FCC;
   (K)   The applicant, if not the telecommunications service provider, shall
submit proof of lease agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications
provider;
   (L)   (1)   A full site plan shall be required for all cell sites, showing
the antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering, access
and all other items required in this subchapter.
      (2)   The site plan shall not be required if the antenna or small cell
facility is to be mounted on an existing structure, including city-owned power
and light poles;
   (M)   At the time of site selection, the applicant should demonstrate how
the proposed site fits into its overall network within the city;
   (N)   This subchapter shall apply to all applications which were filed prior
to the effective date hereof and which have not been approved by the City
Council as of the effective date of this subchapter, and to applications filed
thereafter; and
   (O)   (1)   At the wireless service provider’s discretion, a consolidated
application for a small cell network, or portion of a small cell network, may
be submitted for the city’s permitted use/site plan review process as an
alternative to individual permitting for each small cell facility in a small
cell network.
      (2)   The consolidated application shall be reviewed in a single
permitted use/site plan review process that includes review of all required
land use permits for all sites within the proposed small cell network.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.130) (Ord. 14-14, passed 11-6-2014)
§ 156.589 THIRD-PARTY REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The personal wireless service providers use various
methodologies and analysis tools, including geographically based computer
software, to determine the specific technical parameters of personal wireless
services and low power mobile radio service facilities, such as expected
coverage area, antenna configuration, topographic constraints that affect
signal paths and the like.
      (2)   In certain instances there may be a need for expert review by a
third party of the technical data submitted by the personal wireless services
or low power mobile radio service provider.
      (3)   The City Council or the Planning Commission may require such a
technical review, to be paid for by the applicant for the personal wireless
services or low power mobile radio service facilities.
      (4)   The selection of the third-party expert may be by mutual agreement
among the applicant and city or at the discretion of the city, with a provision
for the applicant and interested parties to comment on the proposed expert and
review its qualifications.
      (5)   The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of
technical aspects of the personal wireless services or low power mobile radio
service facilities and not a subjective review of the site selection.
      (6)   Such a review should address the accuracy and completeness of the
technical data, whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are
legitimate, the validity of the conclusions and any specific technical issues
outlined by the City Council, Planning Commission, city staff or interested
parties.
      (7)   Based on the results of the third-party review, the city may
require changes to the application for the personal wireless services or low
power mobile radio service facilities that comply with the recommendations of
the expert.
   (B)   The expert review of the technical submission shall address the
following:
      (1)   The accuracy and completeness of submissions;
      (2)   The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;
      (3)   The validity of conclusions reached; and
      (4)   Any specific technical issues designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.140)
§ 156.590 PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ZONING TABLE.
Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Zoning Table
Multiple Use, Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts
(P = Permitted; C = Conditional; X = Not Permitted)
                           Monopole  Monopole (>2 Co-Located Lattice Small Cell
Zone Wall Mount Roof Mount (<2 ft.   ft. wide)    Tower      Tower   Facility
                           wide)
Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Zoning Table
Multiple Use, Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts
(P = Permitted; C = Conditional; X = Not Permitted)
                             Monopole  Monopole  Co-Located Lattice Small Cell
Zone   Wall Mount Roof Mount (<2 ft.   (>2 ft.   Tower      Tower   Facility
                             wide)     wide)
MU-40  P          P          P         P         P          P       P
MU-80  P          P          P         P         P          P       P
MU-160 P          P          P         P         P          P       P
A-1    P          P          C         C         C          C       P
A-5    P          P          C         C         C          C       P
RR-1   C          C          C         C         C          X       P
RR-05  C          C          C         C         C          X       P
RR-10  C          C          C         C         C          X       P
Residential and Multiple Residential Districts
(P = Permitted; C = Conditional; X = Not Permitted)
R-1-40 C          C          C         C         C          X       P
R-1-20 C          C          C         C         C          X       P
R-1-12 X          X          X         X         X          X       P
R-1-10 X          X          X         X         X          X       P
R-1-8  X          X          X         X         X          X       P
R-M-7  X          X          X         X         X          X       P
R-M-15 X          X          X         X         X          X       P
R-M-30 X          X          X         X         X          X       P
Commercial, Industrial and Natural Resource Excavation Districts
(P = Permitted; C = Conditional; X = Not Permitted)
CBD    C          C          X         X         X          X       P
GC     C          C          C         C         C          C       P
M-D    P          P          P         P         P          P       P
M-G    P          P          P         P         P          P       P
NR     P          P          P         P         P          P       P
NOTES TO TABLE:
Based on the goals and priorities of this subchapter, personal wireless
telecommunications facilities may be allowed on city-owned property when
located within a residential zoning district through a conditional use permit
In zones in which small cells are permitted outright, the applicant may choose
to apply for a conditional use permit to obtain approval of a higher
concentration of facilities under §
156.583(B)(5)
 
§ 156.591 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
subchapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency
of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases
or word of this subchapter, all of which will remain in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 29.32.150)
JUNK YARDS, SELF-SERVICE ENCLOSED STORAGE FACILITIES, SELF-SERVICE OUTSIDE
STORAGE FACILITIES, TOWING AND IMPOUND YARDS
§ 156.605 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide specific standards and
regulations for junk yards, self-service enclosed storage facilities, self-
service outside storage facilities and towing and impound yards within the city
in the following manner.
   (A)   The standards and regulations set forth below are meant to mitigate
the substantial impacts of the said uses.
   (B)   The standards and regulations are designed to improve the aesthetics,
general appearance and function of the said uses.
   (C)   These standards and regulations are designed to provide screening of
all storage areas.
(Prior Code, § 29.33.010) (Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 156.606 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions specified in this subchapter shall be governing. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK YARD. The use of any lot, portion of a lot or tract of land for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap
material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, or
other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided that, this definition
shall be deemed not to include such uses which are clearly accessory and
incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
   SELF-SERVICE ENCLOSED STORAGE FACILITY. A structure, or structures commonly
referred to as storage units, containing separate enclosed, individual and
private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases
for varying periods of time. Such facilities are to be used for dead storage
only. The following activities are prohibited within any SELF-SERVICE ENCLOSED
STORAGE FACILITY:
      (1)   Commercial, wholesale or retail sales, or miscellaneous or garage
sales;
      (2)   The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats,
trailers, small engine equipment or similar equipment;
      (3)   The operation of power tools, spray painting equipment,
compressors, welding equipment, kilns or similar equipment;
      (4)   The establishment of a transfer business; and
      (5)   Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise
or vibrations.
   SELF-SERVICE OUTSIDE STORAGE FACILITY. The use of any lot, portion of a lot
or tract of land for outside storage of automobiles, trucks, recreational
vehicles, boats, trailers or non-motorized storage, containing separate,
individual and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on
individual leases for varying periods of time. The following activities are
prohibited within any SELF-SERVICE OUTSIDE STORAGE FACILITY:
      (1)   Commercial, wholesale or retail sales, or miscellaneous or garage
sales;
      (2)   The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats,
trailers, small engine equipment or similar equipment;
      (3)   The establishment of a transfer business;
      (4)   Junk yard or impound yard;
      (5)   Storage of non-motorized storage shall not exceed the height of the
screened fence; and
      (6)   Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise
or vibrations.
   TOWING AND IMPOUND YARD. The temporary storage of vehicles that have been
towed, carried, hauled or pushed from public or private property for
impoundment in a public or private impound yard.
(Prior Code, § 29.33.020) (Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 156.607 LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or operate junk
yards, self-service enclosed storage facilities, self-service outside storage
facilities and towing and impound yards within the city unless such person
shall first obtain conditional use approval, comply with all the standards and
conditions required by such conditional use approval, and comply with all other
required city, county, state and federal regulations.
(Prior Code, § 29.33.030) (Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.608 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The following provisions shall apply in the Manufacturing-Distribution
(M-D) and General Industrial (M-G) Districts, which Districts shall also be
subject to other provisions of this chapter, except that where conflict in
regulations occurs, the regulations specified in this subchapter shall apply.
   (B)   (1)   The uses are allowed within the M-D and M-G Zoning Districts
only as a conditional use approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may set conditions as necessary pursuant to §§
156.375 through
156.387 of this chapter and state code section pertaining to conditional uses.
      (2)   The uses are prohibited in the West Forest Street Corridor Overlay.
      (3)   The corridor is defined in §§
156.280 and
156.281 of this chapter.
   (C)   Development plans shall be submitted for review by the Planning
Commission based on the regulations of §§
156.400 through
156.412 of this chapter and other applicable chapters in this chapter, (i.e.,
§§ 156.280, 156.291 and 156.445 through 156.465 of this chapter and the like).
   (D)   (1)   General standards and regulations are indicated with the
following table. An “A” indicates the standard or regulation applies to the use
as identified in the respective column. An “N” in the column indicates not
applicable or not allowed.
      (2)   The following abbreviations represent the use category as shown in
the columns below: JY = junk yard (vehicle recycling facility); ES = self-
service enclosed storage facility; OS = self-service outside storage facility;
and TI = towing and impound yard.
General Standards and Regulations JY ES OS TI
General Standards and Regulations                                            JY ES OS TI
Access lanes, internal. Interior access lanes shall be maintained and kept
open and free from storage as required by the Fire Department to provide
adequate access for fire protection. The width of the access lane(s) will be A  A  A  A
reviewed and approved based on adequate access and maneuvering within the
storage area
Building, primary office. When applicable and as determined by the use and
conditional use permit, construct and maintain a permanent primary office    A  A  A  A
building. The exterior building materials shall be approved by the Planning
Commission. Typical improvements and utility connections are required
Buildings, other. All buildings and structures will be reviewed as part of   A  A  A  A
the conditional use permit application
Fluid containment. Provide a fluid drainage and disposal plan that complies  A  N  A  A
with all federal, state and local standards
Landscaping. Setback areas (area between street and building and/or fencing)
shall be landscaped. Provide a detailed landscape plan to be reviewed by the A  A  A  A
Planning Commission as part of the conditional use review. No vehicles shall
be parked or displayed within the areas designated for landscaping
Lighting. Site, security and operational lighting shall be installed so that
it does not create traffic hazards or impacts on adjacent land uses. A
lighting plan shall be submitted and approved as part of the conditional use
request. Lighting for parking shall comply with the lighting standards as    A  A  A  A
identified in §§
156.445 through
156.465 of this chapter
Loading or unloading of vehicles. Vehicle staging areas shall be provided
outside of the public accessible areas where vehicles are loaded or
unloaded. No loading or unloading or storage of any vehicles is permitted    A  A  A  A
within the public right-of-way, the customer parking lot or required setback
area from the public right-of-way
Parking. When applicable and as determined by the use and conditional use
permit, provide adequate off-street customer and employee parking that
complies with the standards of §§
156.445 through
156.465 of this chapter. Customer parking must be separate from the vehicle  A  A  A  A
storage area and accessible from the public road without being restricted
with fences or gates. Operable licensed vehicles being displayed for sale
shall be located in a separate designated area and are not required to be
screened with a visual barrier
Setback, buildings. Setbacks for all buildings are subject to the standards
in §§                                                                      A  A  A  A
156.155 through
156.160 of this chapter
Setback, outdoor storage areas. All outdoor storage areas, required
screening fencing and unloading areas shall be set back 20 feet from all the A  N* A  A
public right-of-way
Setback, water sources (stream, creek, river, irrigation ditch and the like.
Setbacks for all water sources will be reviewed based on the nature of the   A  A  A  A
site, water source, water feature, flood elevation, vegetation and the like
Screening. The facility shall be surrounded by a six-foot solid visual
barrier fence for all frontages along a public street and visual areas from
the street. A six-foot visual barrier fence is required on exterior property
lines; except that, the common boundary with another outside storage
facility, junk yard or towing and impound yard may be marked with a chain
link barrier fence. These visual barriers may be increased in style, height  A  N  A  A
or durability as determined by the Planning Commission. The material and
color shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The intent of this
requirement is to screen the storage areas from outside of the property, and
the fence may need to be modified by the Planning Commission due to the
specific topography to accomplish that result
Signage. Identification and business signage shall comply with §§
156.480 through                                                              A  A  A  A
156.491 of this chapter. No signage shall be permitted on the screen fencing
unless specifically authorized by the Planning Commission
Site maintenance. All grounds and buildings shall be maintained free of
insect and rodent harborage and infestation. The site shall be maintained
free of organic waste or inappropriately stored flammable materials.         A  A  A  A
Materials that are customary to the business shall be stored in accordance
with applicable laws
Storm drainage. Storm drainage is subject to compliance with the city’s    A  A  A  A
Public Works Standards and review and approval by the City Engineer
Surface. The surface area between the drive approach and the storage
facility or required parking area shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete
surface. Required off-street parking shall comply with the Surfacing
standards as identified in §§
156.445 through
156.465 of this chapter and the city’s Public Works Standards. The storage A  A  A  A
area shall be surfaced with an asphalt, concrete, gravel or road base
surface. The thickness of surfacing and material types shall be prescribed
by a licensed geotechnical engineer based on the existing site soil
conditions and proposed use in accordance with city’s Public Works
Standards. A copy of the geotechnical report shall be provided to the City
Engineer for review
NOTES TO TABLE:
* A development with both enclosed and outside storage, the outside storage regulations
would apply to the site.
 
   (E)   Special regulations.
      (1)   Junk yards; stacking or racking of vehicles. Stacking or racking of
vehicles shall not exceed the height of the approved fence.
      (2)   Self-service enclosed storage facilities.
         (a)   Outside storage. Outside storage is prohibited unless the
facility is approved for both enclosed and outside storage.
         (b)   Prohibited activities. See §
156.606 of this chapter.
      (3)   Self-service outside storage facilities.
         (a)   Stacking or racking of vehicles. Vehicles shall not be stacked
or racked. Only one vehicle height shall be permitted within the vehicle
storage area.
         (b)   Prohibited activities. See §
156.606 of this chapter.
      (4)   Towing and impound yards.
         (a)   Certification. All towing or impound lots shall comply with
State Tax Commission standards for impound yards and shall provide the city
with their state issued identification number. All tow trucks and operators
accessing the yard shall obtain and meet all necessary state certification and
licensing requirements.
         (b)   Prohibited activities. Dismantling or salvaging vehicles.
         (c)   Office. An on-site office is required unless the yard is an
approved satellite yard per state regulations. If the yard is a satellite site,
an office in the city is required for the business. Parking of towing trucks
and other similar large vehicles/equipment at offices located in commercial
districts for long periods of time during the day or overnight is prohibited.
         (d)   Stacking or racking of vehicles. Vehicles shall not be stacked
or racked. Only one vehicle height shall be permitted within the vehicle
storage area.
(Prior Code, § 29.33.040) (Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.609 APPLICATION FOR A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Before a conditional use permit for new junk yards, self-service
enclosed storage facilities, self-service outside storage facilities and towing
and impound yards can be issued, complete plans and specifications complying
with these standards and regulations, and the designated application fees,
shall be submitted for review with the Planning Commission. Planning Commission
approval, completion of all improvements and continued compliance with these
standards and regulations are required for all new junk yards, self-service
enclosed storage facilities, self-service outside storage facilities and towing
and impound yards.
   (B)   Junk yards, self-service enclosed storage facilities, self-service
outside storage facilities and towing and impound yards legally approved and
existing as of the effective date of this subchapter may continue to be
operated and maintained without the site improvements and design restrictions
ofthe ordinance continued herein. However, the site improvement ordinance
standards and regulations may be applied to any expansion or modification, as
defined in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.33.050) (Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 156.610 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this subchapter shall follow the provisions of §
156.016 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.33.060) (Ord. 11-30, passed 12-1-2011)
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
§ 156.625 CODES AND STANDARDS.
   Any dwelling or other structure which is designed or intended for human
habitation which is to be located in the city outside of a mobile home park or
mobile home subdivision must meet the standards of the Uniform Building Code
and other codes as adopted by the city or if it is a manufactured home, it must
meet the standards of, and be certified under the National Manufactured Housing
and Standards Act of 1976, as amended, being 42 U.S.C. § 5402, or its successor
statute, and must prominently display an insignia approved by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development and must not have been altered in
violation of such codes.
(Prior Code, § 29.34.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.626 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to the above Codes and Standards, the following
requirements shall also be met.
      (1)   The dwelling must be permanently connected and attached to a site
built permanent foundation which meet International Code Council (ICC)
Guidelines for Manufactured Housing installations if a manufactured home. Any
running gear shall be removed and stored out of sight. Any enclosure must be
secured to a perimeter of the dwelling and be constructed or materials that are
weather-resistant and aesthetically consistent with concrete and masonry
foundation materials.
      (2)   The dwelling must be permanently connected to and approved for all
required utilities.
      (3)   The dwelling must be taxed as real property. If the dwelling is a
manufactured home, an affidavit must be filed with the State Tax Commission
pursuant to Utah Code and qualified, therefore, as an improvement to real
estate.
      (4)   The dwelling must provide 72 square feet of enclosed storage with
the minimum height of six feet located in a basement or garage area or in an
accessory storage structure. Such structure shall conform to all applicable
building codes.
      (5)   Porches and landings for ingress and egress to the dwelling must be
built and must be in accordance with the Uniform Building Code as adopted by
the state.
      (6)   At least 60% of the roof must be pitched at least 2/12 and shall
have roof surface of wood shakes, asphalt, composition, wood shingles,
concrete, metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials
approved by the Uniform Building Code.
      (7)   The dwelling shall have exterior siding consisting of wood,
masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl. The roof overhang,
including rain gutters, shall not be less than one foot, measured from the
vertical side of the building but not including bay windows, nooks, morning
rooms and the like.
      (8)   The width of the dwelling shall be at least 20 feet for a length of
at least 20 feet, exclusive of any garage area. The width shall be considered
the lessor of two primary dimensions. If the architectural front of the
dwelling is less than half the other dimension, the required off-street parking
shall be in a two-car garage or carport attached to the dwelling as illustrated
herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/abf4618048c5c9307a9b00041e04360f577d88f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3079.jpg]
      (9)   Required off street parking spaces shall meet the zoning ordinance
requirements.
      (10)   The Community Development Director or designee in concert with the
Planning Commission may approve deviations from one or more of the development
or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of finding that the
architectural style proposed provides compensating design features and that the
proposed dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in
the vicinity.
      (11)   Continuous sidewalk shall be installed parallel with the property
line on any public right-of-way in compliance with the codes and standards.
   (B)   Together, they may also require other deviations to achieve the
overall goals and purposes of this subchapter. These requirements may be
appealed by the Appeal Authority.
(Prior Code, § 29.34.020) (Ord. 98-01, passed 1-8-1998; Ord. 99-35, passed 12-
16-1999; Ord. 03-16, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER USES
§ 156.640 PURPOSE.
   To permit potential nuisances from industrial or other uses to be measured
factually and objectively in terms of the potential nuisance itself; to ensure
that all uses will provide necessary control methods for protection from
hazards and nuisances which can be prevented by modern processes of control and
nuisance elimination; to protect any use from arbitrary exclusion based solely
on the characteristics of uncontrolled production in this type of use in the
past.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.010)
§ 156.641 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any
manner so as to create dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other
form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, glare, electrical or other
disturbance; liquid or solid refuse or wastes; or other substance, condition or
element in such a manner or in such an amount as to affect adversely the
surrounding area or adjoining premises. The foregoing are hereinafter referred
to as “dangerous or objectionable elements”.
   (B)   No use shall be undertaken or maintained unless it conforms to the
regulations of this subchapter in addition to the regulations set forth for the
district in which such use is situated.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.020) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.642 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS PROCEDURE.
   The Community Development Director or designee may require performance
standards review for any use in any district when he has reason to believe that
such use, or the manner of its operation will not or may not conform to the
performance standards of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.030)
§ 156.643 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL USES.
   (A)   Initial and continued compliance with performance standards is
required of every use; and provisions for enforcement of continued compliance
with said standards shall be invoked by the zoning administrator against any
use if there are reasonable grounds to believe that performance standards are
being violated by such use.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.040)
   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, any use established before the
effective date of this subchapter and nonconforming as to performance standards
shall have five years in which to conform therewith.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.050)
§ 156.644 LOCATIONS WHERE DETERMINATIONS ARE TO BE MADE FOR ENFORCEMENT OF
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The determination of the existence of dangerous and objectionable elements
shall be made at the location of the use creating the same and at any points
where the existence of such elements may be most apparent; provided, however,
that, the measurements having to do with noise, odors, vibration or glare shall
be taken at the following points of measurement:
   (A)   In any district, except an M District, at the lot line of the
establishment or use; and
   (B)   In an M District at one or more points 500 feet from the establishment
or use, or at the boundary or boundaries of the district, if closer to the
establishment or use, or at the closest point within an adjacent district other
than an M District.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.060)
§ 156.645 DANGEROUS AND OBJECTIONABLE ELEMENTS.
   (A)   Noise. At points of measurement stated in §
156.644 of this chapter, the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each
standard octave band by any use or facility (other than transportation
facilities or temporary construction work) shall not exceed the values for
octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in Table I, after
applying the corrections shown in Table II. The sound pressure level shall be
measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer
conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.
(American Standards Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other
Sounds, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., and
American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis
of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof,
American Standards Association, Inc., N.Y., N.Y., shall be used.)
Table I
Frequency Ranges Containing Standard Octave Octave Band Sound Pressure Level in
Band in Cycles per Second                   Decibels re: 0.0002 dyne/cm2
Table I
Frequency Ranges Containing Standard Octave Octave Band Sound Pressure Level in
Band in Cycles per Second                   Decibels re: 0.0002 dyne/cm2
0 to 74                                     69
75 to 149                                   54
150 to 299                                  47
300 to 599                                  41
600 to 1,199                                37
1,200 to 2,399                              34
4,800 and above                             28
 
Table II
Type or Location of Operation              Correction or Character of Noise in
                                           Decibels
1. Emission only between 7:00 a.m. and +5a a. Apply one plus correction only
7:00 p.m.
2. Noise source operated less than 5%  +5a  
of any 1-hour period
3. Property is not located in one of
the R Districts and is not within 500  +5a  
feet of any R District
4. Noise of impulsive character        -5b b. Apply one minus correction only
(hammering and the like)
5. Noise of periodic character (hum,   -5b  
screech and the like)
 
   (B)   Vibration. No vibration (other than from transportation facilities or
temporary construction work) shall be permitted which is discernible without
instruments at the points of measurement specified in this section.
   (C)   Odors.
      (1)   No emission of odorous gases or other matter shall be permitted in
such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the ratio of one
volume of odorous air to four of clean air at points of measurement specified
herein, or at point of greatest concentration.
      (2)   Any process involving creation or emission of any odors shall be
provided with a secondary safeguard system, so control will be maintained if
primary safeguard system should fail. (There is hereby established as a guide
in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table III, “Odor Thresholds”,
in Chapter 5, Air Pollution Abatement Manual, Copyright 1951, Manufacturing
Chemists’ Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., and said manual and/or table as
subsequently amended.)
   (D)   Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from flood lights or
from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise,
shall be permitted to be visible at the points of measurement specified herein.
This restriction shall not apply to signs or lighting of buildings or grounds
for protection as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Fire and explosion hazards. All activities involving, and all storage
of flammable and explosive materials, shall be provided at any point with
adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion.
   (F)   Radioactivity or electric disturbances. No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radio-activity at any point, or electrical
disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment other than that
of the creator of such disturbance.
   (G)   Smoke. No emission shall be permitted from any chimney or other
source, of smoke or gases, except in accordance with air pollution provisions
of the state’s Board of Health.
   (H)   Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution.
No emission shall be permitted, except in accordance with air pollution
provisions of the state’s Board of Health.
   (I)   Liquid or solid wastes.
      (1)   No discharge at any point into public sewer, private sewage system,
public storm drain, stream or into the ground shall be permitted, except in
accordance with the standards approved by the state’s Department of Health or
standards equivalent to those approved by such Department.
      (2)   No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any property in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes
or forces, and any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or insects shall
be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
(Prior Code, § 29.35.060) Penalty, see §
156.999
MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS
§ 156.660 PURPOSE.
   To require that mobile home developments will be of such character as to
promote the objectives and purposes of this subchapter; to protect the
integrity and characteristics of the districts contiguous to those in which
mobile home parks are located; and to protect other use values contiguous to or
near mobile home park uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.36.010)
§ 156.661 LOCATION AND USE.
   No mobile home shall be located, placed, used or occupied in any district
other than within an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision where
allowed within the zoning district; except that, mobile homes may be stored,
displayed and sold in commercial and manufacturing districts, but not occupied,
except in mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions when allowed in such
districts; except that, mobile homes approved by the Community Development
Director or designee may be located on bona fide agricultural lands as housing
for families or employees of the farm or ranch operation; provided that, the
agricultural acreage shall not be less than 40 acres for irrigated lands and
160 acres for non-irrigated lands.
(Prior Code, § 29.36.020)
§ 156.662 APPROVAL.
   Mobile home parks may not be constructed unless first approved by the
Planning Commission, after review of plans for said mobile home park which
satisfies the Commission that the said development will:
   (A)   Be in keeping with the general character of the district within which
the development is to be located;
   (B)   Be located on a parcel of land containing not less than ten acres, or
on two or more parcels separated by a street or alley only, and totaling at
least ten acres;
   (C)   Have at least 25 spaces completed and ready for occupancy before first
occupancy is permitted;
   (D)   Meet all standards and requirements of the mobile home park ordinance
of the local jurisdiction;
   (E)   Have written approval of the state’s Division of Health;
   (F)   Be developed according to plans prepared by a professional team. In
all cases, it is recommended that professional design and other assistance be
obtained early in the program including (as needed) a geologist or soils
engineer, an urban planner, a lawyer, a financial expert or others. It is the
intent of the local jurisdiction that the developer solve his problems before
approval is given and construction begins. Determination of qualifications of
required professional individuals or firms shall be made by the Planning
Commission; and
   (G)   In a mobile home park, the number of mobile homes shall be limited to
nine units per acre. The mobile homes may be clustered; provided that, the
total number of units does not exceed the number permitted on one acre,
multiplied by the number of acres in the development. The remaining land not
contained in individual lots, roads or parking, shall be set aside and
developed as parks, playgrounds and service areas for common use and enjoyment
of occupants of the development and of the visitors thereto.
(Prior Code, § 29.36.030)
§ 156.663 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An overall plan for development of a mobile home park or subdivision
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review. The plan shall be
drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch to 50 feet. The number of copies of
the plan shall be determined by the Community Development Department. The plan
shall show:
      (1)   The topography of the site represented by contours, shown at not
greater intervals than two feet when required by the Planning Commission;
      (2)   The proposed street and mobile home space layout;
      (3)   Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds, open spaces;
      (4)   Tabulations showing per cent of area to be devoted to parks,
playgrounds and open spaces, number of mobile home spaces and total area to be
developed;
      (5)   Proposed locations of parking spaces;
      (6)   Generalized landscaping and utility plan, including locations of
water, electricity, gas lines, fire hydrants; and
      (7)   Any other data the Planning Commission may require.
   (B)   The applicant for approval of plans for a mobile home park or mobile
home subdivision shall pay application fee at the time application is made. The
application fee shall be as established by the local governing body.
   (C)   Applications for approval shall be in writing, submitted to the
Planning Commission at its regular meeting and shall be granted or denied
within 30 days, unless an extension of such time is approved by the applicant.
An application denied by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the local
governing body, which appeal must be made in writing within ten days after the
denial is made by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 29.36.040)
§ 156.664 STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The development of a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall
conform to the following standards and requirements, unless modified by an
approved planned unit development plan.
   (A)   The area shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the
application for approval of the development shall be filed jointly by all the
owners of the property included in the plan.
   (B)   (1)   The plans for a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision
shall be prepared by a team of competent professionals in planning,
engineering, architecture and landscape architecture. In all cases, it is
recommended that professional design and other assistance be obtained early in
the program, including, as needed, an urban planner, a geologist or soils
engineer, a lawyer, a financial expert or others.
      (2)   It is the intent of the local jurisdiction that the developer
solves his or her problems before approval is given and construction begins.
Determination of qualifications of required professional individuals or firms
shall be made by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   In all mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, a strip of land
at least 15 feet wide surrounding the entire park or subdivision shall be left
unoccupied by mobile homes, and shall be planted and maintained in lawn,
shrubs, trees, an approved wall or fence, designed to afford privacy to the
development.
   (D)   Storm drainage facilities shall be so constructed as to protect
residents of the development as well as adjacent property owners. Such
facilities shall be of sufficient capacity to insure rapid drainage of water in
or adjacent to the development.
   (E)   All storage and solid waste receptacles, outside of the confines of
any mobile home, must be housed in a closed structure compatible in design and
construction to the mobile homes, and to any service buildings within the
developments; all patios, garages, car ports and other add-ons must be
compatible in design and construction with the mobile home. The service
buildings shall be constructed in accordance with standard commercial practice
and kept in good repair as approved by the Community Development Department.
   (F)   A security compound for the storage of vehicles, boats and other large
items shall be provided equivalent to a minimum of 300 square feet of paved
area per mobile home space in mobile home parks. The Planning Commission may
also require a security compound in a mobile home subdivisions, to be
maintained by a home owners association.
   (G)   In all mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, within 45 days
of occupancy, each mobile home shall be skirted, or if shields are used, they
are to be fire-proof, well-painted or otherwise preserved.
   (H)   In mobile home parks not less than 10% of the gross land area shall be
set aside for the joint use and enjoyment of occupants. The land covered by
vehicular roadways, sidewalks and off-street parking shall not be construed as
part of the 10% common area required for parks and playgrounds for occupants;
provided, however, that, in initial stages of development or special smaller
developments the minimum area shall be not less than one-half acre or 10%,
whichever is greater.
   (I)   Yard lighting with a minimum of two-tenths foot candles of light shall
be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all driveways and
walkways in mobile home parks.
   (J)   In mobile home parks all areas not covered by mobile homes, hard
surfacing or buildings shall be landscaped as approved by the Planning
Commission and such landscaping shall be permanently maintained.
   (K)   In mobile home parks all off-street parking spaces and driveways shall
be hard surfaced before the adjacent mobile home spaces may be occupied.
   (L)   In mobile home parks the roadways shall be designed to accommodate
anticipated traffic, including the following standards unless modified by an
approved planned unit development plan:
      (1)   One-way traffic: a minimum of 15 feet in width plus extra width as
necessary for maneuvering mobile homes;
      (2)   Two-way traffic: a minimum of 30 feet in width;
      (3)   Entrance roadways: minimum of 36 feet in width;
      (4)   Roadways: all roadways shall be hard-surfaced and bordered by 24-
inch rolled gutters or an approved equivalent;
      (5)   Sidewalks: 36-inch minimum width sidewalks shall be installed on
all main roadways within the development, if required by the Planning
Commission; and
      (6)   Access: each mobile home park or subdivision shall have at least
two accesses to public streets.
   (M)   In mobile home subdivisions, roadway widths shall be as required by
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances, except as may be modified by an
approved planned unit development plan.
   (N)   In a mobile home park, the number of mobile homes shall be limited to
nine units per acre and may be limited to fewer units depending on mobile home
size, topography and other factors of the particular site. The mobile homes may
be clustered, provided that the total number of units does not exceed the
number permitted on one acre, multiplied by the number of acres in the
development.
   (O)   In a mobile home park, no mobile home or add-on shall be located
closer than 20 feet from the nearest portion of any other mobile home or add-
on. All mobile homes and add-ons shall be set back at least ten feet from road
curbs or walks. If the tongue of the mobile home remains attached, it shall be
set back a minimum of six feet from road curbs or walks. All mobile homes shall
set back at least 15 feet from any boundary of the mobile home park.
   (P)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two parking spaces
per mobile home space, and each such parking space shall have a minimum width
of ten feet and minimum depth of 20 feet. In no case shall the parking space be
located further than 100 feet from the mobile home space it is designed to
serve.
   (Q)   One-story bulk storage areas shall be provided within a mobile home
park, equivalent to 60 square feet per mobile home space. The area designated
for said bulk storage shall be improved, landscaped and screened in such manner
as approved by the Planning Commission.
   (R)   A launderette for convenience of the park occupants, but not for the
general public, may be included in mobile home parks.
   (S)   In a mobile home park, no mobile home space shall be rented for a
period of less than 30 days, and occupancy shall be by written lease. In a
mobile home subdivision no mobile home or mobile home lot shall be rented for a
period of less than 90 days. Leases shall be made available for inspection by
the officials of the local jurisdiction upon demand.
   (T)   An access shall be provided to each mobile home stand for maneuvering
mobile homes into position. The access way shall be kept free from trees and
other immovable obstructions. Paving under mobile homes will not be required if
adequate support is provided. Use of planks steel mats, or other means, to
support the mobile home during placement shall be allowed so long as the same
are removed upon completion of placement.
   (U)   In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the
other laws of the local jurisdiction, all mobile home parks shall also conform
to requirements set forth in the Code of Camp, Trailer Court, Hotel, Motel and
Resort Sanitation Regulations adopted by the state’s Board of Health, 2-21-
1968, or successor law and to the Fire Prevention Code or successor law, which
codes are hereby adopted by reference. A copy of the codes are filed with the
office of the City Recorder for use of the public and all restrictions,
regulations and notations contained therein shall be made a part of this
subchapter as fully as though set forth herein. In the event of any conflict
between said codes and this subchapter, this subchapter shall take precedence
where its regulations are more strict, and the provisions of the codes shall
take precedence where their regulations are more strict.
   (V)   For all mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, the Planning
Commission shall review the proposed development plan to determine its
compliance with all portions of the local General Plan. In considering the
application, the Planning Commission among other things shall make sure that
such development will constitute a residential environment of sustained
desirability and the stability and that it will not adversely affect amenities
in the surrounding area. The Planning Commission may require changes to be made
in the plan and development standards in excess of the minimum standards
contained in this chapter, such as walls, buffers and setbacks. Greater amounts
of landscaping, or parking space may be imposed as conditions of the approval
where determined by the Planning Commission to be necessary to insure that the
development will mix harmoniously with contiguous or near-by uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.36.050)
RECREATIONAL COACHES AND RECREATIONAL COACH PARKS
§ 156.675 PURPOSE.
   To permit development of facilities for recreational coaches in appropriate
districts and to require that recreational coach accommodations will be of such
character as to promote the objectives and purposes of this subchapter, to
protect the integrity and character of the districts contiguous to those in
which recreational coach parks are located, and to protect other use values
contiguous to or near recreational coach park uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.37.010) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.676 LOCATION AND USE.
   (A)   No recreational coach as herein defined shall be located, placed, used
or occupied for residential purposes in any district, except within approved
and licensed recreational coach parks and except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Recreational coach parks shall be generally located:
      (1)   Adjacent to or in close proximity to a major traffic artery or
highway;
      (2)   Near adequate shopping facilities; and
      (3)   Within or adjacent to a mobile home park.
   (C)   No individual space in a recreational coach park shall be used by one
individual coach for more than 180 consecutive days, nor shall such space be
rented or leased to any one individual for a period longer than 180 days,
except under the following circumstances and conditions.
      (1)   Recreational coach parks may reserve one space for every 15 spaces
in the park for park resident employees who provide on-site maintenance,
security and operations functions.
      (2)   (a)   Spaces may be used for long term, temporary (over 180 days,
but not permanent) housing of transient employee(s) only (such as U.S. Forest
Service temporary and term employees, long term temporary or transient
construction project or infrastructure workers and the like); provided, the
employer provides a letter to the recreational coach park stating that the
recreational vehicle is not being used for permanent housing, explains the
circumstances that make the need for long term temporary housing necessary, and
provide a projected end date for the space lease not to exceed 12 consecutive
months with the option of renewal with a new letter from the employer. Long-
term use will be limited to one-third of the spaces available in the
recreational coach park.
         (b)   For the purpose of this subchapter, transient employee(s) shall
mean a person in the service of another under any contract of hire, express or
implied, oral or written, where the employer has the power or right to control
and direct the employee in how the work is to be performed. Employer shall mean
one who employs the services of others; one for whom employees work and who
pays their wages or salaries.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles occupying space in a recreational coach park
on a long-term, temporary (over 180 days but not permanent) basis must be owner
occupied, have proof of ownership of the recreational coach, and must have
current license and registration and must be operable for vehicular travel.
   (D)   Recreational coaches may be stored, but not used for permanent living
quarters.
   (E)   Recreational coaches may be stored, displayed, sold and serviced, but
not used for living quarters, in a sales lot in a commercial or manufacturing
district when such use is a permitted or a conditional use.
   (F)   Recreational coaches may be accommodated in an approved and licensed
mobile home park; provided that:
      (1)   The recreational coach park portion of the development is separated
by barriers, screens or otherwise from the area of mobile homes;
      (2)   The recreational coach use area shall have direct access to a
collector or arterial street; and
      (3)   Separate ingress and egress shall be provided for recreational
coaches when required by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 29.37.020) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 29.37, passed 6-
7-2018)
§ 156.677 APPROVAL.
   A recreational coach park may not be constructed unless first approved by
the Planning Commission, after review of plans for said park which satisfy the
Commission that the proposed development will:
   (A)   Be in keeping with the general character of the district where it is
proposed to be located;
   (B)   Be located on a parcel of land containing not less than five acres,
unless attached to a mobile home park, in which case no minimum area is
required;
   (C)   Have at least ten spaces completed and ready for occupancy before
first occupancy is permitted;
   (D)   Meet all standards and requirements of this subchapter;
   (E)   Meet all requirements of the state’s Code of Camp, Trailer Court,
Hotel, Motel and Resort Sanitation Regulations which are intended to apply to
trailer, camper, and tent camps as defined in such code;
   (F)   Be designed by a qualified designer or design team. The determination
of qualifications of such required professional individuals or firms shall be
made by the Planning Commission; and
   (G)   Contain not more than 20 units per acre. The spaces may be clustered,
provided that the total number of units does not exceed the number permitted on
one acre, multiplied by the number of acres in the development. The remaining
land not contained in individual trailer spaces, roads or parking, shall be set
aside and developed as parks, playgrounds or service areas for the common use
and enjoyment of occupants of the development and of visitors thereto.
(Prior Code, § 29.37.030) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.678 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An overall plan for development of a recreational coach park shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review. The plan shall be drawn to a
scale not smaller than one inch to 50 feet. The number of copies of the plan
shall be determined by the Community Development Department. The plan shall
show:
      (1)   The topography of the site, when required by the Planning
Commission, represented by contours shown at not greater than two-foot
intervals;
      (2)   The proposed street and trailer or coach space pad layout;
      (3)   Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds and open spaces, and
tabulations showing the percent of area to be devoted to parks, playgrounds and
open spaces, the number of trailer spaces and total area to be developed;
      (4)   Proposed location, number and design of parking spaces;
      (5)   Generalized landscaping and utility plan, including location of
water, electricity, gas lines and fire hydrants; and
      (6)   Any other data the Planning Commission may require.
   (B)   The applicant for approval of plans for a recreational coach park
shall pay application fee at the time application is made. The application fee
shall be as established by the local governing body.
   (C)   Applications for approval shall be in writing, submitted to the
Planning Commission at its regular meeting and shall be granted or denied
within 30 days, unless an extension of time is approved by the applicant. An
application denied by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the governing
body, which appeal must be made in writing within ten days after denial is made
by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 29.37.040) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.679 STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The development of a recreational coach park shall conform to the following
standards and requirements, unless modified by an approved planned unit
development plan.
   (A)   The area shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the
application for approval of the development shall be filed jointly by all the
owners of the property included in the plan.
   (B)   (1)   The plans for a recreational coach park shall be prepared by a
team of competent professionals in planning, engineering, architecture and
landscape architecture. In all cases, it is recommended that professional
design and other assistance be obtained early in the program, including, as
needed, an urban planner, a geologist or soils engineer, a lawyer, a financial
expert or others.
      (2)   It is the intent of the local jurisdiction that the developer
solves his problems before approval is given and construction begins.
Determination of qualifications of required professional individuals or firms
shall be made by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   In all recreational coach parks, a strip of land at least 15 feet wide
surrounding the entire park shall be left unoccupied and shall be planted and
maintained in lawn, shrubs, trees, an approved wall or fence, designed to
afford privacy to the development.
   (D)   Storm drainage facilities shall be so constructed as to protect
residents of the development as well as adjacent property owners. Such
facilities shall be of sufficient capacity to insure rapid drainage of water in
or adjacent to the development.   
   (E)   Not less than 10% of the gross land area shall be set aside for the
joint use and enjoyment of occupants. The land covered by vehicular roadways,
sidewalks and off-street parking shall not be construed as part of the 10%
common area required for parks and playgrounds for occupants; provided,
however, that, in initial stages of development or special smaller developments
the minimum area shall be not less than one-half acre or 10%, whichever is
greater.
   (F)   Yard lighting with a minimum of two-tenths foot candles of light shall
be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all driveways and
walkways.
   (G)   All areas not covered, hard surfacing or buildings, shall be
landscaped as approved by the Planning Commission and such landscaping shall be
permanently maintained.
   (H)   All off-street parking spaces and driveways shall be hard surfaced
before the adjacent recreational coach spaces may be occupied.
   (I)   The roadways shall be designed to accommodate anticipated traffic,
including the following standards unless modified by an approved planned unit
development plan:
      (1)   One-way traffic: a minimum of 15 feet in width plus extra width as
necessary for maneuvering mobile homes;
      (2)   Two-way traffic: a minimum of 30 feet in width;
      (3)   Entrance roadways: minimum of 36 feet in width;
      (4)   Roadways: All roadways shall be hard-surfaced and bordered by 24-
inch rolled gutters or an approved equivalent;
      (5)   Sidewalks: 36-inch minimum width sidewalks shall be installed on
all main roadways within the development, if required by the Planning
Commission; and
      (6)   Access: each recreational coach park shall have at least two
accesses to public streets.
   (J)   A launderette for convenience of the park occupants but not for the
general public, may be included in mobile home parks.
   (K)   Recreational coach parks shall contain not more than 20 units per
acre. The spaces may be clustered; provided that, the total number of units
does not exceed the number permitted on one acre, multiplied by the number of
acres in the development. The remaining land not contained in individual
recreational coach spaces, roads or parking, shall be set aside and developed
as park, playground or service areas for the common use and enjoyment of
occupants of the park and visitors thereto.
   (L)   In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the
other laws of the local jurisdiction, all recreational coach parks, shall also
conform to requirements set forth in the Code of Camp-Trailer Court, Hotel,
Motel, and Resort Sanitation Regulations adopted by the state’s Board of
Health, 2-21-1968, or successor law and to the Fire Prevention Code, or
successor law which codes are hereby adopted by reference. A copy of the codes
are filed with the office of the City Recorder for use of the public and all
restrictions, regulations and notations contained therein shall be made a part
of this subchapter as fully as though set forth herein. In the event of any
conflict between said codes and this subchapter, this subchapter shall take
precedence where its regulations are more strict, and the provisions of the
codes shall take precedence where their regulations are more strict.
   (M)   For all recreational coach parks the Planning Commission shall review
the proposed development plan to determine its compliance with all portions of
the local General Plan. In considering the application, the Planning Commission
among other things shall make sure that such development will constitute a
residential environment of sustained desirability and the stability and that it
will not adversely affect amenities in the surrounding area. The Planning
Commission may require changes to be made in the plan and development standards
in excess of the minimum standards contained in this chapter, such as walls,
buffers and setbacks. Greater amounts of landscaping, or parking space may be
imposed as conditions of the approval where determined by the Planning
Commission to be necessary to insure that the development will mix harmoniously
with contiguous or near-by uses.
(Prior Code, § 29.37.050) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.680 TEMPORARY USING OF RECREATIONAL COACHES IN MULTIPLE-USE AND
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS DURING RECOGNIZED HUNTING, FISHING OR OTHER SPORTS
ACTIVITY SEASONS.
   Subject to all the following conditions, it shall be lawful to park and
occupy a recreational coach while engaged in recreational activities in the
multiple-use or agricultural districts.
   (A)   The applicant shall obtain a letter of authorization of such occupancy
from the appropriate public agency, if the land is publicly owned or
administered, or from the owner of the land if the land is privately owned, and
shall present such letter to the Community Development Department at the time
of application for a permit to occupy the land.
   (B)   The applicant shall obtain a permit from the Community Development
Department before placing any recreational coach as allowed herein.
   (C)   No such recreational coach shall be located and occupied in any
multiple-use or agricultural district for longer than seven days in any one
month, or longer than 21 days in any one calendar year, or for any general
habitation purpose other than for activity in a recognized and on-going outdoor
recreational pursuit.
   (D)   Any such recreational coach shall be self-contained or shall contain
toilet facilities of a type approved by the local health official; except that,
this requirement may be waived by the Community Development Department if he or
she finds that acceptable toilet facilities exist on the premises where the
recreational coach is to be parked, and that the occupants will have access
thereto.
   (E)   The above requirements shall not govern in camp grounds or camping
areas designated as such by appropriate local, state or federal officials or
agencies.
(Prior Code, § 29.37.060) (Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation (as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise) violating, causing or permitting violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and punishable as provided by law.
Such person, firm or corporation intentionally violating this chapter shall be
deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any portion
of any violation of this chapter is permitted or continued by such person, firm
or corporation, shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.180)
   (B)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of §
156.236 of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of §
156.236 of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates §
156.236 of this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall
be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
more than $750 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.070)
   (C)   Any violation of the provisions of §
156.358 of this chapter, either by failing to do those acts required herein or
by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be considered a Class C misdemeanor
unless otherwise specifically stated in §
156.358 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29.18.070)
   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of §
156.486, either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing any act
prohibited herein, shall be considered an infraction.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 7-19-2007; Ord. 07-17, passed 8-30-2007; Ord. 24-07, passed
4-4-2024)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Utah Code Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO UTAH CODE ANNOTATED
U.C.A. Cite Code Section
U.C.A. Cite                      Code Section
4-11-101 et seq.                 90.042
4-25-4                           90.078
Title 4, Chapter 41              156.020
4-41a-109                        156.485
7-23-101 et seq.                 155.245;
                                 156.020
Title 8, Chapter 5               91.058
9-7-4                            91.081
9-7-402                          91.081
9-7-404                          91.081
9-7-405                          91.081
Title 10                         31.005
10-1-301 et seq.                 50.060
10-1-401 et seq.                 152.001
10-3-208                         32.027
10-3-1108(2)(d)                  91.005
10-3-1301 — 10-3-1312          91.081
10-6-131                         31.021
10-8-85                          10.999
10-8-85.5                        114.002
Title 10, Chapter 9a             155.018;
                                 156.055
10-9a et seq.                    155.001
10-9a-103(66)                    155.018
10-9a-201                        156.035
10-9a-203                        156.037
10-9a-205                        34.007;
                                 34.009
Title 10, Chapter 9a, 103        156.020
10-9a-302                        156.055
10-9a-304                        156.009
10-9a-305                        156.010
10-9a-503                        152.031
10-9a-511                        156.387
10-9a-530                        156.360
10-9a-603                        155.018
10-9a-604.2                      155.047
10-9a-604.5                      155.052
10-9a-608                        155.018
10-9a-801                        156.043
10-9a-801(2)(a)                  155.243
10-9a-801(4)                     155.243
Title 11                         114.022
11-7-1(2)                        94.004
Title 11, Chapter 13             155.018
Title 11, Chapter 26             152.004
Title 11, Chapter 36a            34.001;
                                 155.018
                                 34.004;
Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part 5    34.005;
                                 34.009
Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part 7    34.011
11-13-203(4)                     152.031
11-36a-102                       34.002
11-36a-202                       34.002
11-36a-301                       34.001;
                                 34.004
11-36a-302                       34.004
11-36a-303                       34.001;
                                 34.005
11-36a-304                       34.001;
                                 34.005
11-36a-305                       34.006
11-36a-306                       34.004;
                                 34.005
11-36a-402                       34.008
11-36a-601                       34.010
11-36a-602                       34.010
11-36a-603                       34.010
11-36a-701                       34.011
11-36a-702                       34.011
11-36a-704                       34.011
11-36a-705                       34.011
Title 13, Chapter 32             116.115
Title 13, Chapter 43             34.011
Title 15A, Chapter 1, Part 4     33.032
Title 15A, Chapter 2             150.001
15A-5-103                        94.023
Title 16, Chapter 6a             156.020
Title 16A                        152.031
Title 17B                        155.018
Title 17D, Chapter 1             155.018
17D-1-103                        155.018
19-2-114                         94.004
19-5-115(2)                      154.042
19-5-115(4)                      154.042
19-6-101                         93.002
20A, Chapter 7                   32.010
20A-7-401.3                      32.008
20A-7-602.8                      155.017
20A-7-601(5)(a)                  155.017
26B-4-152                        33.067
Title 31A, Chapter 22, Part III  71.007
32B-7, Part 3                    111.030
Title 41, Chapter 1a             71.001
41-1a-102                        113.001
Title 41, Chapter 6a, Article 18 71.004
Title 41, Chapter 12a            71.005
Title 41, Chapter 22             71.006
Title 51, Chapter 7              31.002
Title 52, Chapter 4              34.008;
                                 155.018
Title 53, Chapter 3              71.002;
                                 73.001
53-7-104                         94.023
54-2-1                           155.018
54-2-201                         155.017
54-3-27                          155.017
57-1-45                          155.018
Title 57, Chapter 8              156.428
57-8-13                          155.018
57-16-3                          156.359
Title 57, Chapter 21             156.530
Title 58, Chapter 37             112.044
59-12-102                        152.031
Title 63, Chapter 2              31.020
Title 63G, Chapter 2             156.055
Title 63G, Chapter 2, Part 1     116.100
63G-2-101 — 63G-2-901          31.020
63G-2-201(3)(b)                  31.020
63G-2-204(3)                     31.020
63G-2-204(7)                     31.020
63G-2-304(1) and (2)             31.020
63G-2-308                        31.020
63G-2-403                        31.020
63G-2-404                        31.020
65A-8-211                        94.004
Title 72, Chapter 4              71.003
72-5-403                         155.018
72-5-110                         92.075
72-7-102(4)                      152.001
72-9-604(7)                      113.002
73-1-11                          155.018
73-3-3.5                         155.018
itle 76                          10.999
76-9-702                         115.008
76-9-702.5                       115.008
76-10-801—76-10-803            93.046
Title 77, Chapter 24A            92.075
Title 77B, Part 6                93.046
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code 2023 Code
1.01.010   11.001
1.01.020   11.002
1.01.030   11.003
1.02.010   10.001
1.02.020   10.002
1.02.030   10.003
1.02.040   10.004
1.02.050   10.005
1.02.060   10.006
1.02.070   10.007
1.02.080   10.008
1.02.090   10.008
1.02.100   10.008
1.02.110   10.008
1.02.120   10.008
1.02.130   10.999
2.01.010   30.001
2.01.020   31.001
2.01.030   31.002
2.01.040   31.003
2.01.050   31.004
2.02.010   30.015
2.02.020   30.016
2.02.030   30.017
2.02.040   30.018
2.02.050   30.019
2.02.060   30.020
2.02.070   30.021
2.02.080   30.022
2.02.090   30.023
2.02.100   30.024
2.03.010   30.035
2.03.020   30.036
2.03.030   30.037
2.03.040   30.055—
           30.066
2.03.050   30.038
2.03.060   30.039
2.03.070   30.040
2.03.080   30.041
2.03.090   30.042
2.04.010   31.020
2.04.020   31.020
2.04.030   31.020
2.04.040   31.020
2.04.050   31.020
2.04.060   31.020
2.05.010   31.021
2.05.020   31.021
2.05.040   31.021
2.05.050   31.021
2.06.010   31.022
2.07.010   31.023
2.07.020   31.023
2.07.030   31.023
2.08.010   31.024
2.08.020   31.024
2.08.030   31.024
2.09.010   31.025
2.09.020   31.025
2.10.010   31.005
2.11.010   31.040
2.11.020   31.040
2.11.030   31.041
2.11.040   31.042
2.11.050   31.043
2.11.060   31.044
2.11.070   31.045
2.11.080   31.046
2.11.090   31.047
2.11.100   31.048
2.11.110   31.049
2.11.120   31.050
2.11.130   31.051
3.01       91.001
3.02.010   91.040
3.02.020   91.041
3.02.030   91.042
3.02.040   91.043
3.03.010   91.002
3.03.020   91.003
3.03.030   91.004
3.03.040   91.005
3.03.050   91.006
3.03.070   91.007
3.04.010   91.020
3.04.020   91.021
3.04.030   91.022
3.04.040   91.023
3.04.050   91.024
3.04.060   91.025
4.01       90.001
4.02.010   90.015
4.02.020   90.016
4.02.030   90.017
4.02.040   90.018
4.02.050   90.019
4.03.010   90.035
4.03.020   90.036
4.03.030   90.037
4.03.040   90.038
4.03.050   90.039
4.03.060   90.040
4.03.070   90.041
4.03.080   90.042
4.04.010   90.055
4.04.020   90.056
4.04.030   90.057
4.04.040   90.058
4.04.050   90.059
4.04.060   90.060
4.04.070   90.061
4.04.080   90.062
4.05.010   90.075
4.05.020   90.076
4.05.030   90.077
4.05.040   90.078
4.06.010   90.090
4.06.020   90.091
4.06.030   90.092
4.06.040   90.093
4.06.050   90.094
4.06.060   90.095
4.06.070   90.096
4.07.010   90.110
4.07.020   90.111
4.07.030   90.112
4.07.040   90.113
4.07.050   90.114
4.08.010   90.016
4.08.020   90.020
4.08.030   90.999
4.08.040   90.999
5.01.020   150.001
5.01.030   150.002
5.01.040   150.003
5.01.050   150.004
5.01.060   150.005
5.01.070   150.006
5.01.080   150.007
5.01.090   150.008
5.01.100   150.009
5.01.110   150.010
5.01.120   150.999
5.01.130   150.011
6.01.010   34.001
6.01.020   34.002
6.01.030   34.003
6.01.040   34.004
6.01.050   34.005
6.01.060   34.006
6.01.070   34.007
6.01.080   34.008
6.01.090   34.009
6.01.100   34.010
6.01.110   34.011
6.01.120   34.012;
           34.013
8.01.010   91.055
8.01.020   91.055
8.01.030   91.056
8.01.040   91.057
8.01.050   91.058
8.01.060   91.059
8.01.070   91.060
8.01.080   91.061
8.01.090   91.062
8.01.100   91.063
8.01.110   91.064
8.01.120   91.065
8.01.160   91.066
9.01.010   32.001
9.01.020   32.002
9.01.030   32.003
9.01.040   32.004
9.01.050   32.005
9.01.060   32.006
9.01.070   32.007
9.01.080   32.008
9.01.090   32.009
9.01.100   32.010
9.02.010   32.025
9.02.020   32.026
9.02.030   32.027
9.02.040   32.028
9.02.045   32.029
9.02.050   32.030
9.02.060   32.031
9.02.070   32.032
10.01.010  50.001
10.01.020  50.002
10.01.030  50.003
10.01.040  50.004
10.01.050  50.005
10.01.060  50.006
10.01.070  50.007
10.01.075  50.007
10.01.080  50.008
10.01.085  50.009
10.01.090  50.010
10.01.100  50.011
10.01.110  50.012
10.01.120  50.013
10.01.130  50.014
10.01.140  50.015
10.02.010  50.025
10.02.020  50.026
10.02.030  50.027
10.03.010  50.040
10.03.020  50.041
10.03.030  50.041
10.03.040  50.041
10.03.050  50.042
10.03.060  50.043
10.03.070  50.044
10.03.080  50.045
10.03.090  50.046
10.03.100  50.047
10.03.110  50.048
10.03.120  50.049
10.04.010  50.060
10.05.010  50.075
10.05.020  50.076
10.05.030  50.077
10.05.040  50.078
11.01      33.001
11.02.010  33.030
11.02.020  33.031
11.02.030  33.032
11.02.040  33.032
11.02.050  33.033
11.02.060  33.999
11.03.010  33.045
11.03.020  33.046
11.03.030  33.047
11.03.040  33.048
11.03.050  33.049
11.03.060  33.050
11.04.010  33.065
11.04.020  33.066
11.04.030  33.067
11.04.040  33.068
11.04.050  33.069
13.01.010  93.001
13.01.020  93.002
13.01.030  93.015
13.01.040  93.016
13.01.050  93.017
13.01.060  93.018
13.01.070  93.019
13.01.080  93.020
13.01.090  93.021
13.01.100  93.022
13.01.110  93.023
13.01.120  93.024
13.01.130  93.025
13.01.140  93.026
13.01.150  93.027
13.01.160  93.028
13.01.170  93.029
13.01.180  93.030
13.01.190  93.031
13.01.200  93.032
13.01.210  93.033
13.01.220  93.045
13.01.230  93.046
13.01.240  93.047
13.01.250  93.048
13.01.260  93.049
13.02.010  132.001
13.02.020  132.002
13.02.030  132.003
13.02.040  132.004
13.02.050  132.999
13.02.060  132.999
13.03.010  133.001
13.03.020  133.002;
           133.999
13.03.030  133.03
13.03.040  133.04
13.04.010  94.001
13.04.020  94.002
13.04.030  94.003
13.04.040  94.004
13.04.050  94.005
13.04.060  94.006
13.04.070  94.007
13.04.080  94.008
13.04.090  94.999
13.05.010  94.020;
           94.999
13.05.020  94.021
13.05.030  94.022
13.05.040  94.023
14.01.010  110.001
14.01.020  110.002
14.02.010  110.015
14.02.020  110.016
14.02.030  110.017
14.02.040  110.018
14.02.050  110.019
14.02.060  110.020
14.02.070  110.021
14.02.080  110.022
14.02.090  112.001
14.02.100  110.022
14.02.110  110.023
14.02.120  110.024
14.02.130  110.025
14.02.140  110.026
14.02.150  110.027
14.02.160  110.028
14.02.170  110.029
14.02.180  110.030
14.02.190  110.030
14.02.200  110.031
14.02.210  110.032
14.02.220  110.033
14.02.230  110.034
14.02.240  110.999
14.02.250  110.999
14.03.010  116.040
14.03.020  116.041
14.03.030  116.042
14.03.040  116.043
14.03.050  116.044
14.03.060  116.045
14.03.070  116.046
14.03.080  116.047
14.03.090  116.048
14.03.100  116.049
14.03.110  116.050
14.03.120  116.999
14.04.010  111.001
14.04.020  111.002
14.04.030  111.003;
           111.015
14.04.040  111.016
14.04.050  111.017
14.04.060  111.018
14.04.070  111.030
14.04.080  111.031
14.04.090  111.032
14.04.100  111.033
14.04.110  111.999
14.04.120  111.034
14.05.010  112.015
14.05.020  112.016
14.05.030  112.017
14.05.040  112.018
14.05.050  112.019
14.05.060  112.020
14.05.070  112.021
14.05.080  112.022
14.06.010  116.001
14.06.020  116.002
14.06.030  116.003
14.06.040  116.004
14.06.050  116.005
14.06.060  116.006
14.06.070  116.007
14.06.080  116.008
14.06.090  116.009
14.06.100  116.010
14.06.110  116.011
14.06.120  116.999
14.07.010  112.035
14.07.020  112.036
14.07.030  112.037
14.07.040  112.038
14.07.050  112.039
14.07.060  112.040
14.07.070  112.041
14.07.080  112.042
14.07.090  112.043
14.07.100  112.044
14.07.110  112.045
14.07.120  112.046
14.07.130  112.047
14.07.140  112.999
14.08.010  116.065
14.08.020  116.066
14.08.030  116.067
14.08.040  116.068
14.08.050  116.069
14.08.060  116.999
14.09.010  112.060
14.09.020  112.061
14.09.030  112.062
14.09.040  112.063
14.09.050  112.064
14.09.060  112.065
14.09.070  112.066
14.09.080  112.067
14.09.090  112.068
14.10.010  113.001
14.10.020  113.002
14.10.030  113.003
14.10.040  113.004
14.10.050  113.005
14.11.010  116.080
14.11.020  116.081
14.11.030  116.082
14.11.040  116.083
14.11.050  116.084
14.12.010  117.001
14.12.020  117.002
14.12.030  117.003
14.12.040  117.004
14.12.050  117.005
14.12.060  117.006
14.12.070  117.007
14.12.080  117.008
14.12.090  117.009
14.12.100  117.010
14.12.110  117.011
14.12.120  117.012
14.12.130  117.013
14.12.140  117.999
14.13.010  118.001
14.13.020  118.002
14.13.030  118.003
14.13.040  118.004
14.13.050  118.999
14.14.010  116.095
14.14.020  116.096
14.14.030  116.097
14.14.040  116.098
14.14.050  116.099
14.14.060  116.100
14.14.070  116.101
14.14.080  116.999
14.15.010  114.001
14.15.020  114.002
14.15.030  114.003
14.15.040  114.004
14.15.050  114.005
14.15.060  114.006
14.15.070  114.007
14.15.080  114.008
14.15.090  114.009
14.15.100  114.999
14.16.010  114.020
14.16.020  114.021
14.16.030  114.022
14.16.040  114.023
14.16.050  114.024
14.16.060  114.025
14.16.070  114.025
14.16.080  114.025
14.16.090  114.026
14.16.095  114.027
14.16.100  114.028
14.16.110  114.999
14.17.010  116.115
14.17.020  116.116
14.17.030  116.117
14.17.040  116.999
14.18.010  115.001
14.18.020  115.002
14.18.030  115.003
14.18.040  115.020
14.18.050  115.021
14.18.060  115.022
14.18.070  115.023
14.18.080  115.024
14.18.090  115.025
14.18.100  115.026
14.18.110  115.027
14.18.120  115.028
14.18.130  115.029
14.18.140  115.004
14.18.150  115.005
14.18.160  115.999
14.18.170  115.006
14.18.180  115.007
14.18.190  115.008
15.01.010  71.001
15.01.020  71.002
15.01.030  71.003
15.01.040  71.004
15.01.050  71.005
15.01.060  71.006
15.01.070  71.007
15.01.090  71.008
15.01.100  71.009
15.01.110  71.010;
           71.999
15.01.120  71.011
15.02.010  72.001
15.02.020  72.002
15.02.030  72.003
15.02.040  72.004
15.02.050  72.005;
           72.999
15.02.060  72.006
15.02.070  72.007;
           72.999
15.02.080  72.008
15.02.090  72.009
15.02.100  72.010
15.02.110  72.011
15.02.120  72.012
15.02.130  72.013
15.02.140  72.014
15.02.150  72.015
15.02.160  72.016
15.02.170  72.017
15.02.180  72.018
15.02.190  72.019;
           72.999
15.02.200  72.020
15.03.010  73.015
15.03.020  73.016
15.03.030  73.017
15.03.040  73.018
15.03.050  73.019
15.03.060  73.020
15.04.010  70.001
15.04.020  70.002
15.04.030  70.003
15.04.040  70.004
15.04.050  70.004
15.04.060  70.005
15.04.070  70.006
15.04.080  70.999
15.05      73.001
16.01.010  130.001
16.01.020  130.999
16.01.040  130.002
16.02.010  116.025
16.02.020  116.026
16.02.030  116.027
16.02.040  116.999
16.03.010  131.001;
           131.999
16.03.020  131.002
16.03.030  131.003;
           131.999
16.03.040  131.004
16.03.050  131.005;
           131.999
16.03.060  131.006;
           131.999
16.03.070  131.007;
           131.999
16.03.080  131.008
16.03.090  131.008
16.03.100  131.008
16.03.110  131.008
16.03.120  131.999
16.04.010  92.070
16.04.020  92.071
16.04.030  92.072
16.04.040  92.073
16.04.050  92.074
16.04.060  92.075
16.04.070  92.076
16.04.080  92.999
17.01.010  92.001
17.01.020  92.002
17.01.030  92.003
17.01.040  92.004
17.01.050  92.005
17.01.060  92.006
17.01.070  92.007
17.01.080  92.999
17.02.010  92.020
17.02.020  92.021
17.02.030  92.022
17.03.010  92.035
17.03.020  92.036
17.03.030  92.037
17.03.040  92.038
17.03.050  92.039
17.03.060  92.040
17.03.070  92.041
17.03.080  92.042
17.03.090  92.043
17.03.100  92.044
17.03.110  92.045
17.03.120  92.046
17.03.130  92.047
17.03.140  92.048
17.03.150  92.049
17.03.160  92.050
17.03.170  92.051
17.03.180  92.052
17.03.190  92.053
17.03.200  92.054
17.03.210  92.055
17.03.220  92.056
18.01      91.080
18.02      91.081
18.02.010  91.081
18.02.020  91.081
18.02.030  91.081
18.02.040  91.081
18.02.050  91.081
18.02.060  91.081
18.03.010  91.082
18.03.020  91.082
18.04.010  91.081
18.04.020  91.081
18.04.030  91.081
18.04.040  91.081
18.04.050  91.081
18.04.060  91.081
18.05      91.083
20.01.010  33.015
20.01.020  33.016
22.01.010  52.001
22.01.020  52.002
22.01.030  52.003;
           52.999
22.01.040  52.004
22.01.050  52.005
22.01.060  52.006
22.01.070  52.007
22.01.080  52.008
22.01.090  52.009
22.01.100  52.010
22.01.110  52.011
22.01.120  52.012
22.01.130  52.013
22.01.140  52.014
22.01.150  52.015
22.01.160  52.016
22.01.170  52.017
22.01.180  52.018
22.01.190  52.019
22.01.200  52.020
22.01.210  52.021
22.01.220  52.022
22.01.230  52.023
22.01.240  52.024
22.01.250  52.025
22.01.260  52.026
22.01.270  52.027
22.01.280  52.028
22.01.290  52.029
22.01.300  52.999
22.01.310  52.999
22.02.010  52.040
22.02.020  52.041
22.02.030  52.042
22.02.040  52.043
22.02.050  52.044
22.02.060  52.045
22.02.070  52.046
22.02.080  52.047
22.02.090  52.048
22.02.100  52.049
22.02.110  52.050
22.03.010  52.065
22.03.020  52.066
22.03.030  52.067
22.03.040  52.068
22.04.010  52.080
22.04.020  52.081
22.04.030  52.082
22.04.040  52.083
22.04.050  52.084
22.04.060  52.085
22.05.010  52.100
22.05.020  52.101
22.05.030  52.102
22.05.040  52.103
22.05.050  52.104
22.05.060  52.105
22.05.070  52.106
22.06.010  52.120
22.06.020  52.121
22.06.030  52.122
22.06.040  52.123
22.06.050  52.124
22.06.060  52.125
22.06.070  52.126
22.06.080  52.127
22.06.090  52.128
22.06.100  52.129
22.06.110  52.130
22.06.120  52.131
22.06.130  52.132
22.06.140  52.133
22.07.010  52.145
22.07.020  52.146
22.07.030  52.147
22.08.010  52.160
22.08.090  52.161
22.10.010  52.195
22.10.020  52.196
22.10.030  52.197
22.10.040  52.198
22.10.050  52.199
22.10.060  52.200
22.10.070  52.201
22.10.080  52.202
22.11.010  52.999
22.11.020  52.999
22.11.030  52.999
22.11.040  52.999
22.12.010  52.162
22.12.020  52.163
22.12.030  52.164
22.12.040  52.165
22.13.010  52.180
22.13.020  52.181
22.13.030  52.182
24.01.010  153.001
24.01.020  153.002
24.01.030  153.003;
           153.999
24.01.040  153.004
24.01.050  153.005;
           153.999
24.01.060  153.006
24.01.070  153.007
24.01.080  153.008
24.01.090  153.009
24.01.100  153.010
24.01.110  153.011
24.01.120  153.012
24.01.130  153.013
24.01.140  153.014
24.01.150  153.015;
           153.999
24.01.160  153.016;
           153.999
24.02.010  153.030
24.02.020  153.030
24.02.030  153.031
24.02.040  153.032
24.03.010  153.045
24.03.020  153.046
24.03.030  153.047
24.03.040  153.048
24.03.050  153.049
24.03.060  153.050
24.03.070  153.051
24.03.080  153.052;
           153.999
24.03.090  153.053
24.03.100  153.054
24.03.110  153.055
24.03.120  153.056
24.03.130  153.057
24.03.140  153.058
24.03.150  153.059
24.03.160  153.060
24.03.170  153.061
24.03.180  153.999
24.05.020  154.001
24.05.030  154.002
24.05.040  154.003
24.05.050  154.004
24.05.060  154.005
24.06.010  154.030
24.06.020  154.031
24.06.030  154.032
24.06.040  154.033
24.06.050  154.034
24.06.060  154.035
24.06.070  154.036
24.06.080  154.037
24.06.090  154.038
24.06.100  154.039
24.06.110  154.040
24.06.120  154.041
24.06.130  154.042
24.06.140  154.043
24.07.010  154.060
24.07.020  154.060
24.07.030  154.060
24.07.040  154.061
24.07.050  154.062
24.07.060  154.063
24.07.070  154.064
24.07.090  154.065
24.07.100  154.066
24.07.110  154.067
24.08.010  154.080
24.08.020  154.081
24.08.030  154.082
24.08.050  154.083
24.08.060  154.084
25.01.010  155.001
25.01.020  155.002
25.01.030  155.003
25.01.040  155.004
25.01.050  155.005
25.01.060  155.006
25.01.070  155.007
25.01.080  155.008
25.01.090  155.009
25.01.100  155.010
25.01.110  155.011
25.01.120  155.999
25.01.130  155.012
25.01.140  155.013
25.01.150  155.014
25.01.160  155.015
25.01.170  155.016
25.01.180  155.017
25.02.010  155.030
25.02.020  155.031
25.02.030  155.032
25.02.040  155.033
25.02.050  155.034
25.03.010  155.045
25.03.020  155.046
25.03.030  155.047
25.03.040  155.047
25.03.050  155.048
25.03.060  155.049
25.03.070  155.050
25.03.080  155.050
25.03.090  155.051
25.03.100  155.052
25.03.110  155.053
25.03.120  155.053
25.03.130  155.053
25.03.140  155.053
25.03.150  155.054
25.03.160  155.055
25.03.170  155.056
25.03.180  155.999
25.03.190  155.057
25.04.010  155.070
25.04.020  155.071
25.04.030  155.072
25.04.040  155.073
25.04.050  155.073
25.04.060  155.074
25.04.070  155.076
25.04.080  155.076
25.04.090  155.076
25.04.100  155.077
25.04.110  155.078
25.04.120  155.079
25.04.130  155.080
25.04.140  155.081
25.04.150  155.082
25.04.160  155.083
25.04.170  155.084
25.05.010  155.095
25.05.020  155.096
25.05.030  155.097
25.05.040  155.099
25.05.050  155.100
25.05.060  155.101
25.05.070  155.102
25.05.080  155.103
25.05.090  155.104
25.05.100  155.105
25.05.110  155.105
25.05.120  155.106
25.06.010  155.120
25.06.010  155.121
25.06.030  155.122
25.06.040  155.123
25.06.050  155.124
25.06.060  155.125
25.06.070  155.126
25.06.080  155.127
25.06.090  155.128
25.06.100  155.128
25.06.110  155.128
25.07.010  155.140
25.07.020  155.141
25.07.030  155.142
25.07.040  155.143
25.07.050  155.144
25.07.060  155.145
25.08.010  155.160
25.08.020  155.161
25.08.030  155.162
25.08.040  155.162
25.08.050  155.163
25.08.060  155.163
25.08.070  155.163
25.08.080  155.163
25.08.090  155.164
25.08.100  155.165
25.08.110  155.165
25.09.010  155.180
25.09.020  155.181
25.09.030  155.182
25.09.040  155.183
25.09.050  155.184
25.09.060  155.185
25.09.070  155.186
25.09.080  155.187
25.09.090  155.188
25.10.010  155.200
25.10.020  155.201
25.10.030  155.202
25.10.040  155.203
25.12.010  155.215
25.12.020  155.216
25.12.030  155.217
25.12.040  155.218
25.12.050  155.219
25.12.060  155.220
25.12.070  155.221
25.12.080  155.222
25.12.090  155.223
25.12.100  155.224
25.12.110  155.225
25.13.010  155.240
25.13.020  155.241
25.13.030  155.242
25.13.040  155.243
25.13.050  155.244
25.13.060  155.245
25.14.010  155.260
25.14.020  155.261
25.14.030  155.262
25.14.040  155.263
25.14.050  155.264
25.14.060  155.265
25.14.070  155.266
25.14.080  155.267
25.14.090  155.268
25.14.100  155.269
25.14.110  155.270
25.14.120  155.271
25.14.130  155.272
25.14.140  155.273
25.14.150  155.274
25.14.160  155.275
25.15      155.018
26.01.010  151.001
26.01.020  151.002
26.01.030  151.003
26.01.040  151.004
26.01.050  151.005
26.01.060  151.006
26.01.070  151.007
26.01.080  151.008
26.01.090  151.009
26.01.100  151.010
26.01.120  151.999
28.01.010  51.001
28.01.020  51.002
28.01.030  51.003
28.01.040  51.004
28.01.050  51.005
28.01.060  51.006
28.01.070  51.007
28.01.080  51.008
28.01.090  51.009
28.01.100  51.010
28.01.110  51.011
28.01.120  51.012
28.01.130  51.013
28.01.140  51.014
28.01.150  51.015
28.01.160  51.016
28.01.170  51.017
28.02.010  51.030
28.02.020  51.031
28.02.030  51.032
28.02.040  51.033
28.02.050  51.034
28.02.060  51.035
29.01.010  156.001
29.01.020  156.002
29.01.030  156.003
29.01.040  156.004
29.01.050  156.005
29.01.060  156.006
29.01.070  156.007
29.01.080  156.008
29.01.090  156.009
29.01.100  156.010
29.01.110  156.011
29.01.120  156.012
29.01.130  156.013
29.01.140  156.014
29.01.150  156.015
29.01.160  156.016
29.01.170  156.017
29.01.180  156.999
29.01.190  156.018
29.01.200  156.019
29.02.010  156.020
29.02.020  156.020
29.03.010  156.035
29.03.020  156.036
29.03.030  156.037
29.03.040  156.038
29.03.050  156.039
29.03.060  156.040
29.03.070  156.041
29.03.080  156.042
29.03.090  156.043
29.04.010  156.055
29.04.020  156.056
29.04.030  156.057
29.05.010  156.335
29.05.020  156.336
29.05.030  156.337
29.05.040  156.338
29.05.050  156.339
29.05.060  156.340
29.05.070  156.341
29.05.080  156.342
29.05.090  156.343
29.05.100  156.344
29.05.110  156.345
29.05.130  156.346
29.05.140  156.347
29.05.150  156.348
29.05.160  156.349
29.05.170  156.350
29.05.180  156.351
29.05.190  156.352
29.05.200  156.353
29.05.210  156.354
29.05.220  156.355
29.05.230  156.356
29.05.240  156.357
29.05.250  156.358
29.05.250  156.999
29.05.260  156.359
29.05.270  156.360
29.06.010  156.375
29.06.020  156.376
29.06.030  156.377
29.06.040  156.378
29.06.050  156.379
29.06.060  156.379
29.06.070  156.380
29.06.080  156.381
29.06.090  156.382
29.06.100  156.383
29.06.110  156.384
29.06.120  156.385
29.06.130  156.386
29.06.140  156.387
29.10.010  156.070
29.10.020  156.071
29.10.030  156.072
29.11.010  156.085
29.11.015  156.086
29.11.020  156.087
29.11.030  156.088
29.11.040  156.089
29.11.050  156.090
29.11.060  156.091
29.11.070  156.092
29.11.080  156.093
29.11.090  156.094
29.11.100  156.096
29.11.110  156.096
29.11.120  156.097
29.11.130  156.098
29.12.010  156.110
29.12.020  156.111
29.12.030  156.112
29.12.040  156.113
29.12.050  156.114
29.12.060  156.115
29.12.070  156.116
29.12.080  156.117
29.12.090  156.118
29.12.100  156.119
29.12.110  156.120
29.12.120  156.121
29.13.010  156.135
29.13.020  156.136
29.13.030  156.136
29.13.040  156.138
29.13.050  156.139
29.13.060  156.140
29.13.070  156.141
29.13.080  156.142
29.14.010  156.155
29.14.020  156.156
29.14.030  156.157
29.14.040  156.158
29.14.050  156.159
29.14.060  156.160
29.15.010  156.175
29.15.020  156.176
29.15.030  156.177
29.15.040  156.178
29.15.050  156.179
29.15.060  156.180
29.15.070  156.181
29.16.010  156.195
29.16.020  156.196
29.16.030  156.197
29.16.040  156.198
29.17.010  156.210
29.17.020  156.211
29.17.030  156.212
29.17.040  156.213
29.17.050  156.214
29.18.010  156.230
29.18.020  156.231
29.18.030  156.232
29.18.040  156.233
29.18.050  156.234
29.18.060  156.235
29.18.070  156.236
29.18.070  156.999
29.18.080  156.237
29.18.090  156.238
29.18.100  156.239
29.18.110  156.240
29.18.120  156.241
29.18.130  156.242
29.18.140  156.243
29.19.010  156.255
29.19.020  156.256
29.19.030  156.257
29.19.040  156.258
29.19.050  156.259
29.19.060  156.260
29.19.070  156.261
29.19.080  156.262
29.19.090  156.263
29.19.100  156.264
29.19.110  156.265
29.19.120  156.266
29.21.010  156.280
29.21.020  156.281
29.22.010  156.295
29.22.020  156.296
29.22.030  156.297
29.22.040  156.298
29.22.050  156.299
29.22.060  156.300
29.22.070  156.301
29.22.080  156.302
29.22.090  156.303
29.22.100  156.304
29.23.010  156.320
29.23.020  156.321
29.23.030  156.322
29.23.040  156.323
29.24.010  156.400
29.24.020  156.401
29.24.030  156.402
29.24.040  156.403
29.24.050  156.404
29.24.060  156.405
29.24.070  156.406
29.24.080  156.407
29.24.090  156.408
29.24.100  156.409
29.24.110  156.410
29.24.120  156.411
29.24.130  156.412
29.25.010  156.425
29.25.020  156.426
29.25.030  156.427
29.25.040  156.428
29.25.050  156.429
29.25.060  156.430
29.25.070  156.431
29.25.080  156.432
29.25.090  156.433
29.26.010  156.445
29.26.020  156.446
29.26.030  156.447
29.26.040  156.448
29.26.050  156.449
29.26.060  156.450
29.26.070  156.451
29.26.080  156.452
29.26.090  156.453
29.26.100  156.454
29.26.110  156.455
29.26.120  156.456
29.26.130  156.457
29.26.140  156.458
29.26.150  156.459
29.26.170  156.461
29.26.180  156.462
29.26.190  156.463
29.26.200  156.464
29.26.210  156.465
29.27.010  156.480
29.27.020  156.481
29.27.030  156.482
29.27.040  156.483
29.27.050  156.484
29.27.060  156.485
29.27.070  156.486
29.27.080  156.487
29.27.090  156.488
29.27.100  156.489
29.27.110  156.490
29.27.110  156.491
29.28.010  156.505
29.28.020  156.506
29.28.030  156.507
29.28.040  156.508
29.28.050  156.509
29.28.060  156.510
29.28.070  156.511
29.28.080  156.512
29.28.090  156.513
29.28.100  156.514
29.28.110  156.515
29.28.120  156.516
29.28.130  156.517
29.29.010  156.530
29.29.020  156.531
29.29.030  156.532
29.29.040  156.533
29.29.050  156.534
29.30.010  156.545
29.30.020  156.546
29.30.040  156.547
29.31.010  156.560
29.31.020  156.561
29.31.030  156.562
29.31.040  156.563
29.32.010  156.575
29.32.020  156.576
29.32.030  156.577
29.32.040  156.578
29.32.050  156.579
29.32.060  156.580
29.32.065  156.581
29.32.070  156.582
29.32.080  156.583
29.32.090  156.584
29.32.100  156.585
29.32.110  156.586
29.32.120  156.587
29.32.130  156.588
29.32.140  156.589
29.32.150  156.591
29.33.010  156.605
29.33.020  156.606
29.33.030  156.607
29.33.040  156.608
29.33.050  156.609
29.33.060  156.610
29.34.010  156.625
29.34.020  156.626
29.35.010  156.640
29.35.020  156.641
29.35.030  156.642
29.35.040  156.643
29.35.050  156.643
29.35.060  156.644
29.35.060  156.645
29.36.010  156.660
29.36.020  156.661
29.36.030  156.662
29.36.040  156.663
29.36.050  156.664
29.37.010  156.675
29.37.020  156.676
29.37.030  156.677
29.37.040  156.678
29.37.050  156.679
29.37.060  156.680
33.01.010  152.001
33.01.020  152.002
33.01.030  152.003
33.01.040  152.004
33.01.050  152.005
33.01.060  152.006
33.01.070  152.007
33.01.080  152.008
33.01.090  152.009
33.01.100  152.010
33.01.110  152.011
33.01.120  152.012
33.01.130  152.013
33.01.140  152.014
33.01.150  152.015
33.01.160  152.016
33.01.170  152.017
33.02.010  152.030
33.02.020  152.031
33.02.030  152.032
33.02.040  152.033
33.02.050  152.034
33.02.060  152.035
33.02.070  152.036
33.02.080  152.037
33.02.090  152.038
33.02.100  152.039
33.02.110  152.040
33.02.120  152.041
33.02.130  152.042
33.02.140  152.043
33.02.150  152.044
33.02.170  152.045
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
Exhibit 29.22 - -         156.196
Exhibit 29.23 - -         156.324
568           1-15-1987   156.114
97-02         1-9-1997    51.030—
                          51.035
97-08         3-20-1997   156.160
97-11         3-20-1997   156.112
97-16         7-31-1997   131.002
97-22         10-16-1997  156.210—
                          156.215
97-25         10-16-1997  72.007;
                          72.999
98-01         1-8-1998    156.626
98-08         3-5-1998    31.001
98-11         3-19-1998   156.425;
                          156.428
                          115.001—
                          115.008;
98-16         4-23-1998   115.020—
                          115.029;
                          115.999
98-26         6-11-1998   156.155
98-37         8-20-1998   152.001—
                          152.017
                          153.045—
98-38         8-20-1998   153.061;
                          153.999
98-42         9-17-1998   156.118
98-46         9-24-1998   71.010;
                          71.999
98-56         12-10-1998  51.034
99-25         9-23-1999   90.001
99-32         11-29-1999  131.003;
                          131.999
99-35         12-16-1999  156.626
00-03         1-20-2000   156.505—
                          156.517
00-05         1-20-2000   156.070
00-11         4-16-2000   156.089;
                          156.112
00-13A        5-4-2000    156.088;
                          156.112
                          154.001—
00-22         6-1-2000    154.005;
                          154.030—
                          154.043
00-23         7-6-2000    72.019;
                          72.999
00-32         8-17-2000   156.545
00-37         12-7-2000   93.033
01-13         2-15-2001   156.561
01-14         2-15-2001   156.530—
                          156.534
01-15         2-15-2001   156.089
01-16         2-15-2001   156.112
01-17         2-15-2001   156.136
01-21         4-19-2001   33.065—
                          33.069
01-22         4-19-2001   156.546;
                          156.547
01-27         7-19-2001   110.019;
                          116.065
01-30         7-19-2001   72.018
01-31         8-16-2001   156.112
02-01         1-10-2002   112.039;
                          117.002
02-02         1-10-2002   110.030
02-10         3-2-2002    110.022
02-08         3-7-2002    156.546
02-10         3-21-2002   110.020
02-17         6-20-2002   93.045
02-22         6-27-2002   156.089;
                          156.547
                          90.001;
                          90.015—
                          90.021;
                          90.035—
                          90.042;
                          90.055—
02-25         8-15-2002   90.062;
                          90.075—
                          90.078;
                          90.090—
                          90.096;
                          90.110—
                          90.114;
                          90.999
02-27A        9-19-2002   156.089;
                          156.112
02-30         11-21-2002  110.002
03-06         2-20-2003   156.112
03-16         3-3-2003    156.626
03-18         5-1-2003    156.089
03-25         6-12-2003   156.112
03-33         8-28-2003   32.027;
                          32.031
03-37         9-18-2003   50.006
03-46         10-30-2003  156.136
03-48         12-18-2003  153.006
04-03         1-15-2004   156.155;
                          156.547
04-06         2-19-2004   31.020
04-09         3-4-2004    156.575;
                          156.576
                          156.155;
04-10         3-4-2004    156.280;
                          156.281
04-21         8-5-2004    153.014
                          110.017;
04-31         11-4-2004   110.019;
                          116.100
05-02         2-3-2005    156.117
                          115.001—
                          115.008;
05-04         2-3-2005    115.020—
                          115.029;
                          115.999
05-17         7-7-2005    156.112
06-17         7-7-2005    156.020
05-22         9-29-2005   91.056;
                          91.066
05-24         11-17-2005  90.090
05-28         12-15-2005  110.002;
                          110.017
06-04         4-20-2006   156.020
07-03         3-15-2007   31.022;
                          31.050
07-04         3-15-2007   131.001;
                          131.999
                          72.001;
07-05         3-29-2007   72.007;
                          72.999
                          156.001—
                          156.020;
                          156.035—
                          156.043;
                          156.055—
                          156.057;
                          156.070—
                          156.072;
                          156.110—
                          156.121;
                          156.155—
                          156.160;
                          156.175—
07-13         7-19-2007   156.181;
                          156.280;
                          156.281;
                          156.335—
                          156.360;
                          156.375—
                          156.387;
                          156.480—
                          156.491;
                          156.625;
                          156.626;
                          156.675—
                          156.680;
                          156.999
                          156.230—
07-17         8-30-2007   156.243;
                          156.999
07-19         11-1-2007   131.005;
                          131.999
                          92.001—
                          92.007;
                          92.020—
                          92.022;
08-04         3-20-2008   92.035—
                          92.056;
                          92.070—
                          92.076;
                          92.999
08-15         9-18-2008   73.001
08-20         11-20-2008  156.005
09-02         2-19-2009   156.020
                          156.135—
09-03         2-19-2009   156.140;
                          156.142;
                          156.143
09-07         5-7-2009    110.020
09-11         8-6-2009    30.042
09-13         10-29-2009  52.023
09-17         11-19-2009  33.067
09-18         12-3-2009   156.353
10-01         1-21-2010   156.281
10-08         7-29-2010   156.156
10-15         10-7-2010   156.112
11-05         3-17-2011   50.075—
                          50.078
11-01         4-7-2011    50.025—
                          50.027
                          90.041;
11-11         5-19-2011   156.111;
                          156.112;
                          156.358
11-12         5-19-2011   156.121
11-16         6-1-2011    156.136
11-17         6-1-2011    31.020
11-27         10-6-2011   156.136
                          156.020;
11-30         12-1-2011   156.605—
                          156.610
11-32         12-1-2011   30.055—
                          30.066
12-01         1-19-2012   156.136
12-03         1-19-2012   156.136
12-06         3-30-2012   156.454
12-10         8-2-2012    156.156
                          156.020;
12-16         12-6-2012   156.112;
                          156.136;
                          156.359
13-01         1-17-2013   156.358
13-04         3-7-2013    156.455
                          90.042;
13-09         3-21-2013   156.112;
                          156.136
13-13         4-18-2013   156.281
13-14         4-18-2013   156.295
                          93.001;
                          93.002;
13-23         11-21-2013  93.015—
                          93.033;
                          93.045—
                          93.049
14-05         5-1-2014    156.156
14-06         5-1-2014    156.136
14-10         9-18-2014   156.020
14-11         10-2-2014   156.136
14-12         10-2-2014   156.157
14-13         11-6-2014   152.001;
                          152.006
                          156.575;
                          156.576;
14-14         11-6-2014   156.580;
                          156.581;
                          156.583;
                          156.588
14-15         11-6-2014   156.490
                          156.112;
14-16         12-18-2014  156.117;
                          156.118;
                          156.120
15-02         1-15-2015   156.353
15-04         3-29-2015   156.136
                          91.001—
15-08         5-7-2015    91.007;
                          91.040—
                          91.043
15-12         7-16-2015   156.136;
                          156.490
                          33.001;
                          33.030—
                          33.033;
15-15         9-3-2015    33.045—
                          33.050;
                          33.065—
                          33.069;
                          33.999
15-18         10-15-2015  91.002—
                          91.007
16-01         1-21-2016   156.581
16-06         5-19-2016   156.136
16-08         6-16-2016   116.001
                          90.001;
16-13         9-1-2016    90.035;
                          90.036;
                          90.039
06-18         11-3-2016   116.001
15-18         11-3-2016   112.060—
                          112.068
16-15         11-3-2016   156.463
16-16         11-3-2016   156.020
16-18         11-3-2016   116.009
17-08         3-16-2017   156.485;
                          156.490
17-09         3-16-2017   156.136
17-11         6-15-2017   33.067
17-12         8-3-2017    92.040
                          92.006;
18-03         2-15-2018   92.022;
                          92.040
18-05         5-17-2018   34.001—
                          34.013
18-07         5-17-2018   156.455
29.37         6-7-2018    156.676
18-09         8-2-2018    91.056;
                          91.061
18-15         10-4-2018   156.175—
                          156.181
18-17         10-4-2018   50.003
18-16         10-18-2018  156.320—
                          156.323
19-02         1-20-2019   92.999
19-03         2-7-2019    92.040
19-04         2-7-2019    131.007;
                          131.999
19-06         2-15-2019   152.030—
                          152.045
19-15         6-6-2019    156.210—
                          156.214
19-12         8-1-2019    156.451
19-13         8-1-2019    50.015
19-16         9-19-2019   91.066
19-19         11-7-2019   153.016;
                          153.999
                          156.020;
                          156.089;
                          156.112;
19-20         11-7-2019   156.136;
                          156.156;
                          156.345;
                          156.485
19-23         11-21-2019  90.035
                          154.002—
                          154.004;
                          154.030—
                          154.033;
                          154.037;
20-01         1-2-2020    154.038;
                          154.040—
                          154.042;
                          154.061—
                          154.067;
                          154.080—
                          154.084
20-02         3-5-2020    91.007
                          155.001—
                          155.018;
                          155.030—
                          155.034;
                          155.045—
                          155.057;
                          155.070—
                          155.084;
                          155.095—
                          155.106;
                          155.120—
                          155.128;
                          155.140—
20-03         3-19-2020   155.145;
                          155.160—
                          155.165;
                          155.180—
                          155.188;
                          155.200—
                          155.203;
                          155.215—
                          155.225;
                          155.240—
                          155.245;
                          155.260—
                          155.275;
                          155.999
20-04         3-19-2020   30.066
20-05         4-2-2020    156.156
20-10         6-4-2020    113.001—
                          113.005
20-12         7-2-2020    156.342
20-13         7-2-2020    91.020—
                          91.025
20-17         9-3-2020    153.016;
                          153.999
20-19         11-5-2020   91.003—
                          91.007
                          114.020—
20-20         11-5-2020   114.028;
                          114.999
20-21         11-19-2020  71.011
21-02         3-18-2021   156.136
                          94.001—
21-04         4-1-2021    94.008;
                          94.999
21-05         5-20-2021   32.008;
                          32.010
                          94.020—
21-06         6-15-2021   94.023;
                          94.999
21-07         6-17-2021   156.485
21-08         6-17-2021   156.212
21-12         8-5-2021    156.360
21-15         11-15-2021  91.007
21-15         11-18-2021  91.003;
                          91.006
21-16         12-16-2021  156.110—
                          156.121
21-18         12-16-2021  32.009
                          156.089;
22-01         2-17-2022   156.112;
                          156.136;
                          156.360
                          156.480;
22-02         3-3-2022    156.485;
                          156.488;
                          156.490
                          153.001—
22-03         3-3-2022    153.016;
                          153.999
22-05         3-17-2022   156.119;
                          156.344
22-09         5-5-2022    156.321
22-11         6-16-2022   116.025
22-13         7-7-2022    91.006
22-14         7-7-2022    92.054
22-16         8-11-2022   156.085—
                          156.098
                          52.001—
                          52.029;
                          52.040—
                          52.050;
                          52.065—
                          52.066;
                          52.080—
                          52.085;
                          52.100—
                          52.106;
22-17         8-18-2022   52.120—
                          52.133;
                          52.145—
                          52.147;
                          52.160—
                          52.165;
                          52.180—
                          52.182;
                          52.195—
                          52.202;
                          52.999
22-10         9-1-2022    156.346
22-19         9-1-2022    156.346
22-20         9-1-2022    50.075—
                          50.078
22-21         9-15-2022   91.080
22-22         10-6-2022   156.195—
                          156.198
22-25         12-1-2022   156.156
23-02         1-19-2023   50.075
23-03         1-19-2023   113.003;
                          113.004
23-04         1-19-2023   30.036
                          90.035;
                          90.036;
23-05         2-16-2023   90.039;
                          90.041;
                          90.042;
                          90.090
                          111.001—
                          111.003;
                          111.015—
23-07         3-16-2023   111.018;
                          111.030—
                          111.034;
                          111.999
23-08         4-6-2023    156.136
23-09         4-6-2023    156.156
23-10         4-6-2023    155.140—
                          155.145
                          31.020;
23-11         5-4-2023    31.024;
                          31.040
23-13         7-6-2023    113.001—
                          113.005
23-17         7-20-2023   91.059
23-18         8-3-2023    33.067
23-19         8-17-2023   91.005—
                          91.007
23-21         9-21-2023   113.002
23-25         11-2-2023   156.360
                          72.001,
                          72.007,
                          72.021—
23-26         12-7-2023   72.023,
                          153.015,
                          153.016,
                          153.999
24-01         1-18-2024   Adopting Ordinance
                          156.020,
24-02         1-18-2024   156.116—
                          156.119,
                          156.342
                          155.003,
                          155.005,
                          155.010—
                          155.013,
                          155.016,
                          155.018,
                          155.030—
                          155.034,
                          155.046,
                          155.047,
                          155.048,
                          155.050—
                          155.053,
                          155.056—
                          155.059,
                          155.071—
                          155.076,
                          155.078,
24-03         2-1-2024    155.079,
                          155.082—
                          155.085,
                          155.095—
                          155.106,
                          155.120,
                          155.123,
                          155.124,
                          155.125,
                          155.142,
                          155.145,
                          155.162,
                          155.163,
                          155.165,
                          155.180,
                          155.183,
                          155.241—
                          155.244,
                          155.261—
                          155.264
24-04         3-7-2024    156.320—
                          156.324
                          70.999,
24-07         4-4-2024    90.999,
                          116.999,
                          156.999
24-12         5-2-2024    156.200—
                          156.204
24-16         6-6-2024    155.263
24-18         6-4-2024    91.055—
                          91.066
24-21         6-20-2024   156.360
                          92.002—
                          92.004,
                          92.006,
24-22         7-18-2024   92.022,
                          92.037,
                          92.039,
                          92.050
24-23         8-1-2024    92.056
24-24         9-19-2024   30.017
                          156.020,
24-26         9-19-2024   156.136,
                          156.156
                          155.276,
24-28         11-21-2024  156.020,
                          156.021
24-33         12-5-2024   34.001—
                          34.013
                          155.030,
                          155.047,
                          155.050,
                          155.057,
25-01         1-16-2025   155.058,
                          155.071,
                          155.083,
                          155.096,
                          155.141—
                          155.145
25-02         1-16-2025   156.112,
                          156.358
                          154.001—
                          154.005,
                          154.030—
25-03         1-16-2025   154.043,
                          154.060—
                          154.067,
                          154.080—
                          154.084 
25-04         2-6-2025    156.020,
                          156.448
25-15         7-17-2025   156.361,
                          156.447
25-16         8-21-2025   50.075—
                          50.078
                          156.020,
                          156.089,
25-17         8-21-2025   156.112,
                          156.136,
                          156.156
                         
 
 
