CITY CODE
of
DRAPER CITY, UTAH
Code current through:
Ord. 1680, passed October 7, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Draper City, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 1680, passed October 7, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
   American Legal Publishing
   Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinance Notifications are posted at affected code chapters and sections.
These ordinances have been passed, but have not been incorporated in the actual
code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning the ordinances listed.
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL CITY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-1-010: Incorporation
1-1-020: Classification
1-1-030: City Seal
1-1-040: City Logo
1-1-050: Other City Insignia
1-1-060: Unauthorized Use
1-1-010: INCORPORATION:
Draper City was incorporated as a municipal corporation on February 22, 1978,
as a political subdivision of the state of Utah, and may be referred to as
"Draper City, a municipal corporation".
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-2019)
1-1-020: CLASSIFICATION:
Draper City is classified as a "third class city" under Utah Code Annotated
section
10-2-301, as amended. Any change in classification of the city shall be made
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-2019)
1-1-030: CITY SEAL:
A.   The corporate seal of Draper City, established and declared to be the seal
of the city, is circular in form with the words "City of Draper, State of Utah"
inscribed in an outer circle, and the words "Corporate Seal 1978" inscribed in
the center.
B.   The city recorder shall be the custodian of the official seal of the city,
and is authorized to use the city seal on any ordinance, resolution, honoraria,
certificate, or any other instrument necessary to authenticate official city
documents or to indicate institutional sanction for official, legal and
ceremonial purposes.
C.   The city seal shall only be used for the official business of Draper City.
D.   Draper City may amend the city seal as necessary.
E.   
Figure 1.1.030 is a facsimile of the city seal. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-
15-2019; Ord. 1554, 8-2-2022)
Figure 1.1.030
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5183.jpg]
 
1-1-040: CITY LOGO:
A.   The official city logo of Draper City shall include mountain peaks with
the stylized words "DRAPER" and "UTAH" as demonstrated in
Figure 1.1.040.
B.   Additional official styles of the city logo are represented in Figures
1.1.041,
1.1.042,
1.1.043, and
1.1.044.
C.   Draper City may amend and adopt different stylized versions of the city
logo and additional city logos as necessary.
D.   The Draper City communications director shall be the custodian of the city
logo. (Ord. 1554, 8-2-2022)
Figure 1.1.040
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5181.jpg]
 
 
Figure 1.1.041                            Figure 1.1.042
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/ 28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5179.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5177.jpg]
ONE-COLOR                                 GRAYSCALE
Use as an alternative option. For         Use a three-tint grayscale as as
apparel, the color can change to match    alternative option for any application.
the color of the apparel.
Figure 1.1.043                            Figure 1.1.044
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/ 28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5175.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5173.jpg]
WHITE                                     WITHOUT UTAH
Use as an alternative option when placing Use when the application is too small
the logo on a dark or colored background. (e.g. small embroidery patch, badge reel,
                                          etc.)
 
1-1-050: OTHER CITY INSIGNIA:
A.   City insignia means any other official visual representations of Draper
City, including the city flag, photographs on the city website, and other such
visual representations that the city may adopt.
B.   The Draper City communications director shall be the custodian of all
other city insignia. (Ord. 1554, 8-2-2022)
1-1-060: UNAUTHORIZED USE:
A.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to make use of the city seal, the
city logo, or city insignia, or any portion, facsimile, mock-up, or
reproduction thereof, or to make or use of any design, symbol, emblem, or
similar device that is an imitation of the city seal, city logo, or city
insignia that is designed or likely to confuse, deceive, or mislead the public.
B.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to make use of the city seal, the
city logo, or other city insignia without the express, written permission of
the proper custodian.
C.   Unauthorized use of the city seal, the city logo, or other city insignia
is a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 1554, 8-2-2022)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-2-010: Title And Citation
1-2-020: Amendments
1-2-030: Accrued Rights
1-2-040: Continuation Of Existing Ordinances
1-2-050: Omission Of General Law Not Waiver
1-2-060: Severability Clause
1-2-070: Definitions
1-2-080: Rules Of Construction
1-2-090: Computation Of Time
1-2-100: Violation
1-2-010: TITLE AND CITATION:
The ordinances set forth herein shall be known as the DRAPER CITY MUNICIPAL
CODE or DCMC and may be so cited. Any provision of state law adopted herein by
reference shall be cited.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-020: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinances adding to, deleting from, or altering any part of this code
shall constitute an amendment thereto.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-030: ACCRUED RIGHTS:
Nothing in this code or any amendment thereto shall affect any act done, any
right accrued, any penalty incurred, any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending, or the tenure of office of any person holding office, at the time when
this code or any amendment thereto takes effect, nor shall the repeal of any
ordinance hereby have the right of reviving any ordinances already repealed or
superseded, unless the ordinance containing the amendment or repealer indicates
otherwise.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-040: CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions contained in this code shall be construed as continuations
thereof and not as new enactments if they are the same as those ordinances
existing at the time of the effective date of this code.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-050: OMISSION OF GENERAL LAW NOT WAIVER:
The omission to specify or enumerate in this code those provisions of the
general law applicable to all cities shall not be construed as a waiver of the
benefits of any such provision.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-060: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any title, chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, invalid, void or unlawful
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407,
10-15-19)
1-2-070: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise specified in another title of this code, the following words
and terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CITY: Draper City.
CITY COUNCIL: The Draper City council.
CODE: Draper City municipal code.
EMPLOYEES: Shall mean any person working for the city for pay in any appointed,
exempt, full-time, part-time, probationary, seasonal, or temporary capacity.
City Council members are not considered employees.
OFFICERS: Shall have the same mean meaning as appointed or elected officers as
defined by Utah Code Annotated, 10-3-1303 as amended.
ORDINANCES: The ordinances codified herein.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, organization, trust, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, or other entity that may accrue rights
or be subject to jurisdiction within the State of Utah.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-080: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction or interpretation of this code, all ordinances of the city
and any amendments thereto, the following rules of construction shall be
observed when necessary or applicable:
A.   General Rule: All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common use and understanding of the language, but technical
words and phrases as may have acquired a particular meaning in the law or by
trade use shall be construed and understood according to such particular
meaning.
B.   Gender: Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
words used in the feminine gender shall include the masculine.
C.   Number: The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number
shall include the singular.
D.   Tense: The present tense shall include the future and the future tense
shall include the present.
E.   Shall: "Shall" is a mandatory term.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-090: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Unless stated otherwise, a period of time specified in this title shall be
calendar days. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then the last day shall be the next following
business day. A deadline shall be considered on the date in question at the end
of the business day which shall be no later than at 5:00 p.m. as determined by
Draper City's Network Time Protocol.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
1-2-100: VIOLATION:
A.   Penalty: Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who violates
any provision of this code shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall
be subject to fines provided in Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-204, as
amended, and/or imprisonment as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-
301, as amended.
B.   Continuing Violation: In instances where the violation of this code is a
continuing violation, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day
in which the violation occurs or continues.
C.   Other Relief: This section shall not limit the authority of the court to
impose any other sanction or order any other relief as may be appropriate and
lawful under the laws of the state of Utah.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1407, 10-15-19)
TITLE 2
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
CHAPTER 1
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-1-010: Form Of Government
2-1-020: Governing Body
2-1-030: Powers And Duties
2-1-040: Meetings
2-1-010: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
Draper City operates under a six (6) member council form of government with an
appointed city manager pursuant to provisions of the Utah Code Annotated, as
amended. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-1-020: GOVERNING BODY:
The governing body of Draper City shall be a council composed of six (6)
members, one of whom shall be the mayor and five (5) of whom shall be council
members, which council is hereinafter referred to as the "city council". (1994
Code)
2-1-030: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city council is the legislative body of the city and shall exercise the
legislative powers and perform the legislative duties and functions of the city
and may perform such other functions as may be specifically provided or
necessarily implied by law. The city council may also exercise any executive or
administrative power and perform or supervise the performance of any executive
or administrative duty or function that has not been given to the mayor under
state law or removed from the mayor in accordance with and subject to the
provisions set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3b-303, as amended.
(1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-1-040: MEETINGS:
A.   Meetings Generally: Meetings of the city council shall be governed by the
rules and procedures adopted by the city council by resolution.
B.   Electronic Meetings: For purposes of the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act
and pursuant to the Utah Code Annotated as amended, the city council may hold
an electronic meeting if a majority of a quorum of the council participates
electronically and one (1) member of the council is physically present at the
location from which the electronic meeting originates. However if a
proclamation of local, state or national emergency is in effect, all members of
the council may participate remotely in an electronic meeting. (Ord. 1125, 10-
7-2014; amd. Ord. 1429, 3-19-2020)
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR
SECTION:
2-2-020: Powers Of Mayor As Member Of The City Council
2-2-030: Restrictions On Mayor
2-2-040: Budget Officer
2-2-020: POWERS OF MAYOR AS MEMBER OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
A.   Presiding Officer: The mayor shall be the chair and preside at all
meetings of the city council.
B.   No Vote: The mayor shall not vote at meetings of the city council, except
in the following cases:
1.   On each matter for which there is a tie vote of the other council members
present at a council meeting; or
2.    When the council is voting on:
a.   Whether to appoint or dismiss the city manager; or
b.   An ordinance that enlarges or restricts the mayor's powers, duties, or
functions.
C.   No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the city council
unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute.
D.   Mayor Pro Tempore:
1.   In the absence of the mayor or because of his or her inability or refusal
to act, the city council may elect a member of the city council to preside as
mayor pro tempore, who shall have all of the powers and duties of the mayor
during his or her absence or disability.
2.   The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in the minutes of the
city council meeting at which he or she is elected.
3.   Any member of the city council elected as mayor pro tempore shall still
retain his or her power and authority as a member of the council and shall be
entitled to vote as a member of the city council on all matters.
4.   The mayor pro tempore may be elected and so designated for the duration of
up to one (1) calendar year.
E.   Authority To Represent: The mayor shall possess the authority to
officially represent the city council in all policy making and legislative
matters with other public and private agencies. However, such authority shall
not be construed to permit the mayor to exercise any power delegated to the
city council unless specifically authorized in advance by the city council
including entering into any binding commitments, contracts or agreements which
involve the encumbrance of the expenditure of city funds except as specifically
authorized in advance by the city council in accordance with procedures set
forth in the Utah Uniform Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act, as amended. (1994
Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-2-030: RESTRICTIONS ON MAYOR:
The mayor may not serve as the city recorder or as the city treasurer. (1994
Code)
2-2-040: BUDGET OFFICER:
The mayor shall serve as the Draper City budget officer or may appoint some
person to serve as the budget officer, with the approval of the city council.
(Ord. 455, 10-2-2011)
CHAPTER 3
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
2-3-010: Office Created
2-3-020: Appointment
2-3-030: Residence
2-3-040: Condition And Term
2-3-050: Compensation
2-3-060: Duties, Control And Discretion
2-3-070: Limitations
2-3-080: Acting City Manager
2-3-010: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of city manager has been heretofore established and shall continue
in force and effect as an appointed office of the city. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord.
1413, 2-11-2020)
2-3-020: APPOINTMENT:
The city council shall appoint a qualified person to the office of city
manager. The term of office, salary, benefits, duties and termination of the
city manager shall be set out in written contract prior to the time of
appointment, which contract shall be negotiated and approved by written
resolution of the city council. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-3-030: RESIDENCE:
The city manager need not be a resident or a qualified elector of Draper City
at the time of his or her appointment or thereafter. (1994 Code)
2-3-040: CONDITION AND TERM:
The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city
council may set the terms and conditions of employment of the city manager by
duly executed contract. The city manager may be removed and the employment
contract terminated with or without cause by a majority vote of the city
council. (Ord. 674, 1-10-2006) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-3-050: COMPENSATION:
The salary, benefits, and other compensation of the city manager shall be set
from time to time by the city council. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-3-060: DUTIES, CONTROL AND DISCRETION:
A.   Generally: The city manager shall administer the day to day operations of
the city and its services according to the policies and programs established by
the city council. The city manager shall at all times be under the control and
supervision of the city council and shall answer directly to the city council
in all matters relating to the city, its employees, functions, relationships,
activities and status.
B.   Specific Duties: Subject to the limits set forth herein, the following
duties and the authority to perform them are hereby delegated to the city
manager.
1.   Administrative Officer: The city manager shall be the chief administrative
officer of the city under the advice and consent of the city council and
subject to those powers specifically reserved for the mayor by ordinance or
state law.
2.   Personnel Administrator: The city manager shall be the personnel
administrator to whom all employees of the city shall report and shall be
responsible for implementing and enforcing the personnel policies of the city.
3.   Employees: The city manager shall recommend to the mayor the appointment
of all appointed officers and department heads. The city manager may remove all
appointed officers and department heads after first giving notice to the city
council. The city manager shall have authority to hire and remove all other
city employees. The city manager shall review the status and performance of any
personnel being considered for discharge, transfer, or demotion from employment
with the city.
4.   Signature Authority: The city manager shall have the authority to sign all
contracts on behalf of the city provided:
a.   The contract has been approved by the city council, funds to be spent
under the contract have been specifically appropriated through the city's
budget process, or the contract does not require the expenditure of city funds;
and
b.   The contract does not involve the conveyance of any real property interest
of the city.
5.   Supervise Departments: The city manager shall direct and supervise the
administration of all city departments, offices and agencies, except as
otherwise provided by the city council.
6.   Inventory Property: The city manager or designee shall keep or cause to be
kept a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city and
its location. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the care
and custody of all such property, including equipment, buildings, parks and all
other city property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body
for care and control.
7.   Purchasing And Claims: The city manager or designee shall act as
purchasing agent for the city, and as such shall implement and enforce all
provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to purchasing. The city
manager or designee may compromise and settle any claim by and against the city
if the payment in compromise is one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or
less. The city manager shall, on a periodic basis, advise the city council
concerning pending claims against the city and those which have been settled.
8.   Council Meetings: The city manager should attend all meetings of the city
council with the right to take part in the discussion and to recommend to the
city council adoption of such measures as the city manager may deem necessary
or expedient, but not to vote.
9.   Budget Preparation: The city manager shall oversee the city budget officer
in preparation of the city budget in the event that the city manager is not
designated as the budget officer. The city manager shall also ensure that all
executive procedures and activities of the city are in compliance with the
provisions of the Utah Uniform Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act.
10.   Review Contracts: The city manager shall review and make recommendations
to the city council concerning all proposed contracts to which the city may be
a party, and shall see that the terms of any contract to which the city is a
party are fully performed by all parties thereto.
11.   Propose Plans And Programs: The city manager shall propose plans and
programs concerning the development, operation and needs of the city and submit
such plans to the city council to be approved and developed as policy.
12.   Implement Policy: The city manager shall implement all policy changes and
directives of the mayor and the city council through regularly scheduled staff
meetings.
13.   Management Controls: The city manager shall set performance standards and
exercise managerial control to ensure that the city government is functioning
in the most efficient and effective manner.
14.   Organization: The city manager shall recommend creation and organization
of all necessary departments, divisions, bureaus and offices necessary for the
government of the city to the city council for its approval prior to
implementation.
15.   Records: The city manager shall examine the books, records, and official
papers of the city's departments and offices.
16.   Emergencies: The city manager shall notify the city council and the mayor
of any emergency existing in any department or matter under his or her
supervision.
17.   Additional Duties: The city manager shall have such other powers and
shall perform such other duties and obligations as may be required of him or
her by state law or by ordinance, resolution, or policy of the city council.
(Ord. 398, 10-3-2000; amd. Ord. 455, 10-2-2001; Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017; Ord. 1275,
8-29-2017; Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-3-070: LIMITATIONS:
A.   Other Employment: The City Manager shall not accept any outside employment
in addition to employment by the City without prior written approval of the
City Council.
B.   Powers Of Mayor Not Delegated: The legislative and judicial powers of the
Mayor, his or her position as Chairperson of the City Council, and any ex
officio position he or she may hold, shall not be delegated to the City
Manager. (1994 Code)
2-3-080: ACTING CITY MANAGER:
In the absence of the City Manager or because of his or her inability or
refusal to act, the City Council may appoint by majority vote a qualified
person to serve as acting City Manager to perform and undertake the duties and
responsibilities of the City Manager with such authority as is vested in the
office. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
LEGISLATION
SECTION:
2-4-010: Ordinances
2-4-020: Resolutions
2-4-030: Regulations
2-4-040: Public Records
2-4-050: Rules Of Construction
2-4-060: Constitutional Taking Issues
2-4-010: ORDINANCES:
A.   Legislative Power: Except as otherwise specifically provided, the city
council shall exercise its legislative powers through ordinances.
B.   Extent of Power: The city council may pass any ordinance to regulate,
require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity, business, conduct
or condition authorized by law.
C.   Form: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall contain the
following, in substantially the following order and form:
1.   A number;
2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the ordinance;
3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
4.   An ordaining clause which states: "Be it ordained by the City Council of
Draper City:";
5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of the
ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance which
prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of a municipal
ordinance;
7.   When a penalty for a violation of the ordinance includes any possibility
of imprisonment, a statement that the municipality is required, under Utah Code
Annotated, as amended, to provide for indigent defense services;
8.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the date
when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this chapter;
9.   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance;
10.   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and fix the seal of
Draper City; and
11.   When applicable, a citation to provisions of this code which are amended
by the ordinance.
D.   Improper Form: No ordinance shall be void or unlawful by reason of its
failure to conform to the provisions of divisions C1, 2, 3, 4, or 11 of this
section.
E.   Effective Date: Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance, ordinances
shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty
(30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner.
F.   Signed: Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed
by the mayor, or if he or she is absent, by the mayor pro tempore or by a
quorum of the council members, before taking effect.
G.   Recording: Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be
recorded by the city recorder in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
before taking effect. The city recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if
the city council has not already done so, and shall make or cause to be made a
certificate stating the date of passage and the date of publication or posting
of the ordinance, as required.
H.   Publication:
1.   All ordinances, except those enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 10-3-
706 through 10-3-710, as amended, shall be deposited in the office of the city
recorder and a short summary of the ordinance shall be posted on the Utah
Public Notice website; or a complete copy of the ordinance shall be posted in
three (3) public places within Draper City, before taking effect.
2.   Any ordinance, code, or book, other than the state code, relating to
building or safety standards, municipal functions, administration, control, or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication
or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least one (1) copy
has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city
recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the city council.
3.   Any state law relating to building or safety standards, municipal
functions, administration, control, or regulations, may be adopted and shall
take effect without further publication or posting, if reference is made to the
state code.
4.   The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the manner
provided in this section.
I.   Prima Facie Evidence: The record and certificate prepared by the city
recorder, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage, and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
In addition, the ordinances printed and published by the authority of the city
council, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and legal
publication of such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in the publication,
in all courts and administrative proceedings.
J.   Proved Under Seal: The contents of all Draper City ordinances, the dates
of passage, and the date of publication or posting, may be proved by the
certification of the city recorder under the seal of Draper City.
K.   Penalty: The city council may provide a penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated, as amended, and/or by a term of imprisonment
not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor term of imprisonment under Utah
Code Annotated, as amended. The city council may also impose a civil penalty
for the unauthorized use of municipal property, including, but not limited to,
the use of parks, streets, and other public grounds or equipment. Rules of
civil procedure shall be substantially followed.
L.   Liability: An officer of Draper City shall not be convicted of a criminal
offense where he or she relied on or enforced an ordinance he or she reasonably
believed to be a valid ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for
punitive damages that the official acted in good faith in enforcing an
ordinance or that he or she enforced an ordinance on advice of legal counsel.
(1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 962, 2-1-2011; Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020; Ord. 1489, 5-4-
2021)
2-4-020: RESOLUTIONS:
A.   Administrative Powers: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council
may exercise all administrative powers by resolution.
B.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form and
contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
C.   Effective Date: Resolutions may take effect on passage or at a later date
as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become effective
more than three (3) months from the date of passage.
D.   Publication: Resolutions need not be published or posted.
E.   Filing: Resolutions shall be retained on file in the records of Draper
City, but need not be codified.
F.   Limitation: No punishment, fine or forfeiture may be imposed by
resolution.
G.   Proved Under Seal: The contents and dates of passage of all Draper City
resolutions may be proved by the certification of the city recorder under the
seal of Draper City. (1994 Code)
2-4-030: REGULATIONS:
A.   Authorization: When and to the extent authorized by ordinance, an
administrative officer of the city may promulgate regulations governing the
administration of the city.
B.   Defined: A regulation is any administrative rule, policy, procedure or
decision of the city which is or can be applied to recurrent situations or
problems, or which is intended to govern one or more activities or services of
the city for an extensive period of time.
C.   Requirements: In promulgating a regulation, the administrative officer
shall substantially comply with the following:
1.   Written: The regulation shall be in writing.
2.   Consistency: The regulation shall be consistent with this code and other
provisions of law.
3.   Not Arbitrary Or Capricious: The regulation, in whole or in part, shall
not be arbitrary and capricious.
4.   City Manager Approval: The regulation shall be submitted to the city
manager and must be approved by him or her.
5.   City Attorney: After approval by the city manager, the regulation shall be
submitted to the city attorney for review and comment.
6.   City Council: After approval of the city manager and review by the city
attorney, the regulation must be incorporated by reference into a resolution of
the city council. Such resolution must be duly passed and adopted by the city
council.
D.   Ratification: In the event any act performed or position taken by a city
official on behalf of the city is called into question for failure to comply
with the requirements of subsection C of this section, the city council may
ratify such act or position by resolution, in which event such act shall be
deemed to have been performed and such position shall be deemed to have been
taken pursuant to a valid regulation.
E.   Effect: Regulations adopted shall have the force and effect of resolutions
adopted by the city council.
F.   Proved Under Seal: The contents and dates of passage of all Draper City
regulations may be proved by the certification of the city recorder under the
seal of Draper City. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-4-040: PUBLIC RECORDS:
The ordinances, resolutions, regulations and any other books, records, accounts
or documents of Draper City shall be kept at the office of the city recorder.
Approved copies shall be open and available to the public during regular
business hours for examination and copying pursuant to the Draper City
Government Records Access and Management Ordinance. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord.
1413, 2-11-2020)
2-4-050: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
Unless expressly provided to the contrary, the following rules shall govern
construction and interpretation of the ordinances, resolutions and regulations
of Draper City:
A.   Amendment Or Repeal: Unless otherwise specifically provided, any amendment
or repeal shall not affect any right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any
penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue of
the provision amended or repealed, nor shall any repeal have the effect of
reviving any provision previously repealed or superseded.
B.   Severability: If any part or provision of an ordinance, resolution or
regulation is held invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect any other provisions and all provisions,
clauses and words of the ordinance, resolution or regulation shall be
severable.
C.   Titles And Headings: Titles and headings form no part of the ordinances,
resolutions or regulations, have no binding or interpretive effect, and shall
not alter the legal effect of any part of the provisions for any reason, unless
otherwise provided by law.
D.   Common And Specific Usage: All words and phrases shall be construed and
understood according to the common use and understanding of the language;
however, the technical words and phrases and such other words and phrases that
have acquired a particular meaning or which are specified as having a
particular meaning shall be construed and understood according to such
particular meaning.
E.   Liberal Construction: All provisions of the ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of Draper City shall be liberally construed according to the import
of their terms to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law.
F.   Gender And Number: Unless otherwise indicated from the context of the
ordinance, resolution or regulation, all words in the singular shall include
the plural and all words used in the masculine gender shall extend and apply to
the feminine gender and vice versa.
G.   Tenses: The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future
and past tense when such would be a reasonable interpretation of the provision.
H.   City: The word "city" shall be understood to refer to Draper City, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1994 Code)
2-4-060: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide advisory guidelines for
the city to assist the city in identifying actions that involve physical taking
or exaction of private real property that may have constitutional taking
issues. This section does not apply when the City formally exercises its power
of eminent domain.
B.   Definitions: As used herein:
1.   CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES: Actions involving the physical taking or
exaction of private real property by the city that might require compensation
to a private real property owner under:
a.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States;
b.   Article I, section 22 of the Utah constitution; or
c.   Any recent court rulings governing the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by a governmental entity.
C.   Guidelines: The following guidelines shall be considered by the city when
taking any action that might result in the physical taking or exaction of
private real property:
1.   Identification: The city should review the following to determine and
identify whether a proposed governmental action raises constitutional taking
issues:
a.   Does the action result in a permanent physical occupation of private
property?
b.   Does the action require a property owner to dedicate property or grant an
easement to the city?
c.   Does the action deprive the property owner of all economically viable uses
of the property?
d.   Does the action have a severe impact on the property owner's economic
interest?
e.   Does the action deny a fundamental attribute of ownership?
D.   Analysis: If the city determines that a governmental action involves
constitutional taking issues, the proposed action should be reviewed by the
city to analyze the possible taking and to determine the action to be taken. In
reviewing the proposed action, the following factors may be analyzed:
1.   The effect the potential taking would have on the use or value of the
private property;
2.   The likelihood that the action may result in a constitutional taking;
3.   Any alternatives to the proposed action that would fulfill the city's
lawful objectives and reduce the risk of a constitutional taking;
4.   The cost to the city for payment of compensation if a taking is
determined;
5.   The legitimate governmental interest involved and its essential nexus to
the potential taking or exaction; and
6.   If the action is roughly proportionate and reasonably related both in
nature and extent, to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject
of the proposed action.
E.   Appeals:
1.   Right to Appeal. Any owner of private property whose interest in the
property is subject to a physical taking or exaction by the City, pursuant to a
final and authoritative decision or action of the City, may appeal the City’s
decision or action.
2.   Filing Procedure. An application shall initiate the appeal by filing a
written notice of appeal and statement of all the grounds for the appeal in the
City Recorder’s Office within thirty (30) days from the date of the City’s
decision or action.
3.   Appeal Procedure and Timing. The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer
shall hear all evidence regarding the appeal and render a decision and findings
in writing within fourteen (14) days from the date the appeal was filed. If the
Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer fails to hear and decide the appeal within
fourteen (14) days, the City’s decision or action is presumed to be approved.
4.   Standard of Review. The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall review
the facts and information presented by the applicant and the City to determine
by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the action by the City
constitutes a constitutional taking. In doing so, he or she shall consider the
criteria for an exaction under the Utah Code § 10-9a-508, as well as applicable
state and federal statutory and common law.
F.   Limitations: The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and shall
not be construed to expand nor limit the scope of the city's liability for a
constitutional taking. The city shall have no legal liability to any person,
firm or entity of any nature whatsoever and a court may not impose liability
upon the city for failure to comply with the provisions of this section. The
private property owner need not file the appeal authorized by this section
before bringing an action in any court to adjudicate claims that are eligible
for appeal. A property owner's failure to appeal the action of the city does
not constitute, and may not be interpreted as constituting, a failure to
exhaust administrative remedies or as a bar to bringing legal action. (Ord.
1199, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 1530, 4-12-2022)
CHAPTER 5
APPOINTED OFFICERS
SECTION:
2-5-010: Office Creation
2-5-020: Vacancies
2-5-030: City Recorder
2-5-040: City Treasurer
2-5-050: City Attorney
2-5-010: OFFICE CREATION:
The city council may create any office deemed necessary for the government of
Draper City and shall, by resolution or ordinance, prescribe the power and
duties to be performed by appointed officials. (1994 Code)
2-5-020: VACANCIES:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint and
fill vacancies in all appointed offices provided for by law or ordinance. All
appointed officers shall continue in office until their successors are
appointed and qualified. (1994 Code)
2-5-030: CITY RECORDER:
A.   Appointment: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council
shall appoint a qualified person to the office of city recorder.
B.   Office: The city recorder shall occupy an office in the city hall or at
some other place convenient thereto as the city council may direct.
C.   City Auditor: As allowed by state law, the city has appointed the finance
director to perform the duties of such office, including the preparation and
presentation to the city council of monthly summary financial reports and
quarterly detail financial reports prepared in the manner prescribed in the
Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities.
D.   Corporate Seal: The city recorder shall keep the corporate seal. When
certified by the city recorder under the corporate seal, copies of all papers
filed in the city recorder's office and transcripts from all records of the
city council shall be admissible in all courts as originals.
E.   Meetings Of City Council: The city recorder shall attend the meetings as
assigned and keep the record of the proceedings of the city council.
F.   Actions Of City Council: The city recorder shall record all ordinances,
resolutions, and regulations passed by the city council in the manner provided
in section
2-4-010.
G.   Contracts: The city recorder shall countersign all contracts made on
behalf of the city or to which the city is a party and shall maintain a
properly indexed record of all such contracts.
H.   Elections And Appointments: The city recorder shall manage all municipal
election procedures and requirements as provided in the Utah Code Annotated, as
amended, and shall keep a record of all persons elected or appointed to any
office within the city, including the date of appointment or election, term of
office, date of death, resignation, or removal, and name of person appointed to
fill any vacancy.
I.   Limitations: The city recorder shall not serve as the city treasurer.
J.   Records Of The City: The city recorder shall keep all the books, records,
accounts and documents of the city at the recorder's office. Such records shall
be open for public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Draper City
Government Records Access and Management Ordinance.
K.   Additional Duties: The city recorder shall perform such other and further
duties as the city council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation or
directive. (Ord. 1161, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-5-040: CITY TREASURER:
A.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council shall appoint a
qualified person to the office of city treasurer.
B.   Bond Required: Before commencing his or her duties, the city treasurer
shall execute and file with the city recorder an official bond as required by
section
2-6-060.
C.   Custodian: The city treasurer shall be the custodian of all money, bonds,
or other securities belonging to the city.
D.   Collections: The city treasurer shall collect and receive all monies
payable to the city, including taxes, assessments, licenses, fines,
forfeitures, service charges, fees and other revenues of the city. The city
treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all monies received hereunder and
shall promptly deposit all such monies in the appropriate bank accounts of the
city. The city treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the city separate
and distinct from his or her own money.
E.   Receipts: The city treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every
person paying money to the city treasury, a receipt or other evidence of
payment therefore, specifying the date of payment and the account paid. The
city treasurer shall file the duplicate of such receipt or evidence of payment
in the office of the city recorder.
F.   Checks: The city treasurer shall sign all checks prepared by the accounts
payable clerk and shall, prior to affixing said signature, determine or cause
to be determined that sufficient funds are on deposit in the appropriate bank
account of the city to honor such check.
G.   Warrants: The city treasurer shall pay all warrants in the order in which
presented and as money becomes available for payment thereof in the appropriate
funds of the city. The city treasurer shall make provisions for the payment of
all warrants issued prior to signing any subsequently issued checks.
H.   Special Assessments: The city treasurer shall receive all monies received
by the city on any special assessment and shall apply the payments thereof to
the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was made.
I.   Accounting: The city treasurer shall keep an accurate and detailed
accounting of all transactions, receipts, collections, disbursements and other
matters within the treasurer's charge as provided by state law or as the city
may by ordinance or resolution direct.
J.   Limitations: The city treasurer shall not serve as the city recorder.
K.   Additional Duties: The city treasurer shall perform such other and further
duties as the city council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation or
directive. (1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 962, 2-1-2011; Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-5-050: CITY ATTORNEY:
A.   Appointment: The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor upon
recommendation by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city
council. The city may contract with or retain an attorney licensed to practice
law in the state of Utah. The city may make a separate contract with an
attorney or attorneys for the performance of criminal prosecutorial legal
services. All attorneys under contract with the city shall communicate with
each other as necessary to properly correlate their efforts.
B.   Duties: The city attorney shall act as legal advisor to the city in all
matters pertaining to contracts with or by the city or questions of legality
arising out of any law, ordinance or otherwise. The city attorney shall appear
on behalf of the city in all suits at law or in equity in which the city is a
party, and shall prosecute or defend them, as the case may be, in all courts
until they are finally disposed of. He or she shall advise all city officers in
relation to their official duties, prepare and draft all such ordinances,
resolutions and regulations as the city council or city manager may from time
to time request and perform such other duties as the ordinances of the city and
the general laws require or as the city council may direct. The city attorney
shall attend meetings of the city council and other meetings of the city when
requested to do so. The city attorney may, with the consent of the city
council, retain special counsel on matters pertaining to the legal affairs of
the city if the same is deemed necessary and desirable and such special counsel
shall be compensated by the city. The city attorney shall, when requested to do
so, furnish written opinions on subjects submitted by the city council or by
the city manager.
C.   Additional Duties: The city attorney shall perform such other duties as
the city council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation or directive.
(1994 Code) (amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 6
TAKING OFFICE
SECTION:
2-6-010: Eligibility For Mayor And Council Members
2-6-020: Election Of Mayor And Council Members
2-6-025: Campaign Finance Disclosure
2-6-030: Term Of Office For Mayor And Council Members
2-6-040: Vacancies In Office Of Mayor Or Council Member
2-6-050: Oath Of Office
2-6-060: Bonds
2-6-070: Salaries
2-6-080: Failure To Qualify For Office
2-6-090: Duties And Powers Defined
2-6-100: Official Neglect Or Misconduct
2-6-110: Transfer Of Records
2-6-010: ELIGIBILITY FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
A.   Chosen By Voters: The mayor and council members shall be elected by the
registered voters of Draper City.
B.   Residency And Registration Requirements: An individual may become a
candidate for any elected municipal office if:
1.   The individual is a registered voter; and
2.   The individual has resided within the municipality in which the individual
seeks to hold elective office for the twelve (12) consecutive months
immediately before the date of the election; or
3.   The territory in which the individual resides was annexed into the
municipality, the individual has resided within the annexed territory or the
municipality the twelve (12) consecutive months immediately before the date of
the election.
C.   Each elected officer of Draper City shall be a registered voter in Draper
City and maintain a principal place of residence within the city during the
officer's term of office. An elected office is automatically vacant if the
elected officer:
1.   Establishes a principal place of residence outside the city;
2.   Resides at a secondary residence outside the city for a continuous period
of more than sixty (60) days while still maintaining a principal place of
residence within the city;
3.   Is absent from the city for a continuous period of more than sixty (60)
days; or
4.   Fails to respond within thirty (30) days to a request from the county
clerk or lieutenant governor seeking information to determine the officer's
residency.
D.   Exceptions: An elected officer may be absent from the city or establish
and reside at a secondary residence outside the city while still maintaining a
principle place of residence in the city, if:
1.   The city council consents by a majority vote after taking public comment
regarding:
a.   Whether the city council should give consent; and
b.   The length of time to which the city council should consent; and
2.   Length of absence or secondary residence as determined by the city council
does not exceed one (1) year.
E.   City Employee: Neither the mayor nor a member of the city council shall,
upon taking office, be an employee of Draper City. Any employee of Draper City
shall be entitled to run for elected office but, if elected, shall comply with
the provisions of this code prior to taking office. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018; amd.
Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-6-020: ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
A.   Elected: The mayor and council members shall be elected in an at large
municipal election held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, of
each odd-numbered year as provided in Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 3.
B.   Notice Of Election: On or before May 1 in a year in which there is a
municipal general election, the city recorder shall publish a notice that
identifies the municipal offices to be voted on in the municipal election and
the dates for filing a declaration of candidacy. The city recorder shall
publish the notice on the Utah Public Notice Website and in at least one of the
following ways:
1.   At city hall;
2.   In the city newsletter;
3.   On the city's website; or
4.   With a city utility enterprise fund customer's bill.
C.   Procedure: The municipal elections and primary elections for mayor and
council members shall be conducted in the manner provided for in title 20A of
the Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
D.   Districts: The city council, for purposes of an election, may combine two
(2) or more regular Salt Lake County voting precincts into one (1) Draper City
voting precinct for purposes of an election by designating the location and
address of that combined voting precinct. If only two (2) precincts are
combined, the polling place shall be within the combined precinct or within one
half (1/2) mile of the boundaries of the combined voting precinct. If more than
two (2) precincts are combined, the polling place shall be as near as practical
to the middle of the combined precinct.
E.   Primary Elections: No primary elections shall be held for the offices of
mayor or city council members and all openings for such offices shall be filled
at the November general municipal election of Draper City, unless:
1.   The number of candidates exceeds twice the number of offices to be filled;
or
2.   A primary election is otherwise required by law, in which cases a primary
election shall be held in the manner provided in Utah Code Annotated section
20A-9-404, as amended. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018; amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020; Ord.
1489, 5-4-2021)
2-6-025: CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE:
A.   Each candidate for elected office shall comply with the campaign finance
disclosure requirements found in the Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
B.   The recorder shall provide each candidates notices of campaign finance
disclosure deadlines as required by state law at the following times:
1.   When the candidate files a declaration of candidacy; and
2.   Before the municipal general election.
C.   The notice described in section 2-6-025(B) shall include:
1.   The provisions of statute or municipal ordinance governing the disclosure
of contributions and expenditures;
2.   The dates when campaign finance statements must be filed; and
3.   The penalties that apply for failure to file a timely campaign finance
statement, including the statutory provision that requires removal of the
candidate’s name from the ballot for failure to file the required campaign
finance statement when required.
D.   The recorder will not provide other notices of deadline. (Ord. 1579, 5-2-
2023)
2-6-030: TERM OF OFFICE FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The elected mayor and council members shall begin their term of office at
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their
election, and shall continue in office for four (4) years thereafter and until
their respective successors are chosen and qualified, except in case of death,
resignation, removal, or disqualification from office. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018)
2-6-040: VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF MAYOR OR COUNCIL MEMBER:
A.   If any vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or council member of the
city, the city council shall appoint a registered voter in the city who meets
the qualifications for office described in state code to fill the unexpired
term of the vacated office.
B.   Before acting to fill the vacancy, the city council shall:
1.   Give public notice of the vacancy at least two (2) weeks before the
council meets to fill the vacancy;
2.   Identify in the notice the date, time and place of the meeting where the
vacancy will be filled; the name and contact information of the person to whom
an individual interested in being considered to fill the vacancy shall submit
their name for consideration and the deadline for submission.
3.   In an open meeting, interview each individual whose name is submitted for
consideration, and who meets the qualifications for office, regarding the
individual's qualifications.
C.   If, for any reason, the city council does not fill the vacancy within
thirty (30) days after the day on which the vacancy occurs, the city council
shall fill the vacancy from among the names that have been submitted. The two
(2) individuals having the highest number of votes of the city council after a
first vote is taken shall appear before the city council and the council shall
vote again. The mayor shall break any tie pursuant to section
2-2-020B1.
D.   If neither candidate receives a majority vote of the city council at that
time, the vacancy shall be filled by lot in the presence of the city council.
E.   A vacancy in the office of mayor or city council member shall be filled by
an interim appointment, followed by an election to fill a two (2) year term,
if:
1.   The vacancy occurs, or a letter of resignation is received, by the mayor
at least fourteen (14) days before the deadline for filing for election in an
odd-numbered year; and
2.   Two (2) years of the vacated term will remain after the first Monday of
January following the next municipal election.
3.   The city council shall follow the voting procedures outlined in
subsections B and C of this section. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018; amd. Ord. 1413, 2-
11-2020)
2-6-050: OATH OF OFFICE:
A.   Required: Before entering on their respective duties, all officers of
Draper City, whether elected or appointed, shall take the constitutional oath
of office as set forth in article IV, section 10 of the Constitution of Utah.
B.   Time: Elected officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their election or as soon
thereafter as is practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath of office
at any time before entering on their duties.
C.   Administered: The oath of office shall be administered by the city
recorder, any judge, or any notary public.
D.   Filed: All oaths of office shall be filed with the city recorder, except
that of the city recorder which shall be filed with the city treasurer.
E.   Failure To Comply: No official act of any officer shall be invalid for the
reason that he or she failed to take the oath of office. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018)
2-6-060: BONDS:
A.   Required: In addition to the requirements of subsection B of this section,
the city shall either:
1.   Execute a corporate surety bond or maintain a blanket bond with good and
sufficient sureties payable to Draper City for the faithful performance of the
duties of elected officials, appointed officers, and employees as required by
state laws and the ordinances of Draper City; or
2.   Maintain an insurance policy to ensure the faithful performance of the
duties of elected officials, appointed officers, and employees of Draper City.
B.   Treasurer's Bond: The city shall maintain a treasurer's bond set at an
amount not less than that established by the state money management council.
C.   Filed: All bonds or insurance policies of the city shall be filed with the
city recorder.
D.   Approval Of Bonds: The bonds of council members, if required, shall be
approved by the mayor, and the bond of the mayor, if required, shall be
approved by the city council, at the first meeting of the city council in
January following a municipal election.
E.   Premium Charge: The premium charged for any required corporate surety or
blanket bond or insurance policy for an elected official, appointed officer, or
employee of the city shall be paid by Draper City.
F.   Additional Bonds Or Insurance: The city council may at any time require
additional bonds, increased bond amounts, or increased insurance policy
coverage limits under this section by resolution or ordinance. Bond amounts or
coverage limits may exceed those established by the state money management
council pursuant to state code. (Ord. 1365, 10-16-2018; amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-
2020)
2-6-070: SALARIES:
A.   Generally: Elected and appointed officers of the city shall receive such
compensation for their services as the mayor and city council may fix by
ordinance pursuant to the procedure set forth in subsection B of this section.
B.   Adopting, Changing Or Amending Compensation: Upon its own motion, the city
council may review or consider the compensation of any officer or officers of
the city or a salary schedule applicable to any officer or officers of the city
for the purpose of determining whether it should be adopted, changed or
amended. In the event the city council decides that the compensation or
compensation schedules should be adopted, changed or amended, it shall set a
time and place of a public hearing at which all interested persons shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the
meeting shall be published at least seven (7) days prior thereto by a
publication in at least one issue of a newspaper published in Salt Lake County
and generally circulated in Draper City and on the Utah public notice website.
After the conclusion of the public hearing, the mayor and city council may
enact an ordinance fixing, changing, or amending the compensation of any
elective or appointed officer of the city or adopting a compensation schedule
applicable to any officer or officers.
C.   Monthly Compensation: The compensation of all city officers shall be paid
at least monthly. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018)
2-6-080: FAILURE TO QUALIFY FOR OFFICE:
Whenever any person duly elected to any office of the city fails to qualify for
such office within sixty (60) days after the date of beginning of the term of
office for which he or she was elected, such office shall thereupon become
vacant and shall be filled as provided by law. Whenever the bond of any officer
of the city is canceled, revoked, annulled, or otherwise becomes void or of no
effect, without another proper bond being given so that continuance of bonded
protection is afforded, the office of such officer shall thereupon become
vacant and shall be filled as provided by law. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018)
2-6-090: DUTIES AND POWERS DEFINED:
The duties, powers and privileges of all elected and appointed officers of the
city shall be defined by the city council pursuant to state law. (Ord. 1280, 1-
9-2018)
2-6-100: OFFICIAL NEGLECT OR MISCONDUCT:
If an officer of the city willfully omits to perform any duty, or willfully and
corruptly commits oppression, malconduct, misfeasance, or malfeasance in
office, the person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, shall be removed from
office, and is not eligible for any city office thereafter. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-
2018; amd. Ord. 1413, 2-11-2020)
2-6-110: TRANSFER OF RECORDS:
Every officer and employee of the city upon expiration of his or her term for
any cause whatsoever shall, within five (5) days after notification and request
to do so, deliver to his or her successor all books and records which may be
the property of the city. (Ord. 1280, 1-9-2018)
TITLE 3
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
CHAPTER 1
DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-010: Department Creation
3-1-020: Interdepartmental Cooperation
3-1-030: Department Heads
3-1-040: Additional Employment
3-1-045: Assistant City Manager
3-1-050: Police Department
3-1-055: Police Chief
3-1-060: Fire Chief
3-1-066: Parks And Recreation Department
3-1-067: Parks And Recreation Director
3-1-068: Finance Department
3-1-069: Finance Director
3-1-070: Public Works Department
3-1-080: Public Works Director
3-1-085: City Engineer
3-1-090: Community Development Department
3-1-100: Community Development Director
3-1-110: Water Department
3-1-120: Draper City Planning Commission (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6- 15-2021)
3-1-130: Appeals And Variance Hearing Officer (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-
2021)
3-1-140: Redevelopment Agency (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-150: Subordinate Bodies (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-160: General Rules For Committees (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15- 2021)
3-1-170: Draper City Arts Council (Rep. by Ord. 591, 11-2-2004)
3-1-180: Draper City Historic Preservation Commission (Renumbered by Ord. 1493,
6-15-2021)
3-1-190: Draper City Parks, Trails And Recreation Committee (Renumbered by Ord.
1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-200: Draper City Arena Advisory Board (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-210: Draper City Neighborhood Associations (Rep. by Ord. 600, 4-5-2005,
eff. 5-1-2005)
3-1-220: Draper City Conservation Area Commission (Rep. by Ord. 556, 1-6-2004)
3-1-230: Draper City Tree Commission (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-240: Draper City Community Events And Volunteerism Council (Rep. by Ord.
557, 1-20-2004)
3-1-250: Draper City Youth Council Advisory Board (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-
15-2021)
3-1-260: Draper City Police Citizen's Advisory Board (Renumbered by Ord. 1493,
6-15-2021)
3-1-270: Draper City Emergency Preparedness Committee (Renumbered by Ord. 1493,
6-15-2021)
3-1-270-5: Draper City District Representative Program For Emergency
Communications (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-280: Planning Commission (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-290: Traverse Ridge Special Service District Administrative Control Board
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-300: Draper City Volunteer Committee (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6- 15-2021)
3-1-310: Audit Committee (Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-320: Draper City Diversity And Inclusion Advisory Board (Renumbered by Ord.
1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-010: DEPARTMENT CREATION:
The City Council may create any department, division or section deemed
necessary or appropriate for the administration of the City and shall prescribe
by resolution or ordinance the organization, powers and duties of such bodies.
In addition to such designated duties and functions, each department and unit
thereof shall be open during regular business hours as defined by the City,
shall make a daily deposit with the City Treasurer or his or her designee of
any public monies, and shall pay out monies belonging to the City only in the
manner prescribed by law, ordinance, regulation or policy. (1994 Code)
3-1-020: INTERDEPARTMENTAL COOPERATION:
Each department shall cooperate with other departments and furnish, upon the
direction of the City Manager or City Council, such service, labor, and
materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such other department. (1994
Code)
3-1-030: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
Within each department of the City, there shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the City Council, a department head who shall have
such powers and duties as prescribed by the City Council, including:
A.   Administering the department and all activities assigned thereto;
B.   Developing and maintaining current departmental policies and procedures
for carrying out departmental operations;
C.   Planning and supervising the operations of the department for the full and
effective use of personnel, equipment and financial resources assigned to the
department;
D.   Establishing department goals, priorities and work plans;
E.   Conducting performance evaluations of department employees;
F.   Implementing risk management programs to protect the health, safety and
welfare of City employees and the public and to prevent financial losses and
the potential for claims and lawsuits against the City;
G.   Maintaining spending within the budget parameters established by the City
Council; (Ord. 1074, 11-12-2013)
H.   Administering provisions of the City Procurement Code; (Ord. 1257, 5-2-
2017)
I.   Recruiting, selecting and appointing employees as directed by the City
Council;
J.   Keeping informed of the latest practices relating to the department and
implement such practices;
K.   Creating and maintaining a work environment free from sexual harassment
and discrimination based on race, color, age, sex, religion, disability, or
national origin;
L.   Suspending any subordinate officers, employees or agents in accordance
with City disciplinary procedure and Utah Code Annotated 10-3-912, as amended,
when in his or her judgment the good service and best interest of the City
demands it;
M.   Submitting reports as required by the Mayor, City Manager or City Council
detailing the activities of the department; and
N.   Establishing and maintaining a system of filing and indexing records and
reports of department activities. (Ord. 1074, 11-12-2013)
3-1-040: ADDITIONAL EMPLOYMENT:
Department heads shall obtain written approval from the City Manager prior to
accepting or pursuing employment outside his or her duties as a City department
head. (1994 Code)
3-1-045: ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER:
There is hereby created the position of Assistant City Manager, who shall act
under the direction of the City Manager. The Assistant City Manager shall have
such powers and duties as designated by the City Manager. The Assistant City
Manager shall be selected by the City Manager and appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 1043, 3-5-2013)
3-1-050: POLICE DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a Police Department within the City
which shall be entrusted with the duties of providing emergency medical
services, animal control, community oriented policing, and protecting lives and
property within the City. (Ord. 525, 4-1-2003)
3-1-055: POLICE CHIEF:
There is hereby created the position of Police Chief who shall act as the
department head of the Police Department. The Police Chief shall have such
powers and duties as designated and assigned to him or her by the City Council.
(Ord. 525, 4-1-2003)
3-1-060: FIRE CHIEF:
3-1-066: PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a Parks and Recreation Department. The
Parks and Recreation Department shall be responsible for the planning,
development and delivery of a comprehensive Public Recreation Program for the
City. The Parks and Recreation Department also oversees the operations of the
City's amphitheater, the City's parks and trails, and other functions as deemed
appropriate by the City Council and City Manager. (Ord. 1162, 8-4-2015)
3-1-067: PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR:
There is hereby created the position of Parks and Recreation Director who shall
act as the department head of the Parks and Recreation Department. The Parks
and Recreation Director shall have such powers and duties as designated by the
City Manager. The Parks and Recreation Director is appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 1162, 8-4-2015)
3-1-068: FINANCE DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a finance department. The finance
department shall be responsible for the budgeting, payroll, financial
compliance, utility billing, treasury functions, purchasing functions and other
functions as deemed appropriate by the city council and city manager. (Ord.
1053, 7-2-2013)
3-1-069: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
There is hereby created the position of finance director who shall act as the
department head of the finance department. The finance director shall have such
powers and duties as designated by state laws, ordinances and the city manager.
The finance director shall be selected by the city manager and appointed by the
mayor with the consent of the city council. (Ord. 1053, 7-2-2013)
3-1-070: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a public works department. The public
works department shall include the functions of engineering, operations and
maintenance, streets, water and parks. (Ord. 503, 11-19-2002)
3-1-080: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
There is hereby created the position of public works director who shall act as
the department head of the public works department. The public works director
shall have such powers and duties as designated by the city manager. (Ord. 503,
11-19-2002)
3-1-085: CITY ENGINEER:
There is hereby created the position of city engineer who shall act as the
division head of the engineering division within the public works department.
The city engineer shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council as an
at will employee. The city engineer shall have such duties and responsibilities
as set forth in state law and as designated and assigned by the public works
director. (Ord. 503, 11-19-2002)
3-1-090: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a community development department
within Draper City which shall be responsible for the planning and zoning of
the city and which shall oversee and regulate all building, construction and
development activities within the city. (1994 Code)
3-1-100: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
There is hereby created the position of community development director who
shall act as the department head of the community development department. The
community development director shall have such powers and duties as designated
and assigned to him or her by the city council. (1994 Code)
3-1-110: WATER DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a water department within Draper City
which shall be responsible for maintaining the city water system. The water
department shall be under the supervision of the public works director. (Ord.
503, 11-19-2002)
3-1-120: DRAPER CITY PLANNING COMMISSION:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-130: APPEALS AND VARIANCE HEARING OFFICER:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-140: REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-150: SUBORDINATE BODIES:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-160: GENERAL RULES FOR COMMITTEES:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-170: DRAPER CITY ARTS COUNCIL:
(Rep. by Ord. 591, 11-2-2004)
3-1-180: DRAPER CITY HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-190: DRAPER CITY PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-200: DRAPER CITY ARENA ADVISORY BOARD:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-210: DRAPER CITY NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 600, 4-5-2005, eff. 5-1-2005)
3-1-220: DRAPER CITY CONSERVATION AREA COMMISSION:
(Rep. by Ord. 556, 1-6-2004)
3-1-230: DRAPER CITY TREE COMMISSION:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-240: DRAPER CITY COMMUNITY EVENTS AND VOLUNTEERISM COUNCIL:
(Rep. by Ord. 557, 1-20-2004)
3-1-250: DRAPER CITY YOUTH COUNCIL ADVISORY BOARD:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-260: DRAPER CITY POLICE CITIZEN'S ADVISORY BOARD:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-270: DRAPER CITY EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS COMMITTEE:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-270-5: DRAPER CITY DISTRICT REPRESENTATIVE PROGRAM FOR EMERGENCY
COMMUNICATIONS:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-280: PLANNING COMMISSION:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-290: TRAVERSE RIDGE SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL BOARD:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-300: DRAPER CITY VOLUNTEER COMMITTEE:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-310:  AUDIT COMMITTEE:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-1-320 DRAPER CITY DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION ADVISORY BOARD:
(Renumbered by Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
CHAPTER 2
PERSONNEL
SECTION:
3-2-010: Personnel Policies And Procedures
3-2-020: Personnel Director
3-2-030: Equal Opportunity Employer
3-2-040: Rules Of Conduct
3-2-050: Personnel File
3-2-060: Compensation
3-2-070: Benefits
3-2-080: Sexual Harassment
3-2-090: Grievances
3-2-100: Discipline
3-2-110: Separation From Service
3-2-120: Appeals From Disciplinary Actions
3-2-130: Employee Appeal Hearing Officer
3-2-140: Litigation Costs
3-2-150: Volunteers
3-2-010: PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The City has established and adopted personnel policies and procedures
consistent with the ordinances, laws and regulations of the City, State and
Federal government for the efficient administration, organization, operation,
and conduct of its personnel. The personnel policies and procedures manual
entitled "Employee Personnel Policy Handbook" is available to each Municipal
employee and is kept on file with the City's Human Resource Department.
Employees are encouraged to review the personnel policies and procedures at the
time of hire and be familiar with the contents thereof at all times during
their employment with the City. Employees are responsible to comply with the
provisions of the City's personnel policies and procedures as adopted or
amended by the City Council during their employment with the City. (Ord. 1039,
12-8-2013)
3-2-020: PERSONNEL DIRECTOR:
The City Manager is hereby designated as the Personnel Director to ensure just
and equitable employment conditions and to promote positive and efficient
working morale for all City personnel. As Personnel Director, the City Manager
shall implement and maintain the provisions of this chapter and perform other
duties as required by ordinance, resolution or policy of the City Council. The
City Manager may assign the Director of Human Resources or other designee the
responsibility to perform duties of the Personnel Director. (Ord. 1039, 12-8-
2013)
3-2-030: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER:
Draper City is an "equal opportunity employer" and as such does not
discriminate in the hiring, employment or promotion of its employees on the
basis of race, religion, sex, pregnancy, genetic information, age, national
origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, citizenship, disability, veteran
or military status, or other factors protected by State and Federal laws 1 .
(Ord. 1154, 5-5-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 34A-5-106.
3-2-040: RULES OF CONDUCT:
All employees of the City shall conduct themselves in an appropriate manner in
accordance with the personnel policies and procedures adopted by the City.
Employees shall be subject to and shall comply with provisions of the Utah
Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, set forth at Utah Code Annotated 10-3-1301
et seq., as amended, hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-050: PERSONNEL FILE:
A personnel file shall be kept for each employee of the City, excluding elected
officials, volunteers and contractors. The file shall contain a copy of all
records relating to employment of the employee, including, but not limited to,
records regarding hiring, compensation, holiday, vacation or sick leave,
awards, grievances, disciplinary action, education, training programs, and any
other relevant records. All personnel records shall be maintained, classified
and accessed in accordance with the Government Records Access and Management
Act, as adopted by the City. (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-060: COMPENSATION:
Unless otherwise included in an employment contract approved by the City
Council, Draper City employees shall be compensated in accordance with a
schedule of salary rates or ranges for each job classification as adopted by
the City Council. In arriving at the salary rates or ranges, the City Council
may consider the prevailing rates of pay and working conditions for comparable
work in other public agencies and private employment, current costs of living,
suggestions of department heads, City financial condition, policies, procedures
and other relevant considerations. (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-070: BENEFITS:
Draper City employees may receive such benefits as provided in the personnel
policies and procedures adopted by the City Council and as otherwise required
by law 1 . (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-1103.
3-2-080: SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
Sexual harassment is prohibited as a form of sex discrimination and shall be
addressed in accordance with the sexual harassment policies and procedures
adopted by the City. (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-090: GRIEVANCES:
Employees shall have the right to appeal decisions or disciplinary action by
the City which affect their employment. Any employee with a grievance may
pursue the matter through informal or formal grievance procedures in accordance
with the personnel policies and procedures adopted by the City Council. (Ord.
846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-100: DISCIPLINE:
Employees may be disciplined for good cause through informal or formal
disciplinary action in accordance with the personnel policies and procedures
adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-110: SEPARATION FROM SERVICE:
Employees may be separated from service with the City in the following manner:
A.   Resignation: An employee desiring to discontinue his or her employment
with the City shall file a written resignation with the department head stating
the effective date of resignation and the reasons for resignation at least two
(2) weeks prior to the effective date of resignation.
B.   Reduction In Force: An employee may be laid off by the City due to change
in the organization of City personnel, material change in the duties of the
employee's position, shortage in the work requirements of the City, shortage in
the funding of the City, or when otherwise necessary in the best interest of
the City.
C.   Dismissal: An employee may be dismissed by the City for any reason
permitted by law; provided, however, that any such dismissal shall be
accomplished in accordance with the personnel policies and procedures adopted
by the City Council. (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
3-2-120: APPEALS FROM DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:
A.   With the exception of those listed below, all employees of the City shall
hold their employment without limitation of time, being subject to discharge or
dismissal only as provided in Utah Code Annotated 10-3-1106, as amended. Any
employee covered herein who is discharged, suspended without pay for more than
two (2) work days (per department regular schedule), or involuntarily
transferred to a position with less remuneration shall have the right to appeal
disciplinary action to the Employee Appeal Hearing Officer ("Hearing Officer")
in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-1105 and
10-3-1106, as amended. (Ord. 1300, 12-19-2017)
B.   Employees not eligible to appeal a discharge, suspension or transfer as
described in subsection A of this section include:
1.   Any officer appointed by the Mayor, City Manager, or other person or body
with power to appoint if the appointment is made in writing; the person's
written job description identifies the person's positions as exempt from the
protections provided herein; and the position is described in an ordinance as
exempt from the protections provided herein;
2.   A person who holds the following positions or an equivalent position
designated in a City ordinance or personnel policy:
a.   The Chief of Police;
b.   The Fire Chief;
c.   Department directors;
d.   Probationary employees;
e.   Part time employees; or
f.   Seasonal or temporary employee;
3.   An individual appointed to a position under part 9, chapter 3, title 10
"Appointed Officials and Their Duties" of the Utah Code Annotated, including:
a.   The City Engineer;
b.   The City Recorder;
c.   The City Treasurer; or
d.   The City Attorney. (Ord. 1265, 7-11-2017)
3-2-130: EMPLOYEE APPEAL HEARING OFFICER:
A.   Position Designated: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 10-3-1106, as
amended, the Hearing Officer is designated to hear appeals of employees in
accordance with section
3-2-120 of this chapter. The City designates the Employee Appeal Hearing
Officer as the only internal post-disciplinary appeal procedure for discharges,
suspensions without pay for more than two (2) work days (per department regular
schedule), or an involuntary transfer from one position to another with less
remuneration for any disciplinary reason (the "discipline"). (Ord. 1300, 12-19-
2017)
B.   Exhaustion Of Internal Grievance Procedures: An employee shall exhaust all
internal grievance procedures before appealing to the Hearing Officer.
C.   Filing An Appeal:
1.   Appeals to the Hearing Officer shall be taken by filing written notice of
the appeal with the City Recorder within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of
the notice of the final imposition of the discipline.
2.   The appeal shall state the specific reasons for the appeal, including but
not limited to the reasons why the employee believes the City's decision was in
error, the mailing or email address to be used for further communication with
the employee, and the employee's signature.
3.   Upon receipt of a properly filed appeal, the City Recorder will forward a
copy of the appeal to the Hearing Officer.
4.   Upon receipt of the appeal from the City Recorder, the Hearing Officer
will schedule a hearing to take and receive evidence and fully hear and
determine the matter which relates to the reason for the discipline. The
Hearing Officer may hold a scheduling conference, enter orders regarding
procedural issues, and establish deadlines for the parties to exchange witness
and exhibits lists.
D.   Appeal Hearing Process:
1.   The employee shall be entitled to appear in person before the Hearing
Officer and to be represented by counsel at the employee's expense, to have a
hearing open to the public, to confront the witnesses whose testimony is to be
considered, and to examine the evidence to be considered by the Hearing
Officer. The employee or the City may request the hearing be open to the
public.
2.   The appeal hearing shall be scheduled no later than thirty (30) calendar
days after the receipt of the appeal in the City Recorder's Office, unless
agreed upon in writing by the employee and the City.
3.   The City Recorder shall record and take minutes of each session, except
for the Hearing Officer's deliberations.
4.   The Hearing Officer may exclude from the hearing any witnesses who have
not yet given testimony or evidence in the appeal before the Hearing Officer.
Hearings shall be conducted with appropriate formality and decorum, so that the
due process rights of the parties are protected. Utah rules of evidence and
rules of civil procedure are used as guidelines but need not be strictly
followed or applied.
5.   The City Attorney or designee represents the City's interests. The City
may retain independent legal counsel for the Hearing Officer.
6.   The Hearing Officer shall review a decision using a "substantial evidence"
standard of review. "Substantial evidence" is that quantum and quality of
relevant evidence that is adequate to convince a reasonable person to support a
conclusion. If the Hearing Officer finds that there is substantial evidence to
support the City's action, the Hearing Officer shall uphold the action. If the
Hearing Officer finds that there is not substantial evidence to support the
City's action, the Hearing Officer shall overturn the decision. If the Hearing
Officer overturns the City's action, the Hearing Officer's decision shall
provide that the City shall compensate the employee as required by State law.
7.   The Hearing Officer can only sustain or overturn a decision.
8.   The Hearing Officer may establish hearing procedures consistent with Utah
Code Annotated 10-3-1106, and may modify those procedures at the hearing as may
be equitable and conducive to a determination of the issues.
E.   Decision Of The Hearing Officer:
1.   The Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision. A decision is final
when it is signed and dated by the Hearing Officer, and certified with the City
Recorder. The City Recorder shall distribute the certified decision to the
employee, the City Manager, the Human Resources Director, the City Attorney,
and the appropriate department director.
2.   Each decision of the Hearing Officer shall be certified to the City
Recorder no later than fifteen (15) business days after the day on which the
hearing is held; however, for good cause, the Hearing Officer may extend the
15-day period to a maximum of sixty (60) calendar days, if the employee and the
City both consent.
F.   Judicial Review: The City or the employee may appeal the Hearing Officer's
final decision by filing a petition for review with the Utah Court of Appeals
no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the certification date of the
Hearing Officer's final decision.
G.   Application: This subsection does not apply to an employee:
1.   Described in section
3-2-120 of this chapter; or
2.   Discharged or transferred to a position with less remuneration if the
termination or transfer is the result of a layoff, reorganization, or other
non-disciplinary reason. (Ord. 1265, 7-11-2017)
3-2-140: LITIGATION COSTS:
The City shall defend and pay any judgment incurred by a City elected official,
volunteer, employee, or contractor holding the position of City Engineer, City
Attorney, or City Justice Court Judge as herein provided or otherwise required
by law. The official, volunteer, employee or contractor must submit a signed
and completed written request and agreement with the City Manager within ten
(10) days after service of process upon the officer or employee requesting such
defense. The City's liability hereunder extends only to acts or omissions
occurring during performance of the official's, volunteer's, employee's or
contractor's duties as prescribed for his or her position, occurring during the
scope of his or her employment or under the color of authority. (Ord. 846, 8-5-
2008)
3-2-150: VOLUNTEERS:
A.   Defined: A "volunteer" means any person who donates approved services,
without pay, remuneration or reimbursement other than approved incidental
expenses for services rendered.
B.   Status: A volunteer must be authorized by the City Council to perform
services for the City and shall be deemed an employee of the City only for
purposes of:
1.   Workers' compensation benefits for reimbursement for any injury sustained
while engaged in the performance of any authorized service for the City;
2.   Properly licensed operation of City vehicles or equipment while engaged in
the performance of authorized service for the City; and
3.   Liability and indemnification protection normally afforded salaried
employees.
C.   Expenses: Volunteers may receive reimbursement for transportation, meals,
travel expenses, lodging, uniforms, and supplies in the discretion of and when
authorized and approved by the City. (Ord. 846, 8-5-2008)
CHAPTER 3
PROCUREMENT CODE
SECTION:
3-3-010: Compliance
3-3-020: Definitions
3-3-030: Procurement Authority
3-3-040: Purchasing Agent
3-3-050: Budget Limitation
3-3-060: General Procurement Related Expenditures
3-3-070: Procurement Procedures
3-3-080: Special Types Of Expenditures
3-3-090: Advertising Requirements
3-3-100: Procurement Contracts
3-3-110: Protest Of Specifications Or Award Of Procurement Contract
3-3-120: Delivery Of Supplies
3-3-130: Petty Cash
3-3-140: Inventory Management
3-3-150: Disposal Of Surplus Personal Property
3-3-160: Disposal Of Surplus Real Property
3-3-170: Prohibited Activities
3-3-180: Violations
3-3-190: Appeals
3-3-010: COMPLIANCE:
A.   All procurement-related expenditures of the City shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of State law including,
but not limited to, the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act set forth at Utah Code
Annotated section 10-6-101, et seq., as amended. Any expenditures of the City
involving Federal assistance funds shall comply with applicable Federal law and
regulations. Any expenditure of the City involving the construction,
maintenance or improvement of a Class C road or work using Class C funds shall
comply with applicable provisions of Utah Code Annotated sections 72-6-108 and
109, as amended. No check or warrant to cover any claim against appropriations
may be drawn until the claim has been processed according to the relevant
provisions provided herein.
B.   Procurement-related expenditures not covered under this chapter shall
follow the Utah Procurement Code.
C.   All procurement shall follow the ethical standards of title 19, "Ethics",
of this Code and the Utah Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-1301, et seq. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BID LIMIT: For a "building improvement" for the year 2003, forty thousand
dollars ($40,000.00); for a "public works project" for the year 2003, one
hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00); for a "Class C road
improvement project" for the year 2003, one hundred twenty five thousand
dollars ($125,000.00). For each year after 2003, the amount of the bid limit
for the previous year, plus an amount calculated by multiplying the amount of
the bid limit for the previous year by the lesser of three percent (3%) or the
actual percent change in the Consumer Price Index during the previous calendar
year.
BUILDING IMPROVEMENT: The construction or repair of a public building or
structure.
CLASS C ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROJECT: The construction and maintenance of Class C
roads.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS: The supplies and services used to complete a
construction project.
CONSTRUCTION OF CLASS C ROADS: Work that would apply to any new roadbed either
by addition to existing systems or relocations; resurfacing of existing
roadways with more than two inches (2") of bituminous pavement; or new
structures or replacement of existing structures, except the replacement of
drainage culverts.
CONSTRUCTION PROJECT: A building improvement, public works project, or Class C
road improvement project.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX: The Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers as
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of
Labor.
EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT: The procurement of supplies, services, or construction
materials that cannot be purchased through normal procurement methods due to an
existing or imminent emergency condition. An emergency condition is a
situation, which creates an immediate and serious threat to public health,
life, safety, or property. An emergency condition is usually, but not always,
the result of floods, natural disasters, epidemics, riots, or critical
equipment failures.
EXEMPT EXPENDITURES: Expenditures for supplies or services that are less than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
GOVERNMENT AGENCY CONTRACT: An existing procurement contract that another
governmental agency has issued.
INVITATION FOR BIDS (IFB): A procurement document used for seeking competition
for large expenditure purchases or small expenditure purchases that may
ultimately exceed the amount for a small expenditure purchase. IFBs are
submitted electronically or in a sealed envelope to prevent its contents from
being revealed or known before the deadline for the submission of bids.
MAINTENANCE OF CLASS C ROADS: The keeping of a road facility in a safe and
stable condition to which it was constructed or improved, and includes the
reworking of an existing surface by the application of up to and including two
inches (2") of bituminous pavement; the installation or replacement of
guardrails, seal coats, and culverts; the grading or widening of an existing
unpaved road or flattening of shoulders or side slopes to meet current width
and safety standards; and horizontal or vertical alignment changes necessary to
bring an existing road in compliance with current safety standards.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, trust, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity however designated.
PROCUREMENT: Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an option to
purchase, or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services, or construction
materials, and all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply,
service, or construction materials, including the solicitation of sources,
selection, award, and all phases of contract administration.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: The furnishing of services for auditing, banking,
insurance, engineering, legal, architectural, and other forms of professional
consulting.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: The construction of a park or recreational facility or a
pipeline, culvert, dam, canal, or other system for water, sewage, stormwater,
or flood control and does not include the replacement or repair of existing
infrastructure on private property.
PURCHASE ORDER: A procurement document issued by the purchaser to formalize a
purchasing transaction (contract) with a supplier. A purchase order encumbers
funds (sets asides, assures, or reserves funds for a particular purchase from
an approved budget account). A purchase order is sent to a supplier to initiate
or "place" an order.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP): An alternative method to sealed bids. A
procurement document used for seeking competition for a purchase when the needs
of the buyer cannot be clearly expressed or described within a written
specification and cost is just one (1) of several criteria necessary to make a
procurement decision. Proposals are usually used to purchase professional or
human services, or high technology "state of the art" equipment. Proposals are
generally not appropriate for construction projects.
REQUEST FOR QUOTES (RFQ): A document used for seeking informal competition on
small expenditure purchases. RFQs are usually solicited by telephone, fax, or
email.
REQUISITION:
A.   An internal document by which a department notifies the Purchasing Agent
of items that are needed. The requisition should list the item (or items)
needed, the quantity, the account number(s), and the department director's
approval to proceed with the purchase. The requisition "pre-encumbers" funds
(determines if funds are available for a particular purchase from an approved
budget account); or
B.   A request submitted to the Purchasing Agent or Finance Department for
requesting payment on a previously accrued obligation.
RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A supplier or seller who has submitted a bid
that conforms in all material aspects to the bid specifications (responsive),
and who has the capability in all respects to perform in full the contract or
purchase order requirements in a timely manner (responsible).
SEALED BIDS: Also called an invitation for bids (IFB).
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports that are
merely incidental to the required performance. "Services" does not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT: The procurement of supplies or services that are only
available from a single supplier or manufacturer.
SOLICITATION: The process of notifying prospective bidders that the City wishes
to receive quotes, bids, or proposals for supplies or services. The process may
consist of public advertising, distribution quotes, bids, or proposals to
prospective bidders.
SUPPLIES: All personal property, including but not limited to goods, equipment,
materials, and printing. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017; amd. Ord. 1559, 9-6-2022)
3-3-030: PROCUREMENT AUTHORITY:
The City Council is authorized to approve all procurement and delegates this
authority as outlined below.
A.   The Mayor may sign contracts as specifically authorized in advance by the
City Council in accordance with procedures set forth in the Utah Uniform Fiscal
Procedures Act for Utah Cities, as amended.
B.   The City Manager may purchase supplies, services, or construction
materials in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter and may
sign contracts and agreements pertaining thereto. The City Manager shall update
the City Council on a monthly basis regarding construction project expenditures
and large expenditures.
C.   Department directors and the Purchasing Agent may purchase supplies and
services in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter, and may sign
the contracts and agreements pertaining thereto which do not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), are funded in the City budget, are competitively
bid, and are reviewed by the Finance Director or designee.
D.   The Public Works Director or the Parks and Recreation Director, as
applicable, may oversee the procurement involved with construction projects,
and may sign the contracts and agreements pertaining thereto that are funded in
the City budget, are competitively bid, and are reviewed by the Finance
Director or designee.
E.   Any City employee shall have authority to purchase supplies not to exceed
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in accordance with the procedures set forth
in this chapter, if previously approved by the department director. (Ord. 1257,
5-2-2017; amd. Ord. 1559, 9-6-2022)
3-3-040: PURCHASING AGENT:
A.   The City Manager shall designate a Purchasing Agent for the City. The
Purchasing Agent shall act under the direct supervision of the Finance
Director.
B.   The Purchasing Agent or designee shall perform the duties as assigned by
the Finance Director, which duties shall include:
1.   Administering and interpreting the Procurement Code in accordance with any
applicable Federal, State and Local laws, and Finance Department policies and
procedures for carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
2.   Procuring or supervising the procurement of all supplies and services
needed by the City, including preparation of specifications, and negotiation
and signing of procurement contracts and issuing purchase orders.
3.   Exercising general supervision and control over all inventories or
supplies of the City and the inspection of and accounting for all such
inventories or supplies.
4.   Preparing and maintaining forms and reports as are reasonably necessary to
the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations of the City.
5.   Keeping generally informed of current developments in the field of
procurement, including but not limited to market conditions and new products.
6.   Providing a copy of all contracts and agreements to the City Recorder
immediately upon their execution.
7.   Administering the sale, trade, exchange, or disposal of the City's surplus
personal property. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-050: BUDGET LIMITATION:
A.   No expenditure or encumbrance shall be made for any supplies, services or
construction materials or project for the City in excess of the funded amount
in the City budget as adopted or subsequently amended by the City Council.
B.   Change orders in construction project contracts that cause the contract
price to exceed the total project budget shall not be approved until reviewed
and approved as a budget adjustment by the City Council. Change orders may be
signed in accordance with section
3-3-030 of this chapter. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-060: GENERAL PROCUREMENT RELATED EXPENDITURES:
Procurement related expenditures for general types of supplies and services are
classified as follows:
 
A. Exempt expenditures $5,000.00 or less
B. Minor expenditures  $5,001.00 to $10,000.00
C. Small expenditures  $10,001.00 to $20,000.00
D. Large expenditures  Greater than $20,000.00
 
(Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017; amd. Ord. 1559, 9-6-2022)
3-3-070: PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES:
A.   General Purchasing Procedures: Except as otherwise stated below in this
chapter, all procurement shall be made pursuant to the following general
purchasing procedures:
1.   The department personnel prepare a requisition for the supplies or
services that need to be purchased.
2.   The department director approves the requisition.
3.   The department selects a vendor or service provider according to the
procedures for the type of expenditure, as outlined in subsections C through F
of this section.
4.   The department sends the selected vendor or service provider information
to the Purchasing Agent.
5.   The Purchasing Agent creates a purchase order and sends it to the vendor
or service provider to place the order.
6.   Upon receipt of the vendor's invoice for payment, accounts payable shall
match the invoice with the purchase order and issue payment.
B.   Exempt Expenditures: Exempt expenditures may be made without obtaining
quotes or bids, but should be made with as much competition as practicable
under the circumstances.
1.   The purchasing procedure for exempt expenditures is as follows:
a.   The department purchases items using a credit card, on account, or petty
cash.
b.   The department prepares a requisition for the item(s) that were purchased.
c.   The department director approves the requisition.
d.   The Purchasing Agent creates a purchase order.
e.   Accounts payable matches the invoice (or receipt) with the purchase order
and issues a payment check to the vendor.
C.   Minor Expenditures: In order to select a vendor or service provider for
minor expenditures, the department or Purchasing Agent shall solicit at least
three (3) written or verbal price quotes and shall provide documentation of
said price quotes to the Purchasing Agent as required in subsection A4 of this
section, or by selecting a vendor or service provider pursuant to a State of
Utah or other governmental entity cooperative contract.
D.   Small Expenditures: In order to select a vendor or service provider for
small expenditures, the Purchasing Agent or designee shall obtain and document
price quotes by obtaining written or verbal quotes or bids, or by making the
purchase pursuant to a State of Utah or other governmental entity cooperative
contract.
E.   Large Expenditures: In order to select a vendor for large expenditures the
Purchasing Agent obtains bids or proposals using any of the following methods:
invitation for bids, request for proposals, or by making the purchase pursuant
to a State of Utah or other governmental entity cooperative contract.
F.   Selection Procedures:
1.   Evaluating Invitation For Bids And Request For Quotes: Bids and quotes
shall be evaluated within a reasonable time by the Purchasing Agent or designee
to determine the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, whose bid or quote
conforms in all material aspects to the bid or quote specifications, and who
has the capacity in all respects to perform in full the contract or purchase
order requirements in a timely manner. The Purchasing Agent or designee may not
use criteria not described in the invitation for bids or request for quotes to
evaluate a bid or quote.
2.   Evaluating Request For Proposals: Proposals shall be evaluated within a
reasonable time by an Evaluation Committee comprised of at least three (3) City
employees to determine which proposal provides the best value to the City. The
Evaluation Committee shall evaluate each responsive and responsible proposal,
whose proposal conforms in all material aspects to the proposal specifications,
and who has the capacity in all respects to perform in full the contract or
purchase order requirements in a timely manner. Evaluation criteria for a
proposal may include items such as experience, qualifications, approach to the
project, references, management plans, schedule of delivery, cost, and other
subjective or objective criteria. At any time during the evaluation process,
the Evaluation Committee may request additional information from a proposer or
proposers, including oral interviews or presentations. Criteria not described
in the request for proposals may not be used to evaluate a proposal.
3.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount
or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will
not permit the delay of re-soliciting bids, the Purchasing Agent shall resolve
a tie bid by resolving the tie in favor of:
a.   The bidder closest to the point of delivery;
b.   The bidder who received the previous award;
c.   The bidder who will provide the earliest delivery date;
d.   By drawing lots; or
e.   Any other reasonable method.
4.   Single Bids: In the event that only one (1) bid is received, the
Purchasing Agent shall determine whether it is in the best interests of the
City to re-solicit for additional bids, or proceed with a procurement award
using the single bid received.
5.   No bids Or Proposals: In the event no bids or proposals are received, the
Purchasing Agent shall determine whether the delay of re-soliciting bids or
proposals will be detrimental to the public interest. If a delay in re-
soliciting bids or proposals would be detrimental to the public interest, the
Purchasing Agent may purchase the supplies or services without obtaining quotes
or proposals, but with as much competition as practicable under the
circumstances. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-080: SPECIAL TYPES OF EXPENDITURES:
A.   Professional Services: Professional services are expenditures that, by
their nature, are not reasonably adapted to award by competitive bidding. The
City Manager or designee shall award professional services contracts at his
discretion based on an evaluation of the provider's professional
qualifications, service ability, experience, cost of services, and other
applicable criteria. Professional services may include, but not be limited to,
the services of financial and legal advisors, architects, engineers,
accountants, physicians, dentists, veterinarians, trainers and similar
professional services.
1.   A contract for professional services for less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) may be awarded without obtaining quotes, bids, or proposals, but
should be made with as much competition as practicable under the circumstances.
2.   A contract for professional services exceeding twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) may be awarded after the Purchasing Agent or department solicits
qualifications and billing rates from providers using a Request for Statements
of Qualifications (RFSQ), and creates a list of pre-qualified providers. The
department evaluates the RFSQs and selects a provider based on demonstrated
competence, qualifications, and fair and reasonable billing rates.
3.   A department may proceed with the purchase of professional services
according to the terms and conditions of an existing City contract.
4.   With the City Manager's approval, the City Attorney may retain outside
legal counsel and experts necessary to assist the City in prosecuting or
defending lawsuits and claims without obtaining quotes, bids, or proposals.
B.   Construction Projects: The following provisions are applicable to all
construction projects:
1.   Public Works Director And Parks And Recreation Director Responsible:
Unless otherwise determined by the City Manager, the Public Works Director or
the Parks and Recreation Director, as applicable, shall be responsible for the
procurement of all construction projects for the City.
2.   Dividing The Cost Of A Construction Project: The cost of a construction
project may not be divided to avoid exceeding the bid limit. However, the cost
of a construction project that exceeds the bid limit may be divided if the
selection procedures comply with the requirements of this chapter with respect
to each part of the construction project that results from dividing the cost.
3.   Bid Security: Contracts for construction projects may provide for a bid
security in the amount equal to at least five percent (5%) of the amount of the
bid.
4.   Advertising: Advertising for construction projects shall comply with
section
3-3-090 of this chapter.
5.   Rejection: The Public Works Director or Parks and Recreation Director, as
applicable, may reject any and all bids if deemed to be in the best interests
of the City.
C.   Building Improvement And Public Works Projects:
1.   Annual Calculation Of Bid Limit: Each January the Finance Director shall
establish the bid limit for the upcoming calendar year using the formula
established in the definition of "bid limit".
2.   Estimated Cost Below The Bid Limit: If the estimated cost of the building
improvement or public works project is less than the bid limit, the City may
complete the improvements or project in- house without calling for bids or the
Public Works Director or Parks and Recreation Director may invite bids from at
least three (3) potential, responsible providers of type of construction
needed. Such invitations may be made in writing or orally, including by
telephone, and shall be made without unfair favoritism or bias. The Public
Works Director or Parks and Recreation Director shall keep a record of all
invitations and bids made hereunder. Otherwise, expenditures shall be made
pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection
3-3-070E of this chapter.
3.   Estimated Cost Exceeding The Bid Limit: Except as otherwise provided
herein, any expenditure of the City for a building improvement or public works
project that exceeds the bid limit shall be made pursuant to the procedures set
forth in Utah Code Annotated section 11-39-101, et seq., as amended.
D.   Class C Road Improvement Project: Any Class C road improvement project
that is wholly or partially funded by Class C road funds shall be procured as
required by the Utah Code Annotated section 72-6-108 and 109, as amended, which
is hereby adopted by reference.
E.   Emergency Procurement: An emergency condition is a condition or unforeseen
circumstances that creates an immediate or imminent threat to the public's
health, welfare, safety, or property. The existence of an emergency condition
may create an immediate and serious need for supplies, services, repairs, and/
or construction that cannot be met through normal procurement methods and
policy (i.e., an emergency procurement). An emergency procurement of supplies,
services, repairs, and/or construction shall be made using as much competition
as practical under the circumstances by the Purchasing Agent, the Public Works
Director, the Parks and Recreation Director, or the City Manager or his
designee. Emergency procurements shall be limited to only those supplies,
services, repairs, and/or construction necessary to mitigate the emergency.
F.   Sole Source Procurement: The Purchasing Agent may approve a sole source
procurement, without competition, when the Purchasing Agent determines that
there is only one (1) source for the required item or service to be purchased;
or the award is a condition of a donation or grant that will fund the full cost
of the purchase. Examples of potential reasons for sole source procurements
include, but are not limited to the compatibility of equipment, accessories,
replacement parts, maintenance, or service is the paramount consideration;
trial use or testing; procurement of items for resale; procurement of public
utility service; or unique properties of the sole source. The Purchasing Agent
may verify a sole source by putting the sole source item out to bid.
G.   Procurement Under City, County, State, Or Federal Contracts Or Pre-
Qualified Lists: An expenditure for which requests for qualifications,
competitive bidding or price negotiation according to a procedure comparable to
the City's process has already occurred at the City, County, State or Federal
level may be made without further bidding.
H.   Procurement Under Interlocal Contracts: An expenditure made in conjunction
with an interlocal agreement between the City and another governmental entity
in compliance with the Interlocal Cooperation Act, Utah Code title 11, chapter
13, may be made without further bidding.
I.   Expenditures To Resolve Claims Or Lawsuits: Expenditures to resolve claims
or lawsuits against or by the City may be made without obtaining quotes or
bids, but should be made with as much competition as practicable under the
circumstances. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017; amd. Ord. 1559, 9-6-2022)
3-3-090: ADVERTISING REQUIREMENTS:
All procurement solicitations shall conform to the following advertising
requirements, as applicable. Unless otherwise stated, procurement solicitations
may be posted in E-Procurement websites rather than advertised in a printed
medium.
A.   All invitations for bids and requests for proposals shall be advertised a
minimum of five (5) days in advance of the bid due date at least once in a
generally and widely available medium, which may include newspapers, business
journals or posted on an E-Procurement website.
B.   All invitations for bids for building improvement and public works
projects shall be published at least twice in a newspaper published or of
general circulation in the City at least five (5) days before opening the bids;
and in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 45-1-101, as amended, at
least five (5) days before opening the bids.
C.   All invitations for bids for Class C road improvement projects shall be
advertised at least once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation; and in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 45-
1-101, as amended, for three (3) weeks.
D.   Notice for the sale of surplus personal property shall be advertised at
least ten (10) days prior to the sale or opening of bids at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation; or posted on a public surplus company
website. The notice shall describe the property to be sold, the terms of sale
and the place and time of such sale or bid opening.
E.   Notice for the surplussing of real property shall be provided at least
fourteen (14) days before the opportunity for public comment by: posting the
property with notice of the consideration of designating it surplus; and
mailing notice to each owner of real property within three hundred feet (300')
of the property that is the subject of the proposed disposition as shown on the
last assessment rolls of the County in which the property is located. (Ord.
1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-100: PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS:
A.   The City may award exclusive and nonexclusive contracts. Unless a contract
specifically states it is exclusive, it shall be deemed nonexclusive.
"Nonexclusive" means that the City may award a contract to more than one (1)
contractor for similar supplies or services, as it deems appropriate.
B.   A contract for supplies, services, or construction materials must have a
stated end date and may be entered into for any stated period of time deemed to
be in the best interest of the City; provided, that the term of the contract
and the conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the
solicitation. No contract may be renewed indefinitely.
C.   Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be
subject to the availability and appropriations of funds by the City Council.
D.   Contracts and purchase orders may be amended, modified or supplemented
only by written amendment to the contract or purchase order, executed by the
parties to the contract.
E.   Authority to sign procurement contracts is as established in sections
3-3-030 and
3-3-040 of this chapter.
F.   The City Recorder shall countersign all contracts made on behalf of the
City or to which the City is a party. Department directors shall provide the
City Recorder with a fully conformed original copy of all procurement contracts
upon their execution. The City Recorder shall maintain a properly indexed
record of all contracts.
G.   The City Attorney shall review and approve all contracts as to form. (Ord.
1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-110: PROTEST OF SPECIFICATIONS OR AWARD OF PROCUREMENT CONTRACT:
Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor who is aggrieved with
the solicitation or award of a procurement contract may protest to the City
Purchasing Agent.
A.   Protest Of Specifications: A protest regarding the specifications of a
solicitation must be submitted in writing to the Purchasing Agent prior to the
opening of the bid and must list the pertinent facts giving rise to the
protest.
B.   Protest Of Contract Or Purchase Award: A protest regarding the award of a
procurement contract or purchase award must be submitted in writing to the
Purchasing Agent within five (5) business days of the award of a procurement
contract or purchase award and must list the pertinent facts giving rise to the
protest. Untimely protests will not be considered.
C.   Stay Of Proceedings: In the event of a timely protest, the City shall not
proceed further with the solicitation or with the award of the contract or
purchase order until the protest is sustained or rejected by the Purchasing
Agent, unless an immediate award of the contract is required to protect
substantial interests of the City.
D.   Protest Review: The Purchasing Agent shall determine if the protest is
timely filed. If the Purchasing Agent determines the protest is timely filed,
he shall dismiss the protest if he determines the protest alleges facts, if
true, do not provide an adequate basis for the protest. Otherwise, the
Purchasing Agent shall uphold the protest. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-120: DELIVERY OF SUPPLIES:
When supplies are delivered, the Purchasing Agent or the employee who requested
the supplies shall inspect the supplies received to assure that the correct
quantity and quality have been delivered. If the supplies delivered are
satisfactory, the supplies shall be accepted and a copy of the packing slip,
invoice, or other delivery document shall be stapled to a copy of the purchase
order and forwarded to accounts payable for review, payment, and filing. (Ord.
1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-130: PETTY CASH:
The Finance Department may maintain a Petty Cash Fund not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) that shall be kept in a locked box.
A.   Limits: Any employee of the City may receive up to fifty dollars ($50.00)
from the Petty Cash Fund for any lawful and necessary expenditure to be made on
behalf of the City. Employees shall not receive any money from the Petty Cash
Fund for personal use.
B.   Procedure: Any employee receiving money from the Petty Cash Fund shall
sign a petty cash voucher showing the amount received and an explanation of the
intended use of the money. Within one (1) business day after making the
expenditure, the employee shall return any excess money to the Petty Cash Fund
and staple the itemized receipt for the expenditure to the petty cash voucher.
C.   Replenishing Fund: When money in the Petty Cash Fund becomes less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), the Treasurer shall draft a check to the Petty Cash
Fund to raise the amount of currency in the fund to five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-140: INVENTORY MANAGEMENT:
Department directors shall exercise supervision of all inventories of tangible
City property within the control of or assigned to their departments. All City
property located in warehouses and similar storage areas shall be inventoried
annually, and accountability for the property shall reside with the respective
department director. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-150: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY:
A.   Whenever City personal property is no longer needed by the department
possessing the property, the department director having control of such
property shall notify the City Manager or designee. The City Manager or
designee shall notify other City departments of the availability of such
property. If requested, the City Manager or designee shall supervise the
transfer of such property to the department requesting the property.
B.   If City personal property becomes surplus, unused, obsolete, unsuitable
for public use, or otherwise no longer needed, the property shall be disposed
of in accordance with this section.
1.   City personal property that is included in the fixed asset register (with
an original value greater than $5,000.00), shall not be disposed of, or sold
through public auction, until such property is declared surplus by the City
Council pursuant to its administrative authority. Once this property is
declared surplus by the City Council, it may be sold to the highest bidder by
the Purchasing Agent through an approved public auction service provider.
2.   City personal property that was not originally included in the fixed asset
register, and/or is reasonably expected to raise less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) through public auction, may be sold to the highest
bidder by the Purchasing Agent through an approved public auction service
provider.
3.   The City Manager or his designee shall be responsible for conducting
public auctions for City personal property that was not originally included in
the fixed asset register, and/or is reasonably expected to raise more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) through public auction. The City
Manager shall have the right to reject any bids or offers for City personal
property when he deems it to be in the best interest of the City.
4.   If a surplus item remains unsold after reasonable attempts to sell it
through public auction, the City Manager may sell the surplus item to any
person for such price as the City Manager deems appropriate, or may dispose of
the item at his discretion.
C.   City personal property or items that are fully consumed in their use for
official City business shall be disposed of in any reasonable manner approved
by the Purchasing Agent.
D.   Monetary proceeds from the sale or other disposition of items pursuant to
this section shall be credited to the fund sundry account.
E.   Where City personal property is of such a size, shape, or is so unique as
to be unmarketable, the above requirements may be waived and such property may
be sold or otherwise disposed of in any reasonable manner, with the approval of
the City Council. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-160: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY:
The City Council may exercise its executive authority and authorize by
resolution the disposal, including by sale, lease, or other lawful manner, of
real property for the benefit of the City as provided by Utah Code Annotated
section 10-8-2, as amended. A significant parcel of real property is a parcel
greater than one (1) acre or that has a reasonable value in excess of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
A.   The City Manager shall make an initial determination that real property is
surplus. Surplus real property may include real property that is not needed for
City infrastructure, property where the cost to maintain the property outweigh
its value to the City, is part of a property trade that will benefit the City,
the sale of which will realize significant financial benefits to the City, or
the disposal of which is otherwise in the public interest.
B.   Before the City may dispose of a significant parcel of real property, the
City shall provide notice as required in subsection
3-3-090D of this chapter; and hold a public meeting at which the City Council
accepts public comment on the proposed disposition.
C.   All disposal, leases, or subleases of such real property of the City other
than a significant parcel of real property, shall be made, as nearly as
possible, under the same conditions and limitations as required by this chapter
for the purchase of property including notice and bidding procedures.
D.   The City Council may also authorize at its discretion and under such terms
and conditions as it may deem desirable, fair and appropriate, considering
intended use, property tax value and the interests of the City, the sale of any
surplus property, through public auction or other method designed to best serve
the interests of City residents and produce a fair return; the trade or
exchange or any surplus property; and the lease or sublease of any surplus
property. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-170: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A.   Manipulation Prohibited: Purchases shall not be manipulated or
artificially divided to fall within the exempt expenditure category, or to
avoid using standard purchasing methods and policies.
B.   Personal Purchases: Personal purchases of any type on a City issued credit
or purchasing card are strictly prohibited. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-180: VIOLATIONS:
Any purchase or contract executed in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or applicable State law shall be void as to the City, and any funds
expended thereupon may be recovered by the City through appropriate action.
(Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
3-3-190: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved of a determination of the Purchasing Agent decision in
connection with the provisions of this chapter may appeal the determination or
action within five (5) business days from the Purchasing Agent's decision by
filing a written protest to the City Recorder and the reasons therefor with the
City Council. (Ord. 1257, 5-2-2017)
CHAPTER 4
GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
3-4-010: Short Title
3-4-020: Purpose
3-4-030: Definitions
3-4-040: Compliance With State Law
3-4-050: Right To Inspect Records And Receive Copies
3-4-060: Public, Private, Controlled, And Protected Records
3-4-070: Classification And Retention
3-4-080: Procedures For Records Requests
3-4-090: Fees
3-4-100: Appeals
3-4-110: Record Amendments
3-4-120: Penalties
3-4-130: Records Officer
3-4-140: Records Maintenance
3-4-010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the DRAPER CITY GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND
MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE, and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-020: PURPOSE:
In enacting this chapter, it is the purpose and intent of the city council to
acknowledge and comply with the Utah government records access and management
act as contained in Utah Code Annotated title 63G, chapter 2, as amended, and
specifically to conform with section 63G-2-701 thereof, which provides that the
city may adopt an ordinance relating to information practices, including
classification, designation, access, denials, segregation, appeals, management,
retention, and amendment of records. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ACT: The government records access and management act, Utah Code Annotated
title 63G, chapter 2, as amended.
AGENCY: Any office, department, division, section, staff office, board,
commission, committee or other division of Draper City, or any public or
private entity which pursuant to contract with the city has agreed to produce
and maintain public city records.
CITY: Draper City.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE PROGRAM: The series of instructions or statements that permit
the functioning of a computer system in a manner designed to provide storage,
retrieval, and manipulation of data from the computer system, and any
associated documentation, manuals, or other source material explaining how to
operate the software program. "Software" does not include the original data or
record which is manipulated by the software.
CONTROLLED RECORDS: Controlled under the provisions of this chapter and in
accordance with the provisions of the act.
DATA: Individual entries, e.g., birth date or address, in records.
DISPOSE: To destroy, or render irretrievable or illegible, a record or the
information contained in it by any physical, electronic, or other means,
including unauthorized deletion or erasure of electronically recorded audio,
visual, nonwritten formats, data processing, or other records.
NONPUBLIC RECORDS: Those records defined as private, controlled, or protected
under the provisions of this chapter and the act.
PRIVATE RECORDS: Those records classified as private under the provisions of
this chapter and the act.
PROTECTED RECORDS: Those records classified as protected under the provisions
of this chapter and the act.
PUBLIC RECORDS: Those records which have not been classified as nonpublic in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the act.
RECORD: A book, letter, document, paper, map, plan, photograph, film, card,
tape, recording, electronic data, or other documentary material regardless of
physical form or characteristics, prepared, owned, received, or retained by the
city where all of the information in the original is reproducible by photocopy
or other mechanical or electronic means. "Record" does not mean:
A.   A personal note or personal communication prepared or received by an
employee or officer of the city in a capacity other than the employee's or
officer's governmental capacity, or that is unrelated to the conduct of the
public's business;
B.   A temporary draft or similar material prepared for the originator's
personal use or prepared by the originator for the personal use of an
individual for whom the originator is working;
C.   Material that is legally owned by an individual in the individual's
private capacity;
D.   Material to which access is limited by the laws of copyright or patent
unless the copyright or patent is owned by a governmental entity or political
subdivision;
E.   Proprietary software;
F.   Junk mail or a commercial publication received by the city or an official
or employee of the city;
G.   A book that is cataloged, indexed, or inventoried and contained in the
collections of a library open to the public;
H.   Material that is cataloged, indexed, or inventoried and contained in the
collections of a library open to the public, regardless of physical form or
characteristics of the material;
I.   A daily calendar or other personal note prepared by the originator for the
originator's personal use or for the personal use of an individual for whom the
originator is working;
J.   A computer program that is developed or purchased by or for the city for
its own use;
K.   A note or internal memorandum prepared as part of the deliberative process
by:
1.   A member of the judiciary;
2.   An administrative law judge;
3.   A member of any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial
function;
L.   A telephone number or similar code used to access a mobile communication
device that is used by an employee or officer of the city, provided that the
employee or officer of the city has designated at least one business telephone
number that is a public record as provided in Utah Code Annotated 63G-2-301; or
M.   Information that an owner of unimproved property provides to the city as
provided in Utah Code Annotated 11-42-205. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-040: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The following provisions of the act are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as though fully set forth herein. Any inconsistency or conflict
between this chapter and the following referenced statutes of the state of Utah
shall be governed by the statute:
General provisions:         
63G-2-102                  Legislative intent
63G-2-103                  Definitions
63G-2-104                  Administrative procedures act not
                           applicable
63G-2-105                  Confidentiality agreements
63G-2-106                  Records of security measures
63G-2-107                  Disclosure of records subject to federal
                           law
63G-2-108                  Certification of records officer
Access to records:          
63G-2-201                  Right to inspect records and receive
                           copies of records
63G-2-202                  Access to private, controlled and
                           protected documents
63G-2-205                  Denials
63G-2-206                  Sharing records
63G-2-207                  Subpoenas - court ordered disclosure for
                           discovery
Classification:             
63G-2-301                  Records that must be disclosed
63G-2-302                  Private records
63G-2-303                  Private information concerning certain
                           government employees
63G-2-304                  Controlled records
63G-2-305                  Protected records
63G-2-306                  Procedure to determine classification
63G-2-307                  Duty to evaluate records and make
                           designations and classifications
63G-2-308                  Segregation of records
63G-2-309                  Confidentiality claims
63G-2-310                  Records made public after 75 years
Accuracy of records:        
                           Rights of individuals on whom data is
63G-2-601                  maintained - classification statement -
                           notice to provider of information
63G-2-602                  Disclosure to subject of records -
                           context of use
63G-2-604                  Retention and disposition of records
Applicability to political  
subdivisions:
63G-2-701                  Political subdivisions may adopt
                           ordinances in compliance with chapter
Remedies:                   
63G-2-801                  Criminal penalties
63G-2-802                  Injunction - attorney fees
63G-2-803                  No individual liability for certain
                           decisions of a governmental entity
                           Violation of provision of chapter -
63G-2-804                  penalties for intentional mutilation or
                           destruction - disciplinary action
 
(Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-050: RIGHT TO INSPECT RECORDS AND RECEIVE COPIES:
A.   Right To Inspect Records And Receive Copies Of Records: Every person has
the right to inspect a public record free of charge, and the right to take a
copy of a public record during normal working hours, subject to Utah Code
Annotated sections 63G-2-203 and 63G-2-204 of the act and the provisions of
this chapter.
B.   Obligation To Create: In response to a request, the city is not required
to:
1.   Create a record;
2.   Compile, format, manipulate, package, summarize, or tailor information;
3.   Provide a record in a particular format, medium, or program not currently
maintained by the city;
4.   Fulfill a person's records request if the request unreasonably duplicates
prior records requests from that person; or
5.   Fill a person's records request if:
a.   The record requested is accessible in the identical physical form and
content in a public publication or product produced by the city;
b.   The city provides the person requesting the record with the public
publication or product; and
c.   The city specifies where the record can be found in the public publication
or product. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-060: PUBLIC, PRIVATE, CONTROLLED, AND PROTECTED RECORDS:
A.   Public records shall be as defined in section 63G-2-201 of the act and
this chapter.
B.   Private records shall be those records classified as private as defined in
section 63G-2-302 of the act and as classified and defined in procedures
established pursuant to this chapter. Private records shall be made available
to:
1.   The subject of the record;
2.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is the subject
of the record;
3.   The legal guardian of a legally incapacitated individual who is the
subject of the record;
4.   Any other individual who:
a.   Has a power of attorney from the subject of the record;
b.   Submits a notarized release from the subject of the record or the
individual's legal representative dated no more than ninety (90) days before
the date the request is made; or
c.   If the record is a medical record described in subsection 63G-2-302(1)(b),
is a healthcare provider, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 26-33a-102,
if releasing the record or information in the record is consistent with normal
professional practice and medical ethics; or
5.   Any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court order as
provided in subsection 63G-2-202(7) or a legislative subpoena as provided in
Utah Code Annotated title 36, chapter 14, legislative subpoena powers.
C.   Controlled records shall be those classified as controlled as defined in
Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-303 of the act and as classified and defined
in procedures established in this chapter. Controlled records shall be made
available to a physician, psychologist, or certified social worker, insurance
provider or producer, or a government public health agency upon submission of a
release from the subject of the record that is dated no more than ninety (90)
days prior to the date request is made; and a signed acknowledgment of the
terms of disclosure of controlled information.
D.   Protected records shall be those records classified as protected as
defined in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-305 of the act and as classified
and defined in procedures established in this chapter. Upon request, and except
as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-202(10) or (11)(b), the city
shall disclose a protected record to:
1.   The person who submitted the record;
2.   Any other individual who:
a.   Has a power of attorney from all persons, governmental entities, or
political subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the
protected classification; or
b.   Submits a notarized release from all persons, governmental entities, or
political subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the
protected classification or from their legal representatives dated no more than
ninety (90) days prior to the date the request is made. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-070: CLASSIFICATION AND RETENTION:
All records and records series of any format shall be classified and scheduled
for retention according to the provisions of the act and this chapter. Records
classification and scheduling for retention shall be conducted under the
supervision of the city records officer. Assistance may be requested from the
city attorney as needed. Classification and retention scheduling forms and
guidelines shall be prepared and promulgated by the records officer. The city
shall by resolution establish a retention schedule for all city records and
records series. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-080: PROCEDURES FOR RECORDS REQUESTS:
A.   Under circumstances in which the city is not able to immediately respond
to a records request, the requester shall furnish the city a written request on
forms provided by the city. The date and time of the request shall be noted on
the request form and all time frames provided under this chapter shall commence
from that time and date. Requesters of nonpublic information shall adequately
identify themselves and their status prior to receiving access to nonpublic
records.
B.   The city may respond to a request for a record by approving the request
and providing the records, denying the request, or by giving such other
appropriate response as may be established by policies and procedures.
C.   In most circumstances, the city shall respond to a written request for a
public record as soon as reasonably possible, but no later than ten (10)
business days after receiving the written request as described in this section.
D.   Extraordinary circumstances shall justify the city's failure to respond to
a request for a public record within ten (10) business days and shall extend
the time for response to that time reasonably necessary to respond to the
request, as determined by the city. Extraordinary circumstances shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
1.   Another governmental entity is using the record, in which case the city
shall promptly request that the governmental entity currently in possession
return the record;
2.   The record requested is for either a voluminous quantity of records or
requires the city to review a large number of records or perform extensive
research to locate the materials requested;
3.   The city is currently processing a large number of records requests;
4.   The decision to release a record involves legal issues that require the
city to seek legal counsel for the analysis of statutes, rules, ordinances,
regulations, or case law;
5.   Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from
information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires extensive
editing; or
6.   Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from
information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires computer
programming.
E.   When a record request cannot be responded to within ten (10) days, the
city shall give the requester an estimate of the time required to respond to
the request.
F.   The failure or inability of the city to respond to a request for a record
within the time frames set out herein, or the city's denial of such request,
shall give the requester the right to appeal.
G.   Any record which has been requested that is disposable by the approved
retention schedule may not be disposed of until the request is granted and
fulfilled, or sixty (60) days after all appeals are completed.
H.   No record, disposable by the approved retention schedule, which is subject
to pending litigation or audit shall be disposed of until the litigation or
audit has been completed or resolved. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-090: FEES:
A.   The city may charge a reasonable fee to cover the city's actual cost of
providing a record. The fee shall be as stated in the city's consolidated fee
schedule.
B.   When the city compiles a record in a form other than that normally
maintained by the city, the actual costs may include the following:
1.   The cost of staff time for compiling, formatting, manipulating, packaging,
summarizing, or tailoring the record either into an organization or media to
meet the person's request;
2.   The cost of staff time for search, retrieval and other direct
administrative costs for complying with a request; and
3.   In the case of fees for a record that is the result of computer output
other than word processing, the actual incremental cost of providing the
electronic services and products together with a reasonable portion of the
costs associated with formatting or interfacing the information for particular
users, and the administrative costs as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
63G-2-203(2)(a)(k) and (ii).
C.   The City may fulfill a record request without charge when it determines
that:
1.   Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a person;
2.   The individual requesting the record is the subject of the record, or an
individual specified in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-202(1) or (2); or
3.   The requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the information in
the record, and the requester is impecunious.
D.   The City may not charge a fee for reviewing a record to determine whether
it is subject to disclosure or for inspecting a record. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-100: APPEALS:
A.   A requester or interested party may appeal an access denial to the City
Manager within thirty (30) days after the City sends a notice of denial. A
notice of appeal shall contain the name, mailing address, and daytime telephone
number of the requester or interested party; and the relief sought. The
requester or interested party may file a short statement of facts, reasons, and
legal authority in support of the appeal.
B.   If a City claims extraordinary circumstances and specifies the date when
the records will be available and, if the requester believes the extraordinary
circumstances do not exist or that the date specified is unreasonable, the
requester may appeal the City's claim of extraordinary circumstances or date
for compliance to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City
Manager within thirty (30) days after notification of a claim of extraordinary
circumstances by the City, despite the lack of a "determination" or its
equivalent.
C.   If the appeal involves a record that is the subject of a business
confidentiality claim, the City Manager shall:
1.   Send notice of the appeal to the business confidentiality claimant within
three (3) business days after receiving notice, except that if notice under
this section must be given to more than thirty five (35) persons, it shall be
given as soon as reasonably possible; and
2.   Send notice of the business confidentiality claim and the schedule for the
City Manager's determination to the requester or interested party within three
(3) business days after receiving notice of the appeal.
3.   The business confidentiality claimant shall have seven (7) business days
after notice is sent by the City Manager to submit further support for the
claim of business confidentiality.
D.   The City Manager shall make a decision on the appeal within five (5)
business days after receipt of the notice of appeal or twelve (12) business
days after the City sends the notice of appeal to a person who submitted a
claim of business confidentiality.
1.   If the City Manager fails to make a decision on an appeal of an access
denial within the time specified, the failure is the equivalent of a decision
affirming the access denial.
2.   If the City Manager fails to make a decision on an appeal within the time
specified, the failure is the equivalent of a decision affirming the claim of
extraordinary circumstances or the reasonableness of the date specified when
the records will be available.
3.   The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the parties participating
in the proceeding may, by agreement, extend the time periods specified in this
section.
E.   The City Manager may, upon consideration and weighing of the various
interests and public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or
nondisclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as
private or protected if the interests favoring access are greater than or equal
to the interests favoring restriction of access.
F.   The City shall send written notice of the City Manager's decision to all
participants. If the City Manager's decision is to affirm the access denial in
whole or in part, the notice shall include:
1.   A statement that the requester or interested party has the right to appeal
the decision to the State Records Committee. The statement shall include the
time limit for filing an appeal and the contact information for the State
Records Committee. (Ord. 1256, 4-11-2017)
3-4-110: RECORD AMENDMENTS:
Government records held by the City may be amended or corrected as needed. An
individual may contest the accuracy or completeness of any public, or private,
or protected record concerning him or her by submitting a written request to
the City to amend the record. However, this section does not affect the right
of access to private or protected records. The request shall contain the
requester's name, mailing address and daytime telephone number and a detailed
statement explaining why the City should amend the record. The City shall issue
a decision either approving or denying the request to amend no later than
thirty (30) days after receipt of the request. The City shall inform the
requester in writing of its decision. The requester may appeal the denial of
the request to amend a record pursuant to the provisions contained in this
chapter regarding appeals. This section does not apply to records relating to
title to real or personal property, medical records, judicial case files, or
any other records that the City determines must be maintained in their original
form to protect the public interest and to preserve the integrity of the record
system. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-120: PENALTIES:
A.   Any City employee who knowingly refuses to permit access to records in
accordance with the Act and this chapter, who knowingly permits access to
nonpublic records, or who knowingly, without authorization or legal authority,
disposes of, alters, or removes records or allows other persons to do so in
violation of the provisions of the Act, this chapter, or other law or
regulation, may be subject to criminal prosecution and disciplinary action,
including termination.
B.   In accordance with the Act, neither the City nor any of its agencies or
employees shall be liable for damages resulting from the release of a record
where the requester presented evidence of authority to obtain the record, even
if it may be subsequently determined that the requester had no such authority.
(Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-130: RECORDS OFFICER:
A.   There shall be appointed a city records officer to oversee and coordinate
records access, management and archives activities. The records officer shall
make annual reports of records services activities to the city manager.
B.   A person may be designated by each department of the city to assist with
and work under the direction of the city records officer in implementing the
policies and procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
3-4-140: RECORDS MAINTENANCE:
A.   Records maintenance procedures shall be developed to ensure that due care
is taken to maintain and preserve records safely and accurately over the long
term. The city records officer shall be responsible for monitoring the
application and use of technical processes in the creation, duplication, and
disposal of records. The records officer shall monitor compliance with required
standards of quality, permanence, and admissibility pertaining to the creation,
use, and maintenance of records.
B.   All records shall remain the property of the city unless federal or state
legal authority provides otherwise. Property rights to records may not be
permanently transferred from the city to any private individual or entity,
including those legally disposable or obsolete records. This prohibition does
not include the providing of copies of records otherwise produced for release
or distribution under this chapter.
C.   Custodians of any records shall, at the expiration of their terms of
office, appointment or employment, deliver custody and control of all records
kept or received by them to their successors, supervisors, or to the city
records officer.
D.   All records which are in the possession of any city agency shall, upon
termination of activities of such agency, be transferred to any successor
agency provided that such transfer is consistent with the formal provisions of
such termination. (Ord. 1086, 3-4-2014)
CHAPTER 5
SUBORDINATE BODIES
SECTION:
3-5-010: Subordinate Bodies
3-5-020: General Rules For Committees
3-5-030: Planning Commission
3-5-040: Community Reinvestment Agency
3-5-050: Draper City Historic Preservation Commission
3-5-060: Draper City Parks, Trails And Recreation Committee
3-5-070: Draper City Special Event Arena Committee
3-5-080: Draper City Tree Committee
3-5-090: Draper City Emergency Preparedness Committee (Rep. by Ord. 1514, 11-
16-2021)
3-5-100: Traverse Ridge Special Service District Administrative Control Board
3-5-110: Audit Committee
3-5-120: Draper City Community Engagement Committee
3-5-010: SUBORDINATE BODIES:
The city council may create any subordinate body deemed necessary or
appropriate for the administration of the city and shall prescribe by
resolution or ordinance the organization, powers and duties of such bodies.
(Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-5-020: GENERAL RULES FOR COMMITTEES:
Unless otherwise provided by law or these ordinances, the following rules shall
apply to all committees formed under this chapter.
A.   Committees are advisory bodies only. Neither the committee nor its members
have authority to either represent, act, negotiate or speak on behalf of the
city, or to commit city funds for any purpose unless expressly authorized by
the city council. In keeping with the advisory role of committees, members of
the public may direct comments regarding issues within a committee’s purview to
the City Council. Committee meetings shall not include a “public comment”
agenda item.
B.   Committees shall consist of members as the city council shall provide by
ordinance or resolution;
C.   Members:
1.   Committee members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the city council.
2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:
a.   Committee members shall serve four (4)-year terms;
b.   When a new committee is created, half of the members first appointed to
the committee may be appointed to an initial two (2)-year term so that
appointments to the committee are staggered; and
c.   Each committee shall have up to eleven (11) members.
3.    Committee members with three (3) unexcused absences in a twelve (12)
month period are subject to removal as per section
3-5-020(F).
D.   Chairperson: A chairperson shall oversee the proceedings and activities of
each committee. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all chairpersons
shall:
1.   Be appointed by the mayor; and
2.   Serve a two (2)-year term;
E.   Vice-Chair or Temporary Chair:
1.   If the chairperson of a committee is absent, the vice-chair shall assume
the roles of chairperson.
2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all vice-chairpersons shall:
a.   Be appointed by the mayor; and
b.   Serve a two (2)-year term
F.   Committee members may be removed at the mayor's sole discretion.
G.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, committee members shall
receive no compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed for
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Committee
members shall be deemed "volunteers" for purposes of city ordinances, rules and
regulations regarding personnel. However, they shall be included in the
definition of "employee" for purposes of the Utah Governmental Immunity Act as
set forth in Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
H.   Committees shall conduct meetings in accordance with the Utah Open and
Public Meetings Act. A committee shall keep a public record of its proceedings,
and all minutes of the meetings and decisions of a committee shall be filed in
the Office of the City Recorder as public records. Meetings of a committee may
be called by the chairperson, the vice-chair when acting as the chair, a
majority of the members of a committee, the mayor, city manager, city council
or the department head assigned to work with the committee.
I.   Committees may receive funds by an annual appropriation in the city
budget, by government, corporate or private grants or donations, and from
proceeds of approved committee functions, which funds shall be held and managed
as directed by the city council.
J.   Advisor: The city manager shall designate a member of the city staff to
serve as an advisor to each committee. The designated staff member shall serve
only to advise and act as a liaison to the city administration and shall have
no power to vote on matters coming before the committee.
K.   Quorum: Five (5) members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Three
votes shall be the minimum number of votes required for a motion to pass unless
three votes does not constitute a majority of the quorum present, in which
case, a majority vote carries a motion.
L.   Electronic Meetings: Committees may conduct electronic meetings as long as
a quorum of the committee is present at an anchor location. An electronic
meeting without an anchor location may be conducted in accordance with the Open
and Public Meetings Act. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021; amd. Ord. 1523, 1-11-2022)
3-5-030: PLANNING COMMISSION:
There is hereby created and established a Planning Commission of Draper City to
recommend and monitor the planning and development of the city.
A.   Composition and Appointment: The planning commission shall be comprised of
six (6) regular members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of
the city council.
B.   Terms: Members shall be appointed to staggered four (4)-year terms but may
be appointed to shorter terms when necessary to provide for staggered terms.
Members may be reappointed for successive terms.
C.   Alternates: In addition to the six (6) members of the planning commission,
the mayor shall appoint alternates to the planning commission with the advice
and consent of the city council. Alternates shall serve one-year terms or until
appointed to fill a vacancy on the planning commission. Alternates may be
reappointed for successive terms.
D.   Removal: The mayor may remove any member or alternate of the planning
commission with the advice and consent of the city council.
E.   Vacancy: A vacancy occurring on the planning commission by reason of
death, resignation, removal or disqualification, shall be promptly filled by a
replacement appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council for the unexpired term of the replaced member.
F.   Per Diem: Regular and alternate members of the planning commission shall
be paid per diem compensation for reasonable and necessary expenses for
meetings actually attended, in an amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
G.   Powers: The planning commission shall be organized and exercise its powers
and duties as follows:
1.   The planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson to
oversee all proceedings and activities. The chairperson shall vote only in the
event of a tie or when needed to establish a quorum. The chairperson shall
serve for a term of one year. The planning commission shall elect one of its
members as vice-chairperson to act as chairperson in the absence of the
chairperson or because of the chair's inability or refusal to act. The vice-
chairperson, acting as the chairperson, shall have the power to vote on all
matters.
2.   The planning commission may adopt bylaws that govern the conduct of its
meetings. Such bylaws shall be approved by the city council before taking
effect.
3.   The planning commission shall meet according to the schedule adopted each
year by the city council, and/or such other times as deemed necessary by the
chairperson or city council. All meetings shall be properly noticed and held in
accordance with the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act of the Utah Code
Annotated, as amended. Written minutes of all business meetings of the planning
commission shall be prepared and filed in the office of the city recorder for
review and access by the public in accordance with the Utah Government Records
Access and Management Act. Public participation in meetings shall be limited to
properly-noticed public hearings.
4.   No official business shall be conducted by the planning commission unless
a quorum of its members or alternate members is present. Alternates shall be
allowed to vote on official business of the planning commission when not all
regular members of the planning commission are present. At no time shall more
than five regular members or alternates and one chairperson participate in any
official business of the commission. Unless otherwise prescribed by law, the
planning commission may not take action or forward any recommendation to city
council on an agenda item unless without three votes in favor of the action or
recommendation.
5.   Alternates may fill vacancies occurring on the Commission or may be
appointed to the Commission as regular members' terms expire.
6.   Alternates should attend planning retreats and educational meetings
related to the obligations and duties of the planning commission as offered by
the city, and attend joint meetings of the planning commission and city
council.
7.   Neither the planning commission nor its members have authority to
represent, act, negotiate or speak on behalf of the city, or to commit city
funds for any purpose unless expressly authorized by the city council, this
code, or state or federal law.
H.   Duties: It shall be the function of the planning commission to oversee the
proper development of the city in accordance with pertinent city ordinances and
provisions of Utah Municipal Land Use and Management Act as amended. The duties
of the planning commission shall include:
1.   Preparing and recommending a general plan and amendments thereto to the
city council;
2.   Recommending zoning ordinances and maps, and amendments to zoning
ordinances and maps, to the city council;
3.   Administering applicable provisions of Titles 9 and 17;
4.   Recommending subdivision ordinances and regulations and amendments thereto
to the city council;
5.   Recommending approval or denial of subdivision applications;
6.   Advising the city council on matters when requested;
7.   Hearing or deciding any matter that the city council designates;
8.   Preparing and recommending programs for public improvements and the
financing thereof to the city council; and
9.   Exercising any other powers delegated by the city council that are
necessary to enable the planning commission to perform its function.
I.   Examinations and Surveys: The planning commission and its authorized
agents may enter upon any land at reasonable times to make examinations and
surveys as necessary to enable it to perform its function to promote city
planning and development.
J.   Appeals:
1.   Definition. For purposes of an appeal of a planning commission decision,
"affected person" means:
a.   Any applicant before the planning commission; or
b.   Any person other than an applicant who:
(1)   Owns real property adjoining the property that is the subject of a land
use application or land use decision; or
(2)   Will suffer a damage different in kind than, or an injury distinct from,
that of the general community as a result of the land use decision.
2.   Any affected person may appeal a planning commission decision by filing a
written appeal to the appeals and variance hearing officer stating the grounds
for appeal within fourteen (14) days from the date of the decision or action.
K.   Training: The planning commission shall receive training from time to time
as required by state law. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021; amd. Ord. 1523, 1-11-2022;
Ord. 1592, 11-7-2023)
3-5-040: COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AGENCY:
There is hereby created and established a community reinvestment agency of
Draper City, created pursuant to the Community Reinvestment Agency Act, set
forth in Utah Code Annotated as amended. This agency was previously known as
the Re-development Agency or RDA.
A.   Purpose: The purpose of the community reinvestment agency is to assist the
city in taking actions to reinvest, renew, provide economic development, and
community development for specified areas of the city in accordance with the
Community Reinvestment Agency Act, and as adopted by the city council.
B.   Governing Body: The city council shall be the governing body of the
community reinvestment agency.
C.   Powers and Duties: The community reinvestment agency is authorized to
enter into agreements generally in connection with community reinvestment
matters and shall have the power to transact the business of the Agency and to
exercise all the powers, rights, duties and privileges set forth in the
Community Reinvestment Agency Act. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-5-050: DRAPER CITY HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A.   Creation: On February 21, 1985, Draper City established a Draper City
Historic Preservation Commission to act as an advisory board to the City
regarding historic sites and structures within the city. The city council shall
be empowered to provide monetary and nonmonetary assistance to the commission
upon submission and formal authorization by the city council.
B.   Purpose: The purpose of the commission is to assist the city in
identifying, preserving, protecting, and enhancing historic buildings, sites,
monuments, streetscapes and landmarks within the city deemed architecturally or
historically significant. In addition, the commission will act in an advisory
capacity to the city regarding the implementation of the Draper City
Conservation Area Master Plan and Town Center covering the general historic
core area of Draper City.
C.   Members:
1.   Number: The commission shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more
than eleven (11) members who shall have a demonstrated interest, competence or
knowledge in historic preservation or architecture. Draper citizens shall be
given preference for membership on the commission; however, up to three (3)
members of the commission may be non-residents of Draper. Such non-resident
member of the commission must own property in Draper.
2.   Term: Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice
and consent of the city council to staggered terms of four (4) years, provided
that members may be appointed for terms shorter than four (4) years when
necessary to provide for staggered terms.
3.   Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson: The mayor shall appoint one member of
the commission as chairperson and another member of the commission as vice
chairperson. The chairperson shall oversee the proceedings and activities of
the commission. The vice chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the
chairperson in the absence of the chairperson.
4.   Removal: Members shall serve at the pleasure of the city and may be
removed in the mayor's sole discretion at any time.
5.   Vacancy: Vacancies on the commission occurring for any reason shall be
filled by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, in
accordance with the procedures for appointment set forth herein, for the
unexpired term of such member.
6.   Compensation: Members shall serve without compensation and shall be deemed
"volunteers" for purposes of city ordinances, rules, regulations and policies
concerning personnel, provided, members may be reimbursed for reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as determined
appropriate and pre-approved by the city council.
7.   Governmental Immunity: Members of the commission shall be deemed included
in the definition of "employee" for purposes of the Utah Governmental Immunity
Act.
D.   Organization and Procedures:
1.   Other Officers: At the direction of the chairperson, the commission may
appoint other members to act as other officers of the commission.
2.   Meetings: The commission shall hold meetings as often as it deems
necessary. Meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson, a
majority of the members of the commission, the mayor, or the city manager.
Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with properly approved rules and
regulations of the commission.
3.   Open Meetings: Meetings of the commission shall be conducted in accordance
with the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act, including public notification of
meeting place, time, and agenda items. The commission shall keep a public
record of its proceedings, and all minutes of the meetings and decisions of the
commission shall be filed in the Office of the City Recorder as public records.
Commission meetings shall not include a “public comment” agenda item.
4.   Quorum: No official business of the commission shall be conducted except
in the presence of a properly constituted quorum. A quorum shall consist of the
attendance of at least three (3) of the members of the commission. In the event
of a three-person quorum, any motion must be unanimous to pass. In the event of
a four-person quorum, three votes are required for a decision on the motion. If
the quorum consists of five or more members, decisions shall be made by a
majority vote.
5.   Staff: The commission may employ consultants and/or staff personnel to
assist the commission in performing its duties upon prior approval of the city
council.
6.   Support Of Enforcement Provisions: The commission shall support the
enforcement of all state laws relating to historic preservation and notify the
state historic preservation office of any known proposed action which will
destroy or affect a site, building or object owned by the state of Utah and
included on or eligible for the state or national registers.
E.   Duties Of The Commission: The commission shall perform the following
duties and any other duties as designated by the city council:
1.   Survey And Inventory Community Historic Resources: The commission shall
conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of the historic, architectural, and
archaeological resources within the city. All survey and inventory documents
shall be maintained and open to the public. The survey shall be updated at
least every ten (10) years.
2.   List Of Historic Buildings And Sites: The commission shall establish and
maintain a list of historic structures and sites within the city in accordance
with the results of the survey and the provisions set forth herein, known as
the "Draper City Historic Sites List."
3.   National Register of Historic Places: The commission shall, when
appropriate, submit historic structures and sites for consideration on the
National Register of Historic Places ("National Register").
4.   Review Proposed Nominations: The commission shall review and comment to
the state historic preservation office on all proposed National Register
nominations for properties within the boundaries of the city.
5.   Provide Advice And Information: The commission shall act as an advisory
committee to other officials, departments and committees of the city regarding
the designation, preservation, modification and demolition of historic
structures and sites within the city. The commission shall also provide advice
to the city on the creation and implementation of processes and policies to
further the implementation of the Draper City Town Center.
6.   Support Of Enforcement Provisions: The commission shall support the
enforcement of all state laws relating to historic preservation and notify the
state historic preservation office of any known proposed action which will
destroy or affect a site, building or object owned by the state of Utah and
included on or eligible for the state or national registers.
7.   Neither the commission nor its members have authority to represent, act,
negotiate or speak on behalf of the city, or to commit city funds for any
purpose unless expressly authorized by the city council, this code, or state or
federal law.
F.   Draper City Historic Sites List:
1.   Created: There is hereby created a Draper City Historic Sites List
("Historic Sites List"), which list shall serve as a means of providing
recognition to and encouraging the preservation of historic properties in the
city. The Historic Sites List shall be prepared and maintained by the
commission in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. The commission
shall ensure that the Historic Sites List and any subsequent amendments or any
additions thereto are filed with the city recorder.
2.   Contents: The Historic Sites List shall describe as concisely as possible
each structure or site, the date of its construction as nearly as can be
determined or, if a site, the date during which its historic significance was
established, the reason for including it on such list, and the name and address
of the current owner as shown on the records of the county recorder.
3.   Request For Designation: Any person, group, or governmental agency may
nominate a property for listing on the Historic Sites List by submitting a
written request for designation to the commission. The request for designation
shall include documentation of the qualifying contents and criteria set forth
in this section, including, in duplicate, a completed intensive level survey
documentation for the nominated property.
4.   Review Of Request: Upon receipt of the written request for designation,
the commission will review the submitted nomination at the commission's next
scheduled meeting permitting adequate notice of the same. The commission will
notify the nominating party, either orally or in writing, one week prior to the
meeting that the nomination will be considered and will place that item on the
agenda posted for the meeting. The one week notification may be waived at the
discretion of the commission upon request by the nominating party in order to
accommodate "last minute" submittals, provided no nomination will be reviewed
if it is submitted to the commission less than forty eight (48) hours prior to
the meeting. The commission shall review the nomination for completeness,
accuracy and compliance in accordance with the criteria set forth herein and
approve, approve with conditions or deny the same.
5.   Designation: When historic properties have been officially designated to
the Historic Sites List by the commission, the commission shall promptly notify
the owners of those properties in writing of the designation, together with a
copy of this section. The commission shall record the Historic Sites List
designation with the city recorder's office. Owners of designated property may
obtain a historic sites certificate from the commission, which certificate
shall contain the historic name of the property, the date of designation, and
signature of the commission chairperson.
6.   Criteria: The commission may designate any district, building, structure,
object, or site to the Historic Sites List, in accordance with the procedures
set forth herein, if the district, building, structure, object, or site:
a.   Is located within the official boundaries of the city;
b.   Is at least fifty (50) years old;
c.   Retains its historic integrity by meeting one or more of the following
criteria:
1)   No major alterations or additions have obscured or destroyed the
significant historic features. "Major alterations" that would destroy the
historic integrity include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the
main roof, enlargement or enclosure of windows on the principal facades,
addition of upper stories or the removal of original upper stories, covering
the exterior walls with materials not authentic to the time period of the
building and compatible with the architectural style of the building, moving
the resource from its original location to one that is dissimilar to the
original, additions which significantly detract from or obscure the original
form and appearance of the structure when viewed from the public way;
2)   There is a direct association with events of historic significance in
Draper City;
3)   There is a close association with the lives of persons who were of
historic importance to Draper City; or
4)   It exhibits significant methods of construction or materials that were
used within the historic period;
d.   Has been documented according to the Utah state historic preservation
office standards for intensive level surveys (October 1991 version or
subsequent revisions). Copies of such documentation must be included in the
application for designation and maintained in the city preservation files; and
e.   The owner provides a written statement of approval to designate his or her
property to the Historic Sites List.
G.   Special Considerations For Properties on the National Register:
1.   Building Codes: In the event of rehabilitation of the property, city
building officials may consider waiving code requirements that do not have
health or safety implications in accordance with section 104(f) of the uniform
building code regarding historic buildings or the uniform code for building
conservation, as adopted and amended by the city.
2.   Taxes: Owners of properties on the National Register may seek assistance
from the commission in applying for grants or tax credits for rehabilitating
their properties.
H.   Alterations Or Modifications To Properties: If the owner of a property on
a list maintained by the commission wishes to repair, alter or add to the
historic property and keep the property on the Historic Sites List, The owner
must follow the process described below:
1.   Review By The commission: All applications for building permits on
Historic Sites List properties shall be forwarded by the building official or
community development director within five (5) business days from receipt of
the application to the commission. The commission shall review the application
and proposed work at its next regularly scheduled meeting for compliance with
the standards for rehabilitation set forth herein. Applicants for a building
permit for properties on the National Register shall follow all applicable
federal laws and administrative rules. The commission may review the proposed
work for building permits on National Register properties and provide
assistance to the applicant in complying with federal laws and administrative
rules.
2.   Findings: The commission shall promptly review the application and the
proposed work to determine the appropriateness of the work. If the commission
deems the proposed work appropriate and in keeping with the preservation of the
historic integrity of the property, the commission shall notify the building
official in writing of its determination of the appropriateness of the work. If
the commission deems the proposed work inappropriate in keeping with the
preservation of the historic integrity of the property, the commission shall
forward notice of such determination, together with recommendations as to how
the work may be accomplished to comply with historic preservation standards. If
the commission does not approve the proposed work as "appropriate," the
building official shall notify the owner of the recommendations. The owner is
encouraged to work with the commission to determine the most appropriate means
of completing the work in a manner that maintains the historic integrity of the
property. If the owner does not comply with the recommendations of the
commission as approved by the building official, the property shall be subject
to removal from the register.
3.   Documents: Any building permit issued for properties on the Historic Sites
List shall be forwarded to the commission by the building department and
maintained by the commission to assist in preserving and documenting the
alterations.
I.   Demolition Of Listed Property:
1.   Review Of Permits: All applications for a demolition permit shall be
forwarded by the building official and/or community development director within
five (5) business days from receipt of the application to the commission for
review and evaluation.
2.   Demolition Of Designated Properties:
a.   Negotiation Process: If the property to be demolished is designated on the
Historic Sites List, the commission may delay the issuance of a demolition
permit for the property for a period of thirty (30) days from the date the
application is received by the commission for the explicit and express purpose
of negotiating or arranging alternatives to the demolition of the structure.
b.   Documentation Process: In the event that no agreement is reached between
the parties regarding alternatives to the proposed demolition, the commission
shall have fourteen (14) days thereafter to document the site and the
structure's physical appearance before any demolition takes place.
Documentation may include exterior photographs of all elevations of the
historic building, and exterior and interior measurements of the building in
order to provide an accurate floor plan drawing of the building. All
documentation shall be kept in the city's preservation files, which shall be
open to the public.
3.   Demolition Of Non-designated Property:
a.   Determination of Significance: If a structure to be demolished is not
designated to but qualifies for the National Register or Historic Sites List, a
member of the commission shall determine whether the structure may be of
historical significance within two (2) days of being notified of proposed
demolition. If the structure has the potential to be of historic significance,
the commission shall hold a meeting within two weeks to review the proposed
demolition, and decide whether the structure is significant enough to negotiate
alternatives to demolition and/or to document the structure. The commission
will notify the applicant in writing one week prior to the meeting that the
application will be considered. The applicant may waive the one-week
notification at the discretion of the commission upon request if the commission
determines that the structure is not of historical significance a demolition
permit may be issued upon approval by the city.
b.   Delay Of Permit: If the commission determines that the property is of
historical significance, the commission may delay issuance of a demolition
permit for a period of thirty (30) days from the date the commission determines
the property is of historical significance for the express purpose of
negotiating or arranging alternatives to the demolition of the structure or
documenting the site and the structure's physical appearance.
c.   Criteria For Determining Significance: In order to delay the issuance of a
demolition permit for non-designated properties under this section, the
commission must determine that the site or structure would be eligible for
designation on the National Register or Historic Sites List in accordance with
the criteria set forth herein for such designations.
J.   Removal From Draper City Historic Sites List:
1.   By the Commission: Properties which, in the opinion of the commission, no
longer meet the criteria for eligibility may be removed from the Historic Sites
List after review and consideration by the commission. Any such removal shall
be made in accordance with the designation procedures and criteria set forth
herein. The owner of the property shall be notified in writing of the date and
time of the meeting during which the removal will be considered. When a
historic property has been removed from the Historic Sites List, the commission
shall promptly notify the owner of the property in writing of the removal.
2.   By Owner: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an owner
from removing his or her property from the Historic Sites List as the owner in
his or her sole discretion deems appropriate. Such request for removal shall be
made in writing by the owner to the commission. Requests for removal from the
Historic Sites List shall be determined by the commission. The owner of the
property shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the meeting
during which the removal will be considered by the commission. The commission
may not withhold approval of any removal request, but review and written
approval may be conducted by the city for informational and administrative
purposes. The city shall not accept any liability whatsoever for an owner's
decision to remove his or her property from the Historic Sites List.
3.   Notice Of Removal: When any property is removed from the Historic Sites
List, the commission shall file notice of the removal with the city and county
recorder's office, as applicable.
K.   Standards For Rehabilitation: The following "standards for rehabilitation"
shall be used by the commission when determining the historic appropriateness
of any building permit application on the Historic Sites List:
1.   Use: The property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
structure and its site and environment.
2.   Character: The historic character of the property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize the property shall be avoided.
3.   Developments: Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of
its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from
other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
4.   Changes: Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and
preserved.
5.   Distinctive Items: Distinctive features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize the structure shall
be preserved.
6.   Deterioration: Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather
than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or
pictorial evidence.
7.   Cleaning: Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that
cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
8.   Resources: Significant archaeological resources affected by a project
shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed,
mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
9.   Materials: New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the
property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect
the historic integrity of the historic property and its environment.
10.   Historic Integrity: New additions and adjacent or related new
construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
11.   Additional Guidelines: Additional guidelines may be used as set forth in
"The Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation And Guidelines
For Rehabilitating Historic Buildings".
L.   Enforcement: The provisions of this section are subject to the enforcement
provisions established in the uniform building code, uniform code for building
conservation, uniform housing code, zoning ordinances, and other ordinances, as
adopted and amended by the city. Failure to follow standards as required herein
may result in the removal of the property from the Historic Sites List.
M.   Appeals: Any adversely affected party as defined in section
9-3-040 wishing to appeal a final decision of the commission in the
administration of this section may appeal such decision to the city council by
filing a written appeal with the city recorder stating the grounds for appeal
within fourteen (14) days from the date of the decision or action. (Ord. 1493,
6-15-2021; amd. Ord. 1500, 10-5-2021; Ord. 1523, 1-11-2022; Ord. 1589, 10-3-
2023; Ord. 1592, 11-7-2023)
3-5-060: DRAPER CITY PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE:
A.   Creation. There is hereby created a Draper City Parks, Trails and
Recreation Committee to recommend and monitor the establishment of facilities,
programs and policies to meet the recreational and aesthetic needs of the
citizens of Draper City.
B.   Duties. It shall be the duty of the committee to act in an advisory and
voluntary capacity in the development of parks, trails and recreation
opportunities for Draper City residents, including but not limited to the
following:
1.   Recommend to the city council a Parks, Trails and Recreation Master Plan;
2.   Review and recommend to the city council and planning commission
appropriate changes and updates to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Master
Plan;
3.   Recommend projects, legislation, policies, funding allocations, and other
measures, programs, or activities for the development of parks, trails and
recreation opportunities within the city;
4.   Carry out projects, programs, or activities as directed by the city
council; and
5.   Initiate, sponsor, and promote involvement, activities and contributions
by the private sector for the development of parks, trails and recreation in
the city. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-5-070: DRAPER CITY SPECIAL EVENT ARENA COMMITTEE:
A.   Creation: There is hereby created a Draper City Special Event Arena
Committee to advise the city regarding projects, programs, activities and
administration of the Draper City arena.
B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the committee to act in an advisory and
voluntary capacity to the city regarding programs, activities, and
administration of the Draper City arena including but not limited to the
following:
1.   Propose and recommend policies, standards and rules pertinent to the arena
programs;
2.   Assist the city in creating and implementing activities and programs for
the arena consistent with the needs of the business operators and residents of
Draper;
3.   Seek and solicit resources for supporting the needs of the arena; and
4.   Keep the general public informed of the activities and concerns of the
arena. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-5-080: DRAPER CITY TREE COMMITTEE:
A.   Creation: There is hereby created the Draper City Tree Committee to act as
an advisory committee to the city council and other city departments on matters
relating to tree culture including the establishment, maintenance and upkeep of
all trees, shrubbery and other plant life located on city property.
B.   Members: To the extent available in the community, members should have a
variety of experience with specialized knowledge relating to forestry,
landscaping, fundraising, or administration sufficient to contribute in an
advisory capacity to the city regarding matters of policy and practice relating
to trees, shrubbery and other plant life located on city property.
C.   Duties: The committee may recommend policies of tree culture related to
trees and shrubbery currently planted and growing or hereafter to be planted
and grown upon any and all city-owned properties and places in the city. The
committee duties shall include the following as well as any other which may be
assigned to it from time to time by the city council:
1.   Recommend goals and policies to the city council regarding tree culture
for Draper City in the manner prescribed by state law and city ordinance. The
plan may include an inventory of existing trees, plans for various public areas
such as the entrances to the city, city parks, main transportation corridors
and others, policies in regards to the planting of trees for beautification,
noise dampening, visual screening, weather protection, erosion control and
other factors;
2.   Make recommendations to the city council on public relations matters,
including, but not limited to, programs such as Arbor Day, cleanup days, home
beautification contests and other tree related city activities;
3.   Prepare and recommend for approval by the city council, an official street
tree guide which shall designate which species may be planted in park strips
and which trees are recommended for other public places;
4.   Make recommendations on arboricultural specifications and standards of
practices for all trees and shrubbery on City property, and recommend standards
and specifications for the work of any person or organization engaged in the
business of working on trees within the city;
5.   Make recommendations on the grounds immediately surrounding the trees and
shrubbery on public property, as far as it is necessary to assure the proper
growth, care and protection of said trees and shrubbery;
6.   Make recommendations on the care and treatment of trees and shrubbery,
including planting, maintenance, pruning, spraying and removal of trees and
shrubbery on city property;
7.   Make recommendations on the identification, marking and preservation of
historic or notable trees;
8.   Develop standards and specifications regarding the planting of trees for
new developments, including site plans and subdivisions and make
recommendations to the planning commission and city council regarding the same;
and
9.   Develop standards and specifications regarding the planting of trees on
public property, including size, location and approved species and make
recommendations for adoption in this code. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-5-090: DRAPER CITY EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS COMMITTEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1514, 11-16-2021)
3-5-100: TRAVERSE RIDGE SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL BOARD:
A.   Board Creation: There is hereby created the Traverse Ridge Special Service
District Administrative Control Board. It shall administer the Traverse Ridge
Special Service District to provide transportation services, including snow
removal, street lighting, repairing and maintenance of roads, sweeping, and
disposal services pursuant to Resolution No. 99-82 executed December 28, 1999,
which created the district.
B.   Powers and Duties: Except for the powers expressly reserved to the city
council in Subsection (c) or where the delegation of power is otherwise
prohibited by law, the board may:
1.   Exercise the power of eminent domain possessed by the city that creates
the special service district;
2.   Enter into a contract that the governing authority considers desirable to
carry out special service district functions, including a contract:
a.   with the United States or an agency of the United States, the state, an
institution of higher education, a county, a municipality, a school district, a
local district, another special service district, or any other political
subdivision of the state; or
b.   that includes provisions concerning the use, operation, and maintenance of
special service district facilities and the collection of fees or charges with
respect to commodities, services, or facilities that the district provides;
3.   Acquire or construct facilities;
4.   Acquire real or personal property, or an interest in real or personal
property, including water and water rights, whether by purchase, lease, gift,
devise, bequest, or otherwise, and whether the property is located inside or
outside the special service district, and own, hold, improve, use, finance, or
otherwise deal in and with the property or property right;
5.   Sell, convey, lease, exchange, transfer, or otherwise dispose of all or
any part of the special service district's property or assets, including water
and water rights;
6.   Mortgage, pledge, or otherwise encumber all or any part of the special
service district's property or assets, including water and water rights;
7.   Enter into a contract with respect to the use, operation, or maintenance
of all or any part of the special service district's property or assets,
including water and water rights;
8.   Accept a government grant or loan and comply with the conditions of the
grant or loan;
9.   Use an officer, employee, property, equipment, office, or facility of the
city that created the special service district, subject to reimbursement;
10.   Employ one or more officers, employees, or agents, including one or more
engineers, accountants, attorneys, or financial consultants, and establish
their compensation;
11.   Designate an assessment area and levy an assessment as provided by state
law;
12.   Contract with a franchised, certificated public utility for the
construction and operation of an electrical service distribution system within
the special service district;
13.   Borrow money and incur indebtedness;
14.   As provided in Part 5, Special Service District Bonds, issue bonds for
the purpose of acquiring, constructing, and equipping any of the facilities
required for the services the special service district is authorized to
provide, including:
a.   Bonds payable in whole or in part from taxes levied on the taxable
property in the special service district;
b.   Bonds payable from revenues derived from the operation of revenue-
producing facilities of the special service district;
c.   Bonds payable from both taxes and revenues;
d.   Guaranteed bonds, payable in whole or in part from taxes levied on the
taxable property in the special service district;
e.   Tax anticipation notes;
f.   Bond anticipation notes;
g.   Refunding bonds;
h.   Special assessment bonds; and
i.   Bonds payable in whole or in part from mineral lease payments as provided
by state law;
15.   Except as otherwise stated by ordinance, impose fees or charges or both
for commodities, services, or facilities that the special service district
provides;
16.   Provide to an area outside the special service district's boundary,
whether inside or outside the state, a service that the special service
district is authorized to provide within its boundary, if the governing body
makes a finding that there is a public benefit to providing the service to the
area outside the special service district's boundary;
17.   Provide other services that the governing body determines will more
effectively carry out the purposes of the special service district; and
18.   Adopt an official seal for the special service district.
C.   The following powers are expressly reserved to the city council or are
otherwise prohibited from delegation:
1.   The power to annex an area into the district or add a service within the
area of the district under Part 4, Annexing a New Area and Adding a New
Service;
2.   The power to designate the classes of special service district contracts
that are subject to building improvements and public works projects;
3.   The power to levy a tax on the taxable property within the special service
district;
4.   The power to issue special service district bonds payable from taxes;
5.   The power to call or hold an election for the authorization of a property
tax or the issuance of bonds;
6.   The power to levy an assessment;
7.   The power to issue interim warrants or bonds payable from an assessment;
and
8.   The power to appoint a board of equalization.
D.   The city council may at any time modify, limit, or revoke any right,
power, or authority delegated to the administrative control board. A
modification, limitation, or revocation does not affect the validity of an
action taken by the administrative control board before the modification,
limitation, or revocation.
E.   Members:
1.   Number: The board shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
2.   Qualifications: Each member of the administrative control board shall be a
registered voter within the special service district or be an officer or
employee of Draper City.
3.   Appointment and Term: The city council shall appoint board members
according to the procedures found in state law. Board members shall be
appointed to terms of four years. In order to provide for the proper staggering
of terms so that all appointments do not expire at the same time and to provide
appropriate opportunities for involvement by a variety of interested persons,
two initial membership positions shall be for a term of two years, one initial
membership position shall be for a term of four years. Board members may be
appointed to successive terms after following the appointment procedures found
in state law. Board members may be removed for cause at any time after a
hearing by two-thirds vote of the city council.
F.   Organization and Procedure:
1.   Chairperson: The mayor shall appoint a member of the board to serve as
chair to oversee the proceedings and activities of the board. The board may
elect other officers as it deems necessary.
2.   Rules: The board may propose reasonable bylaws, rules and regulations,
including procurement and fiscal management procedure, to regulate the conduct
of its meetings, which bylaws, rules and regulations must be approved and
adopted by resolution of the city council before becoming effective. All
collections, investments, disbursements, procurements, and other financial
transactions will be managed by the board.
3.   Meetings: The board may hold meetings at such times as the board
determines are necessary and as properly called with notices duly provided to
each board member and as required by law.
4.   Compensation: Compensation of the board members shall be set, from time to
time, by resolution of the council.
5.   For purposes of advising the city council and transacting the business of
the district, the board may meet and confer, adopt recommendations and convey
them to the council verbally or in writing, make decisions regarding district
matters, or it may meet with the council or any of its members to discuss
service development and delivery proposals. The board may establish committees
for the purpose of investigating preferred or potential methods of service
development and delivery.
6.   Budget: The board shall prepare an annual budget for the Traverse Ridge
Special Service District which will conform to the uniform fiscal procedures
act for special districts, and approve it. The budget shall demonstrate all
proposed expenditures and the fees to be established and collected as revenue
to the district's budget.
7.   The board shall have power to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of
any person who is a director, officer, employee, or agent of the district
against any liability asserted against him or her and incurred by him or her in
any such capacity, or arising out of his or her status as such, whether or not
the district would have authority to indemnify him or her against the liability
under law.
8.   The board shall make an annual presentation to the city council of its
goals, budget and activities. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021; amd. Ord. 1578, 5-16-2023)
3-5-110: AUDIT COMMITTEE:
A.   Creation: There is hereby created the Draper City Audit Committee to
advise the city council on the annual audit of the city's financial statements,
and to recommend and monitor the annual auditing functions.
B.   Purpose: The audit committee shall:
1.   Follow the city's procurement code to select and engage an auditor to
audit the city's annual financial statement;
2.   Provide oversight of the integrity of the city's financial statements, the
internal control over the financial reporting process, and compliance with
legal and regulatory requirements; and
3.   Follow up on auditor findings and management letter comments provided by
independent auditors.
C.   Members: The audit committee shall consist of three members.
1.   Two members shall be members of the city council.
2.   One member shall be a financial expert, possessing:
a.   An understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and financial
statements for state and local governments;
b.   Experience in preparing or auditing financial statements of comparable
entities;
c.   Experience in applying such principles in connection with accounting for
estimates, accruals, and allowance accounts;
d.   Experience with internal accounting controls; and
e.   An understanding of audit functions.
3.   Term: Members of the audit committee shall be appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the city council for terms of two years and may not
be appointed to more than two full consecutive terms; provided, however, that
when the audit committee is first established, the terms of the members shall
be staggered and one member shall be appointed to serve an initial term of
three years.
4.   Chairperson: The city council shall appoint one of the two city council
members on the audit committee as chairperson.
D.   Meetings: The audit committee shall meet as often as necessary in order to
adequately advise the city council concerning selection of the external
auditor, the review of the annual financial statement audit, and other items
under their oversight. (Ord. 1493, 6-15-2021)
3-5-120: DRAPER CITY COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT COMMITTEE:
A.   Creation: There is hereby created the Draper City Community Engagement
Committee to act as a welcoming committee focused on creating opportunities for
a unified community within the city.
B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the committee to act in a voluntary and
advisory capacity to the city regarding activities that foster unity and
belonging within the city, including, but not limited to:
1.   Act as a liaison to inform the city of issues faced by our varied
communities and groups.
2.   Advocate and voice support for initiatives that cultivate and foster unity
while stimulating socioeconomic equality for the greater community.
3.   Host events for the greater community to celebrate and inform the public
about various cultures and traditions.
4.   Host community events focusing on neighbors getting to know each other and
creating a supportive and welcoming community.
5.   Attend ribbon cuttings for new businesses in the community and help new
business owners and new residents to Draper feel invited and welcomed. (Ord.
1493, 6-15-2021; amd. Ord. 1620, 9-3-2024)
TITLE 4
DRAPER CITY JUDICIAL CODE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-010: Title
4-1-020: Intent
4-1-030: Conflict
4-1-040: Definitions
4-1-010: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the DRAPER CITY JUDICIAL CODE, hereinafter
referred to as the "judicial code". (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-1-020: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council that this judicial code comply with and be
interpreted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Utah Code
Annotated, particularly chapters 5 through 7 of title 78A, as amended,
regarding the jurisdiction, venue, procedure and conduct of justice courts and
justice court judges, as well as the relevant portions of title 77, as amended,
regarding general criminal procedure for all courts. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-1-030: CONFLICT:
If there is any conflict between the provisions of this judicial code and Utah
Code Annotated, as amended, the provisions of the Utah code shall control.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-1-040: DEFINITIONS:
As used in the judicial code, the following words shall have the meaning
described below:
CITY: Draper City.
CITY COUNCIL: The Draper City council.
CITY RECORDER: The Draper City recorder.
CITY TREASURER: The Draper City treasurer.
JUSTICE COURT: The Draper City municipal justice court.
JUSTICE COURT JUDGE: The Draper City municipal justice court judge.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
trust, or other unincorporated association. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 2
JUSTICE COURT
SECTION:
4-2-010: Creation Of Justice Court
4-2-020: Compliance With Minimum Requirements
4-2-030: Territorial Jurisdiction
4-2-040: Jurisdiction
4-2-050: Venue
4-2-060: Trial Facilities
4-2-070: Reference Materials
4-2-080: Court Days
4-2-090: Hours Of Business
4-2-100: Powers Of The Justice Court
4-2-110: Public Proceedings
4-2-120: English Language
4-2-130: Abbreviations And Numerals
4-2-140: Change Of Place Of Trial Because Of Calamity
4-2-150: Seal
4-2-160: Process, Subpoenas And Warrants
4-2-170: Jurors And Witnesses
4-2-180: Docket
4-2-190: Docket Entries As Prima Facie Evidence
4-2-200: Docket Index
4-2-210: Dockets As Public Records
4-2-220: Monthly Reports
4-2-230: Delivery Of Docket And Papers To Successor
4-2-240: Validity Of Papers Issued
4-2-250: Decisions To Be Rendered
4-2-260: Filing And Docketing Of Abstract
4-2-270: Execution On Judgment
4-2-280: Judgment Not A Lien Unless So Docketed
4-2-290: Fees
4-2-300: Collection And Deposit Of Fines, Fees And Forfeitures
4-2-310: Remittal Of Fines, Fees And Forfeitures
4-2-320: Disposition Of Monies Received
4-2-330: Proceedings Unaffected By Vacancy
4-2-340: Repeated Application For Orders
4-2-350: Trial De Novo In Circuit Court
4-2-010: CREATION OF JUSTICE COURT:
There is hereby established a court within the city known as the Draper City
justice court, hereinafter referred to as the "justice court", which court
shall not be a court of record. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-020: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The city shall comply with and meet the minimum requirements set forth by the
judicial council for the creation and certification of the justice court in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 78-5-139, as amended. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-2-030: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
A.   The territorial jurisdiction of the justice court extends to the corporate
limits of the city.
B.   The territorial jurisdiction of the justice court functioning as a
magistrate extends beyond the boundaries in subsection A of this section to the
extent necessary to carry out magisterial functions under Utah Code Annotated
77-7-23(2), as amended, regarding jailed persons. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-040: JURISDICTION:
A.   The justice court has criminal jurisdiction over class B and C
misdemeanors, violation of ordinances, and infractions committed within its
territorial jurisdiction, except those offenses over which the juvenile court
has exclusive jurisdiction.
B.   The justice court has jurisdiction of small claims cases under Utah Code
Annotated title 78, chapter 6, if the defendant resides in or the debt arose
within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice court. Prior to accepting
small claims affidavits, the justice court shall be certified as competent to
determine small claims pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 78-5-139, as
amended.
C.   The justice court has jurisdiction over traffic misdemeanors and
infractions committed by persons sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age
and that occur within the territorial jurisdiction of the justice court, except
those offenses exclusive to the juvenile court under Utah Code Annotated
section 78-3a-16(1)(a), as amended, and has the authority to take a juvenile's
driver's license and return it to the driver's license division, department of
public safety for suspension under Utah Code Annotated section 53-3-221, as
amended. The justice court shall notify the juvenile court of any conviction of
a person sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age for an offense under Utah
Code Annotated section 78-3a-39.5, as amended. The justice court judge may
transfer matters within the justice court's jurisdiction under this section to
the juvenile court for postjudgment proceedings according to rules of the
judicial council. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-050: VENUE:
The justice court shall be the proper venue for any prosecution by information
in cases involving class B and C misdemeanors or infractions where the offense
was alleged to have been committed within the city, unless otherwise provided
by law. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-060: TRIAL FACILITIES:
A.   The city shall provide adequate courtroom and auxiliary space for the
justice court. The facility need not be specifically constructed for or
allocated solely for the justice court if existing facilities adequately serve
the purposes of the justice court.
B.   The justice court judge shall hold court in the city at the location
designated by the city pursuant to subsection A of this section and shall
conduct all official court business in such location or an office located in a
public facility which is conducive and appropriate to the administration of
justice. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-070: REFERENCE MATERIALS:
The city shall provide and keep current for the justice court a copy of the
motor vehicle laws of Utah, appropriate copies of the Utah code, the "Justice
Court Manual" published by the state court administrator, state laws affecting
local government, city ordinances, and other legal reference materials as
determined to be necessary by the justice court judge. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-080: COURT DAYS:
A.   Generally: Except as otherwise provided herein, the justice court is open
and judicial business may be transacted on any day.
B.   Closed: The justice court is closed on Sunday, on any day on which general
election is held, or on any legal holiday; provided, however, that judicial
business may be transacted on such days for the following purposes:
1.   To give, upon their request, instructions to a jury when deliberating on
their verdict;
2.   To receive a verdict or discharge a jury;
3.   For the exercise of the powers of a magistrate in a criminal action, or in
a proceeding of a criminal nature;
4.   Judicial business not involving a trial or hearing unless the judge finds
it necessary for the fair administration of justice. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-090: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
The justice court shall be open and judicial business shall be transacted every
day during regular business hours as provided by law, including the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated section 78-3-24, as amended, regarding court
administration. The hours the justice court is open shall be posted
conspicuously at the court and in local public buildings. The justice court
judge and clerk shall attend the court at regularly scheduled times. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-2-100: POWERS OF THE JUSTICE COURT:
The justice court has the authority necessary to exercise its jurisdiction,
including, but not limited to, the authority to:
A.   Preserve and enforce order in its immediate presence;
B.   Enforce order in the proceedings before it, or before a person authorized
to conduct a judicial investigation under its authority;
C.   Provide for the orderly conduct of proceedings before it or its officers;
D.   Compel obedience to its judgments, orders and process, and to the orders
of a judge out of court, in a pending action or proceeding;
E.   Control in furtherance of justice the conduct of its ministerial officers,
and of all other persons in any manner connected with a judicial proceeding
before it in every matter;
F.   Compel the attendance of persons to testify in a pending action or
proceeding, as provided by law;
G.   Administer oaths in a pending action or proceeding, and in all other cases
where necessary in the exercise of its authority and duties;
H.   Amend and control its process and orders to conform to law and justice;
I.   Devise and make new process and forms of proceedings, consistent with law,
necessary to carry into effect its authority and jurisdiction;
J.   Establish and adopt procedural process, in conformance with the apparent
intent of statutes or rules of procedure, for actions in which such procedure
is not yet established; and
K.   Enforce rules of the Utah supreme court and judicial council. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-2-110: PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS:
The sittings of the justice court are public; provided, however, that in any
cause, the court may, in its discretion, during the examination of any witness,
exclude any and all other witnesses in the cause. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-120: ENGLISH LANGUAGE:
Judicial proceedings in the justice court shall be conducted in the English
language. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-130: ABBREVIATIONS AND NUMERALS:
Abbreviations as are in common use may be used, and numbers may be expressed by
figures or numerals in the customary manner. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-140: CHANGE OF PLACE OF TRIAL BECAUSE OF CALAMITY:
The justice court judge may, by an order filed with the clerk and published as
he or she prescribes, direct that the justice court be held or continued at any
other place in the city than that appointed, when war, insurrection, pestilence
or other public calamity, or danger thereof, or the destruction of or danger to
the building appointed for holding court, may render it necessary, and may in
the same manner revoke the order, and in his or her discretion appoint another
place in the city for holding court. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-150: SEAL:
A.   Generally: The justice court shall have a seal, which seal shall be
approved by the judicial council.
B.   When Affixed: The seal of the justice court need not be affixed to any
document of the court except to:
1.   A writ;
2.   The authentication of a copy of a record or document on file with the
justice court; and
3.   The authentication of the signature of an officer of the justice court.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-160: PROCESS, SUBPOENAS AND WARRANTS:
A.   Process from the justice court may be issued to any place in the state.
B.   Subpoenas in any action or proceeding of the justice court may be issued
to any place in the state.
C.   All warrants issued by the justice court for violation of any state law or
local ordinance within the court's jurisdiction shall be directed to the
sheriff, any constable of the county, or to the city police. (Ord. 161, 12-5-
1994)
4-2-170: JURORS AND WITNESSES:
The fees, mileage, and other expenses authorized by law for jurors, prosecution
witnesses, witnesses subpoenaed by indigent defendants, and interpreter costs
shall be paid by the city if the action is prosecuted by the city attorney.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-180: DOCKET:
The justice court judge shall keep or cause to be kept a docket. The following
information shall be entered in the docket under the title of the action to
which it relates:
A.   The title to every action or proceeding;
B.   The object of the action or proceeding and the amount of any money
claimed;
C.   The date of the service of the summons and the time of its return;
D.   A statement of the fact if an order to arrest the defendant is made or a
writ of attachment is issued;
E.   The time when the parties or any party appears, or a party's
nonappearance, if default is made;
F.   Minutes of the pleadings and motions in writing by referring to them, and
if not in writing, by a concise statement of the material parts of the
pleadings;
G.   Every adjournment, stating on whose application and to what time;
H.   A demand for a trial by jury, when made, by whom, and the order for the
jury;
I.   The time appointed for the return of the jury and for the trial;
J.   The names of the jurors who appear and are sworn;
K.   The name of all witnesses sworn and at whose request;
L.   The verdict of the jury and when received, or if the jury disagree and are
discharged, the disagreement and discharge;
M.   The judgment of the court, including the costs included and when entered;
N.   An itemized statement of the costs;
O.   The time of issuing an execution and to whom, and the time of any
renewals;
P.   A statement of any money paid to the court, when, and by whom; and
Q.   The receipt of any notice of appeal, and of any appeal bond filed. (Ord.
161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-190: DOCKET ENTRIES AS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
Entries in the justice court judge's docket under section
4-2-180 of this chapter, certified by the justice court judge or his or her
successor in office, are prima facie evidence of the facts stated. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-2-200: DOCKET INDEX:
The justice court judge shall keep or cause to be kept an alphabetical index to
the names of the parties to each judgment in his or her docket with a reference
to the page of entry. The names of the parties shall be entered in the index by
the first letter of the family surname. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-210: DOCKETS AS PUBLIC RECORDS:
The dockets kept or caused to be kept by the justice court judge shall be kept
as public records in accordance with the provisions of the Draper City
government records access and management ordinance and the Utah code of
judicial administration. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-220: MONTHLY REPORTS:
A.   The justice court judge shall file monthly with the state court
administrator a report of the judicial business of the judge on forms supplied
by the state court administrator.
B.   The report shall state the number of criminal and small claims actions
filed, the dispositions entered, and other information as specified in the
forms.
C.   A copy of the report shall be furnished by the justice court judge to the
city council or to such other person as the city council may designate. (Ord.
161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-230: DELIVERY OF DOCKET AND PAPERS TO SUCCESSOR:
The justice court judge, upon the expiration of term of office, shall deposit
with his or her successor all dockets and papers filed in his or her office,
including those of any predecessors and those otherwise in his or her custody.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-240: VALIDITY OF PAPERS ISSUED:
Every paper made or issued by the justice court judge, except a subpoena, is
valid only if issued without any blank space to be filled or completed by
another person. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-250: DECISIONS TO BE RENDERED:
A.   The justice court judge shall decide all matters submitted for final
determination within sixty (60) days of submission, unless circumstances
causing the delay are beyond the judge's personal control.
B.   The justice court judge shall follow reporting procedures established by
the judicial council for all matters not submitted within sixty (60) days of
final submission. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-260: FILING AND DOCKETING OF ABSTRACT:
A.   The justice court judge, on the demand of a party in whose favor judgment
is rendered, shall provide the party with an abstract of the judgment in
substantially the form approved by the judicial council.
B.   The abstract may be filed in the office of the clerk of the district court
of any county in the state but shall be docketed in the judgment docket of that
district court.
C.   The clerk shall note the time of receipt of the abstract on the abstract
and on the docket. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-270: EXECUTION ON JUDGMENT:
From the time of the docketing in the office of the clerk of any district
court, execution may then be issued within the same time, in the same manner,
and with the same effect as if issued on a judgment of the district court.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-280: JUDGMENT NOT A LIEN UNLESS SO DOCKETED:
A.   A judgment rendered in the justice court does not create a lien upon any
lands of the judgment debtor unless an abstract is filed and docketed in the
office of the clerk of the district court of the county in which the lands are
located.
B.   When filed and docketed, the judgment is a lien upon the real property of
the judgment debtor that is not exempt from execution and is situated in that
county for eight (8) years from the date the judgment was entered unless the
judgment is earlier satisfied. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-290: FEES:
Except as otherwise provided by law, all fees in connection with the justice
court shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-300: COLLECTION AND DEPOSIT OF FINES, FEES AND FORFEITURES:
A.   The justice court shall deposit within seven (7) days, or more often if
required by the city council, all fines, fees, costs, and forfeitures collected
in an account controlled by the city treasurer. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
B.   The city treasurer shall report to the finance director the sums collected
and deposited. The finance director shall then apportion and remit the
collected proceeds as provided in section
4-2-310 of this chapter.
C.   With the approval of the city council, a trust or revolving account may be
established in the name of the justice court and the city treasurer for the
deposit of money collected, including bail, restitution, unidentified receipts,
and other money that requires special accounting. Disbursements from this
account do not require the approval of the city council. The account shall be
reconciled at least quarterly by the finance director. (Ord. 962, 2-1-2011)
4-2-310: REMITTAL OF FINES, FEES AND FORFEITURES:
A.   Except as otherwise specified by law, all fines and forfeitures collected
by the justice court shall be remitted, one-half (1/2) to the city treasurer
and one-half (1/2) to the treasurer of the local government which prosecutes or
which would prosecute the violation.
B.   For violation of Utah Code Annotated title 23, the justice court shall
allocate eighty five percent (85%) of the fines, fees and forfeitures to the
division of wildlife resources and fifteen percent (15%) to the general fund of
the city.
C.   For violation of Utah Code Annotated title 73, chapter 18, the justice
court shall allocate eighty five percent (85%) of the fines, fees and
forfeitures to the division of parks and recreation and fifteen percent (15%)
to the general fund of the city.
D.   The surcharge established by Utah Code Annotated section 63-63a-1, as
amended, shall be paid to the state treasurer.
E.   For violation of Utah Code Annotated section 27-12-151 or 27-12-154, as
amended, regarding maximum weight limitations and overweight permits, the
justice court shall pay to the state treasurer and distribute under the
schedule set forth in Utah Code Annotated 78-5-116(4), as amended, all fines,
fees, court costs, and forfeitures collected, minus court costs, not to exceed
the schedule adopted by the judicial council. Revenue deposited in the class B
and C road account pursuant to this subsection is supplemental to the money
appropriated under Utah Code Annotated section 27-12-127, as amended, but shall
be expended in the same manner as other class B and C road funds. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-2-320: DISPOSITION OF MONIES RECEIVED:
Money received or collected on any process or order issued from the justice
court shall be paid within seven (7) days to the party or parties entitled or
authorized to receive the money. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-330: PROCEEDINGS UNAFFECTED BY VACANCY:
No proceeding in the justice court in an action or special proceeding pending
therein is affected by a vacancy in the office of all or any of the judges, or
by the failure of a term thereof. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-2-340: REPEATED APPLICATION FOR ORDERS:
A.   If an application for an order to the justice court judge is refused in
whole or in part, or is granted conditionally, a subsequent application for the
same order may not be made to any other judge, except of a higher court.
B.   This section does not apply to motions refused for any informality in the
papers or proceedings necessary to obtain the order, or to motions refused with
liberty to renew them.
C.   A notice of appeal for a trial de novo in the circuit court is not a
subsequent application for the same order.
D.   A violation of this section may be punished as a contempt, and an order
made contrary thereto may be revoked by the judge who made it, or vacated by a
judge of the court in which the action or proceeding is pending. (Ord. 161, 12-
5-1994)
4-2-350: TRIAL DE NOVO IN CIRCUIT COURT:
Any person not satisfied with a judgment rendered in the justice court, whether
rendered by default or after trial, is entitled to a trial de novo in the
circuit court of the county as provided by law. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 3
JUSTICE COURT JUDGES AND STAFF
SECTION:
4-3-010: Justice Court Judge
4-3-020: Powers Of Justice Court Judge
4-3-030: Powers Of Judge Contradistinguished From Court
4-3-040: Eligibility
4-3-050: Appointment
4-3-060: Certification And Annual Training
4-3-070: Reappointment
4-3-080: Term And Vacancy
4-3-090: Compensation
4-3-100: Limitation On Additional Activities
4-3-110: Service After Retirement
4-3-120: Disability Retirement
4-3-130: Disqualification
4-3-140: Grounds For Removal
4-3-150: Temporary Justice Court Judge
4-3-160: Clerical Personnel
4-3-170: Justice Court Staff
4-3-010: JUSTICE COURT JUDGE:
The justice court shall be presided over by a municipal justice court judge
known as the Draper City justice court judge, hereinafter referred to as the
"justice court judge". (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-020: POWERS OF JUSTICE COURT JUDGE:
The justice court judge has the same authority regarding matters within his or
her jurisdiction as judges of courts of record, including, but not limited to,
the power and authority:
A.   To issue search warrants and warrants of arrest upon a finding of probable
cause;
B.   To conduct proceedings to determine:
1.   Probable cause for any case within his or her jurisdiction; and
2.   An accused person's release on bail or his or her own recognizance;
C.   To preserve and enforce order in his or her immediate presence, and in
proceedings before him or her, when he or she is engaged in the performance of
official duty;
D.   To compel obedience to his or her lawful orders as provided by law;
E.   To compel the attendance of persons to testify in a proceeding before him
or her in the cases and manner provided by law;
F.   To administer oaths to persons in a proceeding pending before him or her,
and in all other cases where it may be necessary in the exercise of his or her
powers and duties;
G.   To exercise the powers of a magistrate to the extent permitted by law as
enumerated in Utah Code Annotated section 78-7-17.5, as amended;
H.   To effectuate the powers set forth in subsection G of this section with
the power to punish for contempt any person in violation thereof;
I.   To deputize, in writing, any suitable and discreet person to act as
constable, when no suitable constable is available. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-030: POWERS OF JUDGE CONTRADISTINGUISHED FROM COURT:
The justice court judge may exercise out of court all the powers expressly
conferred upon a judge as contradistinguished from the court. (Ord. 161, 12-5-
1994)
4-3-040: ELIGIBILITY:
The justice court judge shall be:
A.   A citizen of the United States;
B.   Twenty five (25) years of age or older;
C.   A resident of Utah for at least three (3) years immediately preceding
appointment;
D.   A resident of Salt Lake County or an adjacent county for at least six (6)
months immediately preceding appointment;
E.   A qualified voter of the county of residence; and
F.   A person who has demonstrated maturity of judgment, integrity, and the
ability to understand and apply appropriate law with impartiality. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-3-050: APPOINTMENT:
A.   Generally: The justice court judge shall be appointed by the mayor and be
confirmed by a majority vote of the city council pursuant to the procedure set
forth herein.
B.   Advertise: The city council shall advertise and solicit applications for
the filling of any vacancy in the office of justice court judge.
C.   Mayor Recommendation: The mayor shall review the applications and
recommend to the city council the appointment of the best qualified candidate
to office based solely upon fitness for office and subject to the limitations
set forth in Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 3, as amended, regarding
employment of relatives.
D.   City Council Review: The city council shall review the recommendation of
the mayor and either confirm or reject by a majority vote the recommended
appointment.
E.   Failure Of Confirmation: If the city council does not confirm the
recommended candidate within thirty (30) days of submission, the mayor may
either recommend the appointment of another applicant or reopen the vacancy by
advertisement and solicitation of applications until the appointment is
confirmed by the city council.
F.   Report To Judicial Council: After a newly appointed justice court judge
has been confirmed, the city council shall report the confirmed judge's name to
the judicial council. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-060: CERTIFICATION AND ANNUAL TRAINING:
A.   Certification: Prior to assuming office, the justice court judge shall
attend an orientation seminar conducted under the direction of the judicial
council. The judicial council shall certify the judge as qualified to hold
office upon successful completion of the orientation program and upon the
written opinion of the city attorney that the judge meets the statutory
qualifications for office. No justice court judge may perform judicial duties
until so certified by the judicial council. Failure to obtain said
certification disqualifies the person for office and the office to which the
person was appointed is then vacant.
B.   Annual Training: The justice court judge shall attend continuing education
conducted under the supervision of the judicial council each calendar year,
which education shall include instruction regarding competency and
understanding of constitutional provisions and laws relating to the
jurisdiction of the court, rules of evidence, and rules of civil and criminal
procedure. Completion of such continuing education is evidenced by a
certificate awarded by the judicial council. Any justice court judge not
obtaining said certificate for two (2) consecutive years may be removed from
office for cause under this section.
C.   Costs: The city shall assume the expenses of travel, meals, and lodging
for any justice court judge to attend the education and training seminars
conducted by the judicial council and required herein. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-070: REAPPOINTMENT:
Upon the expiration of a justice court judge's term of office, the justice
court judge may be considered for reappointment by the mayor and the city
council. Before reappointment, each justice court judge shall be evaluated in
accordance with the performance evaluation program established in Utah Code
Annotated section 78-3-21(4), as amended. At least ninety (90) days before
reappointment, the judicial council shall publish whether the justice court
judge has met the evaluation criteria during the justice court judge's term of
office. In determining whether to reappoint a justice court judge, the mayor
and city council shall consider whether or not the justice court judge has been
certified as meeting the evaluation criteria for judicial performance
established by the judicial council and any other factors considered relevant.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-080: TERM AND VACANCY:
A.   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the justice court judge before the
completion of his or her term of office, the city council may fill the vacancy
by appointment for the unexpired term in accordance with the procedure set
forth at section
4-3-050 of this chapter; or contract with a justice court judge of Salt Lake
County, an adjacent county, or another municipality within such counties for
judicial services.
B.   When the city council chooses to contract under subsection A of this
section, it shall ensure that the contract is for the same term as the term of
office of the justice court judge whose services are replaced by the contract.
C.   The city council shall notify the office of the state court administrator
in writing of the appointment, resignation, or the contractual agreement for
services of a justice court judge under this section within thirty (30) days
after filling the vacancy. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-090: COMPENSATION:
A.   Amount: The justice court judge shall be paid a fixed compensation
determined by the city council taking into consideration recommendations of the
office of the state court administrator as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 78-5-128(2), as amended. The compensation shall be comprised of a
monthly salary and shall be computed upon the number of hours, days or other
periods of time that the justice court judge is to be available to perform all
judicial functions, but in no case may the salary be an amount greater than
seventy five percent (75%) of the salary of a circuit court judge.
B.   Review: The city council shall annually review the compensation paid to
the justice court judge and may adjust such compensation as deemed appropriate;
provided, however, that the salary fixed for a justice court judge may not be
diminished during the term for which the justice court judge has been appointed
or elected.
C.   Notice: A copy of the resolution, ordinance, or other document fixing the
salary of the justice court judge and any adjustments to the document shall be
furnished to the state court administrator by the city council. (Ord. 161, 12-
5-1994)
4-3-100: LIMITATION ON ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES:
A.   The justice court judge may not appear as an attorney in any criminal
matter in a federal, state, or justice court or appear as an attorney in any
justice court or in any juvenile court case involving conduct which would be
criminal if committed by an adult.
B.   The justice court judge may not hold any office or employment including
contracting for services in any justice agency of state government or any
political subdivision of the state, including law enforcement, prosecution,
criminal defense, corrections, or court employment; provided, however, that the
justice court judge may, with the concurrence of the governing bodies of both
Salt Lake County and the city, hold both the offices of county and municipal
justice court judge, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 78-5-102, as
amended.
C.   The justice court judge may not hold any office in any political party or
organization engaged in any political activity or serve as an elected official
in state government or any political subdivision of the state.
D.   The justice court judge may not own or be employed by any business entity
which regularly litigates in small claims court.
E.   Any justice court judge who violates this section may be subject to
removal by the judicial conduct commission under Utah Code Annotated section
78-7-28, as amended. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-110: SERVICE AFTER RETIREMENT:
A.   The justice court judge whose tenure in office has terminated due to
retirement and who is physically and mentally able to perform the duties of the
office may hear a case as prescribed by rule of the supreme court.
B.   The retired justice court judge shall take and subscribe an oath of office
upon first appointment. The retired justice court judge shall receive
reasonable compensation for services as set by the city council by ordinance.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-120: DISABILITY RETIREMENT:
A.   The justice court judge, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 78-7-30, as amended, may be retired for a
disability seriously interfering with the performance of his or her duties and
which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. Any justice court
judge desiring to retire on grounds of disability shall certify to the judicial
commission the nature of his or her disability and his or her request for
retirement. The commission may order a medical examination and report.
B.   Action of the judicial conduct commission in approving or disapproving an
application for disability retirement shall be based upon the evaluation and
recommendations submitted by one or more medical examiners or physicians,
including an examination of essential statements submitted by either bar or
judicial associations or committees certifying that:
1.   The justice court judge is mentally or physically disabled and totally
incapacitated for the further performance of his or her assigned job; and
2.   His or her incapacity is likely to continue and be permanent and that he
or she should be retired. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-130: DISQUALIFICATION:
A.   Except by consent of all parties, no justice court judge may sit or act in
any action or proceeding:
1.   To which he or she is a party, or in which he or she is interested;
2.   When he or she is related to either party by consanguinity or affinity
within the third degree, computed according to the rules of common law; or
3.   When he or she has been attorney or counsel for either party in the action
or proceeding.
B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the arrangement of the
calendar or the regulation of the order of business, nor to the power or
transferring the action or proceeding to some other court. (Ord. 161, 12-5-
1994)
4-3-140: GROUNDS FOR REMOVAL:
A.   The justice court judge, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 78-7-30, as amended, may be removed from office,
suspended, censured, involuntarily retired, or publicly or privately
reprimanded for:
1.   Wilful misconduct in office;
2.   Final conviction of a crime punishable as a felony under state or federal
law;
3.   Disability that seriously interferes with the performance of judicial
duties;
4.   Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings a
judicial office into disrepute;
5.   Failure to obtain and maintain certification from the judicial council for
attendance at required judicial training courses; or
6.   Failure to meet the minimum requirements for office, including residency.
B.   The supreme court, on its own motion, may suspend a justice court judge
from office without salary or compensation if he or she pleads guilty, no
contest to, or is found guilty of a crime punishable as a felony under state or
federal law. If he or she is not convicted or if the conviction is reversed,
his or her suspension is terminated and he or she shall be paid his or her
salary or compensation for the period of suspension. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-150: TEMPORARY JUSTICE COURT JUDGE:
If the justice court judge is absent or disqualified, the city council may
appoint any senior justice court judge, or justice court judge currently
holding office within the judicial district or in an adjacent county to serve
as a temporary justice court judge consistent with Utah Code Annotated section
78A-7-208. (Ord. 1019, 6-26-2012)
4-3-160: CLERICAL PERSONNEL:
A.   The city shall provide and compensate clerical personnel to conduct the
business of the justice court.
B.   The selection, supervision, and discipline of court clerical personnel
shall be in accordance with city personnel policies, with the concurrence of
the justice court judge, and Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 3, as
amended, regarding employment of relatives.
C.   The city assumes the cost of travel and training expenses of clerical
personnel at required training sessions conducted by the judicial council.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-3-170: JUSTICE COURT STAFF:
The city shall provide:
A.   Sufficient staff and public prosecutors to attend the justice court and
perform the duties of prosecution before the justice court;
B.   Adequate funding for the costs of defense for persons charged with a
public offense who are determined by the justice court to be indigent under
Utah Code Annotated title 77, chapter 32, as amended; and
C.   Sufficient law enforcement officers to attend and provide security for the
justice court when required. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 4
SMALL CLAIMS DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-4-010: Creation Of Small Claims Department
4-4-020: Jurisdiction
4-4-030: Counterclaims
4-4-040: Procedure
4-4-050: Deferral Of Multiple Claims
4-4-060: Judges Pro Tempore
4-4-070: Assignee May Not File Claim
4-4-080: Hearing Not Of Record
4-4-090: Judgment And Execution
4-4-100: Appeals
4-4-110: Fees
4-4-120: Costs
4-4-010: CREATION OF SMALL CLAIMS DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a department within the justice court known as Draper
City small claims department, hereinafter referred to as the "small claims
department". (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-020: JURISDICTION:
The small claims department has jurisdiction in cases:
A.   For the recovery of money where the amount claimed does not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) including attorney fees, but exclusive of court
costs and interest and where the defendant resides or the action of
indebtedness was incurred within the jurisdiction of the justice court; or
B.   Involving interpleader under rule 22 of the Utah rules of civil procedure,
in which the amount claimed does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
including attorney fees, but exclusive of court costs and interests. (Ord. 161,
12-5-1994)
4-4-030: COUNTERCLAIMS:
Counterclaims may be maintained in the small claims department if the
counterclaim arises out of the transaction or occurrence that is the subject
matter of the plaintiff's claim. A counterclaim may not be raised for the first
time in the trial de novo of the small claims action. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-040: PROCEDURE:
Small claims matters shall be managed in accordance with simplified rules of
procedure and evidence promulgated by the Utah supreme court, and persons or
corporations may litigate actions on behalf of themselves in person or through
authorized employees with or without counsel. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-050: DEFERRAL OF MULTIPLE CLAIMS:
If person or corporation other than a municipality or political subdivision of
the state files multiple small claims in the small claims department, the
justice court judge or clerk may remove all but the initial claim from the
court's calendar in order to dispose of all other small claims matters. Claims
so removed shall be rescheduled as permitted by the court's calendar. (Ord.
161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-060: JUDGES PRO TEMPORE:
The justice court may request that the Utah supreme court appoint a member of
the Utah state bar in good standing, with the member's consent, as judge pro
tempore to hear and determine small claims at times, including evening hours,
to be set by the justice court. Such judges pro tempore, after being duly
sworn, shall serve voluntarily and without compensation at the request of the
justice court, shall be extended the same immunities, and shall have the same
powers with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of the small claims
department as may be exercised by a judge thereof. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-070: ASSIGNEE MAY NOT FILE CLAIM:
No claim shall be filed or prosecuted in the small claims department by any
assignee of such claim. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-080: HEARING NOT OF RECORD:
Hearings in the small claims department shall not be of record, with the sole
object of dispensing speedy justice between the parties. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-090: JUDGMENT AND EXECUTION:
A.   In no event shall the judgment of the small claims department exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) including attorney fees, but exclusive of court
costs and interest.
B.   Attachment, garnishment, and execution may issue after judgment as
prescribed by law, upon the payment of the fees required for those services.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-100: APPEALS:
A.   Either party may appeal the judgment of the small claims department to the
circuit court of Salt Lake County by filing a notice of appeal within ten (10)
days of the notice of entry of the judgment.
B.   The appeal to the circuit court is a trial de novo and shall be tried in
accordance with the procedures of the small claims department, except a record
of the trial shall be maintained. The trial de novo may not be heard by a small
claims department judge pro tempore appointed under section
4-4-060 of this chapter. The decision of the trial de novo may not be appealed
unless the justice court holds a state statute or local ordinance
unconstitutional. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-110: FEES:
A.   Except as provided in this section, the filing fees in the small claims
department shall be the same as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 21-1-5,
as amended, and shall be collected and remitted as provided herein at sections
4-2-290 and
4-2-300 of this title.
B.   When applicable, the appropriate amount shall be withheld from the fees
and allocated to the judges' retirement trust fund or as otherwise directed by
law. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-4-120: COSTS:
The prevailing party in any action in the small claims department is entitled
to costs of the action and also the costs of execution upon a judgment rendered
therein, the same as in other courts. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 5
CITATIONS AND COMPLAINTS
SECTION:
4-5-010: Cross Reference
4-5-020: Party Plaintiff
4-5-030: Corporate Violations
4-5-040: Citation
4-5-050: Contents Of Citation
4-5-060: Proceeding On Citation
4-5-070: Appearance
4-5-080: Wilfully Failing To Appear
4-5-090: Delivery Of Prisoner Arrested Without Warrant
4-5-100: Transfer Of Case
4-5-110: Bail Forfeiture
4-5-120: Successive Actions Permitted
4-5-010: CROSS REFERENCE:
It is the intent of the city council that this chapter of the judicial code
comply with and be interpreted in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Utah Code Annotated dealing with the use of citations in misdemeanor cases,
particularly sections 77-7-18 through 77-7-23, as amended. Except as otherwise
provided, the jurisdiction and procedure for the accusation, prosecution,
conviction and punishment of offenders and offenses within the justice court
shall be governed by the provisions set forth in the Draper City criminal code.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-020: PARTY PLAINTIFF:
All actions brought to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty under an
ordinance of the city shall be brought in the corporate name of the city as
plaintiff. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-030: CORPORATE VIOLATIONS:
A corporation violating any city ordinance may be complained against the same
as a natural person pursuant to the pleading and procedures set forth at Utah
Code Annotated sections 10-7-69 through 10-7-74, as amended. (Ord. 161, 12-5-
1994)
4-5-040: CITATION:
Any peace officer, in lieu of taking a person into custody, or any city
official charged with the enforcement of the laws of this city, may issue and
deliver a citation requiring any person subject to arrest or prosecution on a
misdemeanor or infraction charge to appear at the court of the magistrate
before whom the person could be taken pursuant to law if the person had been
arrested. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-050: CONTENTS OF CITATION:
A.   If a citation is issued pursuant to this chapter, the peace officer or
city official shall issue one copy to the person cited and shall within five
(5) days, file a duplicate copy with the court specified in the citation.
B.   Each copy of the citation issued under authority of this chapter shall
contain:
1.   The name of the court before which the person is to appear.
2.   The name of the person cited.
3.   A brief description of the offense charged.
4.   The date, time and place at which the offense is alleged to have occurred.
5.   The date on which the citation was issued.
6.   The name of the peace officer or public official who issued the citation,
and the name of the arresting person if an arrest was made by a private party
and the citation was issued in lieu of taking the arrested person before a
magistrate.
7.   The time and date on or before and after which the person is to appear.
8.   The address of the court in which the person is to appear.
9.   A certification above the signature of the officer issuing the citation in
substantially the following language:
I certify that a copy of this citation or information (Summons and Complaint)
was duly served upon the defendant according to law on the above date and I
know or believe and so allege that the above-named defendant did commit the
offense herein set forth contrary to law. I further certify that the Court to
which the defendant has been directed to appear is the proper Court pursuant to
Section 77-7-21, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
10.   A notice containing substantially the following language:
This citation is not an information and will not be used as an information
without your consent. If an information is filed, you will be provided a copy
by the Court. You must appear in Court on or before the time set in this
citation. IF YOU FAIL TO APPEAR AN INFORMATION WILL BE FILED AND THE COURT MAY
ISSUE A WARRANT FOR YOUR ARREST.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-060: PROCEEDING ON CITATION:
A.   Whenever a citation is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
the copy of the citation filed with the magistrate may be used in lieu of an
information to which the person cited may plead guilty or no contest and be
sentenced or on which bail may be posted and forfeited. With the magistrate's
approval, a person may voluntarily forfeit bail without appearance being
required in any case of a class B misdemeanor or less. Such voluntary
forfeiture of bail shall be entered as a conviction and treated the same as if
the accused pleaded guilty.
B.   If the person cited wilfully fails to appear before a magistrate pursuant
to a citation issued under this chapter, or pleads not guilty to the offense
charged, or does not deposit bail on or before the date set for his or her
appearance, an information shall be filed and proceedings held in accordance
with the rules of criminal procedure and all other applicable provisions of the
Utah state code or these revised ordinances, which information shall be deemed
an original pleading; provided, however, that the person cited may by written
agreement waive the filing of the information and thereafter the prosecution
may proceed on the citation notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary.
(Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-070: APPEARANCE:
A.   Any person receiving a misdemeanor citation shall appear before the
justice court judge designated in the citation on or before the time and date
specified in the citation unless the uniform bail schedule adopted by the
judicial council or Utah Code Annotated section 77-7-21, as amended, permits
forfeiture of bail for the offense charged. The citation may not require a
person to appear sooner than five (5) days or later than fourteen (14) days
following its issuance.
B.   Any person who receives a citation and who fails to comply with section
4-5-060 of this chapter on or before the time and date and at the court
specified is subject to arrest. The justice court judge may issue a warrant of
arrest.
C.   Except where otherwise provided by law, a citation issued for violations
of Utah Code Annotated title 41 shall state that the person receiving the
citation shall appear before the justice court judge who has jurisdiction over
the offense charged. The justice court clerk and other administrative personnel
shall ensure that the justice court has jurisdiction and venue over such
citation and shall refuse to receive citations that should be filed in another
court. Fines, fees, costs, and forfeitures imposed or collected for violations
of Utah Code Annotated title 41 which are filed contrary to this section shall
be paid to the entitled municipality or county by the state, county, or
municipal treasurer who has received the fines, fees, costs, or forfeitures
from the court which collected them. The accounting and remitting of sums due
shall be at the close of the fiscal year of the municipality or county which
has received fines, fees, costs, or forfeitures as a result of any improperly
filed citations. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-080: WILFULLY FAILING TO APPEAR:
Any person who wilfully fails to appear before the justice court pursuant to a
citation issued under the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she
was originally cited. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-090: DELIVERY OF PRISONER ARRESTED WITHOUT WARRANT:
A.   When an arrest is made without a warrant by a peace officer or private
person, the person arrested shall be taken without unnecessary delay to the
justice court judge, except as provided in subsection C of this section. An
information stating the charge against the person shall be made before the
justice court judge.
B.   If the justice court judge is not available, the arrested person shall be
taken before the magistrate within Salt Lake County who is nearest to the scene
of the alleged offense or nearest to the jail under subsection C of this
section, who may act as committing magistrate for arraigning the accused,
setting bail, or issuing warrants.
C.   If the arrested person under subsection A of this section must be
transported from jail to a justice court judge, the person may be taken before
the magistrate nearest to the jail rather than the justice court judge
specified in subsection A of this section for arraignment, setting bail, or
issuing warrants.
D.   The case shall then be transferred to the court having jurisdiction. This
section does not confer jurisdiction upon a court unless otherwise provided by
law.
E.   Any officer or person violating this section is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-100: TRANSFER OF CASE:
The justice court judge may, upon the motion of either the defense attorney or
prosecuting attorney, based on a lack of territorial jurisdiction or the
disqualification of the judge, transfer cases to the nearest justice court or
the nearest circuit court within Salt Lake County. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-110: BAIL FORFEITURE:
With the approval of the justice court and in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Utah Code Annotated title 77, chapter 20a, a person may
voluntarily forfeit bail without appearance being required, in any case of a
class B misdemeanor or less. Such voluntary forfeiture of bail shall be entered
as a conviction and treated the same as if the accused pleaded guilty. (Ord.
161, 12-5-1994)
4-5-120: SUCCESSIVE ACTIONS PERMITTED:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-7-65, as amended, no prosecution,
recovery, or acquittal for the violation of any city ordinance shall constitute
a defense to any other prosecution of the same person for any other violation
of any such ordinance although the different causes of action existed at the
same time and if united would not have exceeded the jurisdiction of the justice
court. (Ord. 161, 12-5-1994)
TITLE 5
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 1
LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
5-1-010: Title
5-1-020: Purpose
5-1-030: Effective Date
5-1-040: Amount Of Tax And Collection
5-1-050: Sales Tax
5-1-060: Use Tax
5-1-070: Execution
5-1-080: Contract With Utah State Tax Commission
5-1-090: Notice Of Increased Rate
5-1-100: Effective Date Of Increased Rate
5-1-110: Sales Tax; Increased Rate
5-1-120: Use Tax; Increased Rate
5-1-130: Retail Sales
5-1-140: Application Of State Law
5-1-150: Substitution Of Name
5-1-160: License
5-1-170: Computation Of Tax
5-1-180: Penalties
5-1-190: Severability
5-1-010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord.
160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-020: PURPOSE:
The Utah legislature has authorized municipalities of the state of Utah to
enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a 58/64 percent, effective July 1,
1986, and has authorized the tax to be increased to one percent (1%) effective
January 1, 1990. It is the purpose of this chapter to levy and impose a 58/64
percent local option sales and use tax effective July 1, 1986, to increase said
sales and use tax to one percent (1%) effective January 1, 1990, to authorize
and designate the Utah state tax commission as agent for the municipality to
collect the tax and to conform with the requirements of the local sales and use
tax law of Utah, Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-201 et seq. (Ord. 160, 12-5-
1994)
5-1-030: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M., July 1, 1986. The provisions of the previously enacted local sales
and use tax ordinance of the municipality is repealed hereby that such previous
ordinance which is in conflict with this chapter shall continue effective until
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, June 30, 1986. The provisions of this chapter
which are not in conflict with said formal ordinance shall be deemed to be a
continuation thereof and rights, duties, and obligations arising thereunder
shall not in any way be deemed abrogated or terminated. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-040: AMOUNT OF TAX AND COLLECTION:
A.   The city may distribute its sales and use tax revenues by means other than
point of sale or use by notifying the commission in writing of such decision,
no later than thirty (30) days before commencement of the next tax accrual.
After such notice is given, the city may increase the tax authorized by this
part to a total 58/64 percent from July 1, 1986 to December 31, 1989, and to a
total of one percent (1%) on January 1, 1990, of the purchase price paid or
charged, excluding a public transient sales and use tax as provided by the Utah
state legislature under resort community sales tax as also provided by the Utah
state legislature:
1.   From July 1, 1985 through December 31, 1989, twenty five percent (25%) of
the tax revenue shall be paid to each county, city and town providing notice
under this section based upon the percentage that the population of the county,
city, or town bears to the total population of all such entities providing
notice under this section and seventy five percent (75%) based upon the point
of sale or use of the transaction.
2.   From January 1, 1990 through June 30, 1991, thirty five percent (35%) of
the tax revenue shall be paid to each county, city or town providing notice
under this section, based upon the percentage that the population of the
county, city, or town bears to the total population of all such entities
providing notice under this section and sixty five percent (65%) based upon the
point of sale or use of the transaction.
3.   From July 1, 1990 through June 30, 1992, forty percent (40%) of each
dollar collected from the sales and use tax authorized by this chapter shall be
paid to each county, city and town providing notice under this section, based
upon the percentage that the population of the county, city, or town bears to
the total population of all such entities providing notice under this section,
and sixty percent (60%) based upon the point of sale or use of the transaction.
4.   From July 1, 1992 through June 30, 1993, forty five percent (45%) of each
dollar collected from the sales and use tax authorized by this chapter shall be
paid to each county, city and town providing notice under this section, based
upon the percentage that the population of the county, city or town bears to
the total population of all such entities providing notice under this section,
and fifty five percent (55%) based upon the point of sale or use of the
transaction.
5.   From and after July 1, 1993, fifty percent (50%) of each dollar collected
from the sales and use tax authorized by this chapter shall be paid to each
county, city and town providing notice under this section, based upon the
percentage that the population of the county, city or town bears to the total
population of all such entities providing notice under this section, and fifty
percent (50%) based upon the point of sale or use of the transaction.
B.   Notwithstanding any provision of subsection A of this section, no county,
city, or town that has given notice under this section shall receive a tax
revenue distribution less than three-fourths percent (3/4%) of the sales and
use tax revenue collected within its boundaries. The commission shall
proportionately reduce quarterly distributions to any county, city or town,
which but for the reduction would receive a distribution in excess of 58/64
percent from July 1, 1986 through December 31, 1989, and one percent (1%)
beginning January 1, 1990, of the sales and use tax revenue collected within
its boundaries.
C.   Population figures for purposes of this section shall be determined
according to the last decennial census taken by the United States department of
commerce 1 . (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 59-12-205.
5-1-050: SALES TAX:
A.   From and after one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1, 1986,
there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax on every retail
sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the
municipality at the rate of 58/64 percent. Said rate of 58/64 percent shall be
increased to one percent (1%) from and after one minute after twelve o'clock
(12:01) A.M. January 1, 1990.
B.   For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to
have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the
tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an
out of state destination. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state, or has more than one place of business, the place or business at
which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under the rules and
regulations prescribed and adopted by the Utah state tax commission. Public
utilities as defined by Utah law, shall not be obligated to determine the place
or places within the county or municipality where public utility services are
rendered, but the place and sale of such sales tax revenues are arising from
such service allocable to the municipality shall be as determined by the Utah
state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
C.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the local sales and use tax law of Utah,
all of the provision of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended,
and in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to
sales taxes, excepting section 59-12-101, and excepting for the amount of the
sales tax levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as
fully set forth herein.
D.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter
12, the state is named or referred to as the "taxing agent", the name of this
city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed
to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word "state"
when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of
the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be substituted
for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency
thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
E.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by
reason of this section.
F.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which
the tax is measured:
1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah on the
retailer or customer;
2.   Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property on which the sales
and use tax has become due by reason of the same transaction in another
municipality and any county in the state of Utah, under a sales or use tax
ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the local
sales tax use laws of Utah. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-060: USE TAX:
A.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption
in this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer or on or
after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption
in the municipality at the rate of 58/64 percent of the sales price of the
property.
B.   Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions with the local sales and use tax law of Utah, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 15, chapter 12, as amended, and in
force and effect on the effective date hereof, applicable to the use taxes are
hereby adopted and made part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
C.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter
12, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the "taxing agency", the name
of Draper City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall
be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the municipality for the
word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax
commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the
municipality be substituted for that of the state in any section where the
results of that substitution or that substitution would require action to be
taken or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
D.   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
1.   The amount of any sales tax imposed by the state of Utah upon the retailer
or consumer;
2.   The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property, the gross
receipts from the sale of or the cost of which has been subject to sales or use
tax under a sales or use tax ordinance enacted with the local sales and use tax
of Utah by any other municipality and any county of the state. (Ord. 160, 12-5-
1994)
5-1-070: EXECUTION:
The mayor is authorized to execute whatever documents are necessary to
distribute sales and use tax revenues on the combination of point of scale and
population factors set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-201 et seq.
(Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-080: CONTRACT WITH UTAH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
Heretofore, this municipality has entered into an agreement with the state tax
commission to perform all functions incident to the administration of the
operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of this city. That contract is
hereby confirmed and the mayor is hereby authorized to enter into such
supplementary agreement with the state tax commission as deeming necessary to
the continued administration and operation of local sales and use tax ordinance
of the municipality as reenacted by this chapter. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-090: NOTICE OF INCREASED RATE:
The 48th session of the Utah legislature of Utah has authorized the counties
and municipalities of the state of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinance
imposing a one percent (1%) tax. On February 20, 1990, Draper City adopted
ordinance 86, increasing the sales and use tax to one percent (1%). (Ord. 160,
12-5-1994)
5-1-100: EFFECTIVE DATE OF INCREASED RATE:
This chapter shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M., January 1, 1990. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-110: SALES TAX; INCREASED RATE:
From and after the effective date of this chapter, there is levied and there
shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of the tangible
personal property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate
of one percent (1%). (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-120: USE TAX; INCREASED RATE:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after
the operative date of this chapter at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sale
price of the property. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-130: RETAIL SALES:
For the purposes of this chapter all retail sales shall be presumed to have
been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or his
agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an
out of state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by
the state tax commission. Public utilities, as defined by Utah Code Annotated
title 54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any
county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the
place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allowable to
the city shall be as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an
appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by it. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-140: APPLICATION OF STATE LAW:
Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, and in force and affect on the
effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales taxes, excepting section
59-12-101, are hereby adopted and made a part of the ordinance as though fully
set forth herein. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-150: SUBSTITUTION OF NAME:
Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12,
the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of
this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this section shall
be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word
"state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax
commission, or of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name of
the municipality be substituted for that of the state in any section when the
result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the
state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration
or operation of this chapter. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-160: LICENSE:
If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of
this section. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-170: COMPUTATION OF TAX:
There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which the
tax is measured:
A.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah upon a
retailer or consumer;
B.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has
become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and any
county in the state of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by
that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax act. (Ord.
160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-180: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine in an amount less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment
for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine or imprisonment. (Ord.
160, 12-5-1994)
5-1-190: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, any exemption is for any reason held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of this chapter. It is the intention of the city council that each
separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all
provisions herein. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 2
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
5-2-010: Definitions
5-2-020: Levy Of Tax
5-2-030: Rate
5-2-040: Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
5-2-050: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
5-2-060: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
5-2-070: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
5-2-010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CUSTOMER:
A.   Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "customer" means the
person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to
pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
1.   Of telecommunications service; or
2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER:
A.   The person who uses a telecommunications service.
B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not
an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the telecommunications
service on behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act, and determined in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-207.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered
except for amounts collected or paid as:
A.   A tax, fee, or charge:
1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the
customer for the telecommunications service; and
3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act;
or
C.   Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: As defined in the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
MUNICIPALITY: Draper City.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE:
A.   For telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications
service, means the street address representative of where the customer's use of
the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid:
A.   If the location described in this subsection A is known, the location of
the telecommunications equipment:
1.   To which a call is charged; and
2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not known
but the location described in this subsection B is known, the location of the
origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are not
known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsection B and C of this
definition, a person that:
1.   Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition for
the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
1.   That person; or
2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates,
or manages.
C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined in
Utah Code Annotated section 54-8b-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:
A.   Telephone service, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-102,
other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates
within the boundaries of this state; and
B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-102:
1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications sourcing
act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 587, 6-8-2004)
5-2-020: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord.
587, 6-8-2004)
5-2-030: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the telecommunication
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed
to the municipality subject to the following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this
municipality, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for
telecommunications services shall be the lower of: a) the rate imposed by the
taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located; or b) the rate for
nonmobile telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the
municipality in which the customer's service address is located; or for mobile
telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the
customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 587, 6-8-2004)
5-2-040: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION THEREFROM:
This rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the
telecommunication providers' gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
A.   A municipal general election;
B.   A regular general election; or
C.   A local special election. (Ord. 587, 6-8-2004)
5-2-050: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a seventy five (75) day period beginning on
the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section
10-1-403 that this municipality has enacted this chapter. (Ord. 587, 6-8-2004)
5-2-060: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration
of this municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 587, 6-8-2004)
5-2-070: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
A.   Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-203 or title 11, chapter 26, local taxation of
utilities limitation, is hereby repealed.
B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal
ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by
the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a
highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a
right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the
activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, nor does this
chapter limit the municipalities right to charge fees or taxes on persons that
are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this
chapter and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 587, 6-8-2004)
CHAPTER 3
REAL PROPERTY TAX
SECTION:
5-3-010: Tentative Budgets Required For Inspection And Contents
5-3-020: Basis For Real Property Tax Levy
5-3-030: Property Tax Levy; Computation; Apportionment Of Proceeds
5-3-040: Certification Of Ordinance Or Resolution Setting Levy
5-3-010: TENTATIVE BUDGETS REQUIRED FOR INSPECTION AND CONTENTS 1 :
A.   At least seven (7) days prior to its adoption, the city manager shall
prepare for the ensuing year, on forms provided by the state auditor, and have
available for public inspection, a tentative budget for each fund for which a
budget is required. The tentative budget for each fund shall set forth in
tabular form:
1.   Actual revenues and expenditures in the last completed fiscal year;
2.   Estimated total revenues and expenditures for the current fiscal year; and
3.   The city manager's estimate of revenues and expenditures for the budget
year.
B.   The city manager shall estimate the amount of revenue available to serve
the needs of each fund, estimate the portions to be derived from all sources
other than the general property taxes, and estimate the portion that must be
derived from the general property taxes. From these estimates, the city manager
shall compute and disclose in the budget the lowest rate of property tax levy
that will raise the required amount of revenue, calculating the levy on the
latest taxable value. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-5-107.
5-3-020: BASIS FOR REAL PROPERTY TAX LEVY:
From the effective date of the budget or any amendment enacted prior to the
date on which property taxes are levied, the amounts stated therein as the
amount of the estimated revenue from property taxes shall constitute the basis
for determining the property tax levy to be set by the council for the
corresponding tax year, subject to the applicable limitations imposed by law 1
. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
 
Notes
1 2. UCA § 10-5-111.
5-3-030: PROPERTY TAX LEVY; COMPUTATION; APPORTIONMENT OF PROCEEDS 1 :
A.   Before June 22 of each year, the city council, at a regular meeting or a
special meeting called for that purpose, shall by ordinance or resolution, set
the real and personal tax levy for various municipal purposes, but the levy may
be set at an appropriate later date with the approval of the state tax
commission.
B.   In its computation of the total levy, the city council shall determine the
requirements of each fund for which property taxes are to be levied and shall
specify in its ordinances or resolution adopting the levy, that amount
apportioned to each fund.
C.   Proceeds of the levy apportioned for general fund purposes shall be
credited as revenue in the general fund.
D.   The proceeds of the levy apportioned for special fund purposes shall be
credited to the appropriate accounts in the applicable special funds.
E.   The combined levies of the city, for all purposes in any year, excluding
the retirement of general obligation bonds and the payment of any interest, and
taxes expressively authorized by law to be levied in addition, may not exceed
0.007 per dollar of taxable value of taxable property. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-6-133.
5-3-040: CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION SETTING LEVY:
The city recorder shall certify the ordinance or resolution setting the levy to
the county auditor, or auditors if the city is located in more than one county,
before June 22 of each year 1 . (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
 
Notes
1 2. UCA §§ 10-5-112, 10-6-134.
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
5-4-010: Collection And Allocation
5-4-010: COLLECTION AND ALLOCATION:
In accordance with title 6 of this code, the city council shall set by
ordinance or resolution certain fees, assessments, or costs be imposed on
certain business activities that are conducted within the boundaries of Draper
City. All such fees as are determined by the city council by and through
ordinance or resolution, shall be collected by the city treasury or treasurer's
designee and shall be deposited in the general fund. All such fees received
shall be deposited in the appropriate account as is designated by the city
treasurer within seven (7) days of receipt. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT AND IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
5-5-010: Definitions
5-5-020: Findings And Purpose
5-5-030: Service Areas Established
5-5-040: Impact Fees Levied
5-5-050: Time Of Collection
5-5-060: Use Of Fees
5-5-070: Adjustments
5-5-080: Accounting, Expenditure And Refund
5-5-090: Impact Fee Challenges And Appeals
5-5-100: Administrative Development Fees
5-5-010: DEFINITIONS:
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: Those portions of the Draper City general plan
heretofore adopted by various resolutions of the city council which pertain to
the city's capital facilities, including, but not limited to, water,
stormwater, parks, open space and transportation, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
CITY: Draper City, a Utah municipal corporation.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure,
or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any changes in the use
of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from the city that authorizes
the commencement of development activity.
IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition
of development approval.
SERVICE AREA: The geographic area designated by the city which a defined set of
public facilities provides service within the area.
(Ord. 241, 6-17-1997; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
5-5-020: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
The city council hereby finds and determines:
A.   There is a need for public facilities for new developments which have not
been constructed and are required to be consistent with the city's general plan
and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
B.   The rapid and continuing growth of Draper City necessitates the imposition
and collection of impact fees pursuant to law that require development to pay
its fair share of the cost of providing public facilities occasioned by the
demands and needs of the development project at service levels necessary to
promote and preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
C.   The city council hereby adopts the report from Tischler & Associates,
Inc., dated May 28, 1997, entitled "Impact Fees" which establishes the costs
for providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the
city and certain credits allowable against impact fees in the city.
D.   The impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the costs which
are generated through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition
costs required, incrementally, by new development within the city.
E.   The impact fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable
cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within
the city. (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-030: SERVICE AREAS ESTABLISHED:
The city shall constitute a single service area and all real property located
with the corporate boundaries of the city shall be included within such service
area, except for storm drain, which shall be located in two (2) separate
service areas designated by the city. (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-040: IMPACT FEES LEVIED:
The impact fees for the city service areas are hereby established and/or levied
and are contained in the consolidated fee schedule of the city, which schedule
is by this reference made a part hereof. Impact fees shall be established and/
or modified by ordinance in accordance with the Utah impact fees act. (Ord.
341, 9-7-1999)
5-5-050: TIME OF COLLECTION:
Unless otherwise provided by the city council, impact fees shall be payable
prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city. (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-060: USE OF FEES:
The fees shall be used solely to:
A.   Pay for the described public facilities to be constructed by the city;
B.   For reimbursing the city for the development's share of those capital
improvements already constructed by the city; or
C.   To reimburse developers who have constructed public facilities where those
facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impacts of the developer's
project(s). (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-070: ADJUSTMENTS:
The city may, upon a proper showing, adjust the standard impact fee at the time
the fee is charged to:
A.   Respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases;
B.   Ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly;
C.   Allow credits as specified in the impact fee report for Draper City, Utah;
D.   Adjust the amount of the fee based upon studies and data submitted by the
developer which are approved by the city after review of the same; and
E.   Allow credits as approved by the city for dedication of land for,
improvement to, or new construction of, public facilities providing services to
the community at large, provided such facilities are identified in the capital
facilities plan and are required by the city as a condition of approving the
development activity. No credit shall be given for project improvements as
defined in the act. (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-080: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND:
The city shall account for, expend and refund impact fees in accordance with
the provisions of the act. (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-090: IMPACT FEE CHALLENGES AND APPEALS:
A.   Any person or entity residing in or owning property within a service area,
and any organization, association, or corporation representing the interests of
persons or entities owning property within a service area, may file a
declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of the fee.
B.   Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee imposed by the city who
believes the fee does not meet the requirements of law may file a written
request for information with the city as provided by law.
C.   Within two (2) weeks of the receipt of the request for information, the
city shall provide the person or entity with the written analysis required by
the act and with any other relevant information relating to the impact fee.
D.   Within thirty (30) days after paying an impact fee, any person or entity
who has paid the fee and wishes to challenge the fee shall:
1.   File a written appeal with the Draper City council by delivering a copy of
such appeal to the Draper City administrator setting forth in detail all
grounds for the appeal and all facts relied upon by the appealing party with
respect to the fees appealed. Upon receipt of appeal, the city council shall
thereafter schedule a public hearing on the appeal at which time all interested
persons will be given an opportunity to be heard. The city council shall
schedule the appeal hearing and thereafter render its decision on the appeal no
later than thirty (30) days after the challenge to the impact fee is filed. Any
person or entity who has failed to comply with the administrative appeal
remedies established by this section may not file or join an action challenging
the validity of any impact fee.
2.   Within ninety (90) days of a decision upholding an impact fee by the city
or within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date the challenge to the
impact fee was filed, whichever is earlier, any party to the appeal that is
adversely affected by the city council's decision may petition the third
judicial district court in and for Salt Lake County for review of the decision.
3.   In the event of a petition to the third judicial district court, the city
shall transmit to the reviewing court the record of its proceedings, including
its minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript
of its proceedings.
4.   If the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of that tape recording
is a true and correct transcript for purposes of subsection D3 of this section.
5.   If there is a record:
a.   The district court's review is limited to the record provided by the city;
and
b.   The district court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the
city's record unless that evidence was offered to the city and the court
determines that it was improperly excluded by the city.
6.   If there is an inadequate record, the district court may call witnesses
and take evidence.
7.   The district court shall affirm the decision of the city if the decision
is supported by substantial evidence in the record.
8.   The judge may award reasonable attorney fees and costs to the prevailing
party in any action brought under this section. (Ord. 241, 6-17-1997)
5-5-100: ADMINISTRATIVE DEVELOPMENT FEES:
A.   In addition to construction and dedication of any required public
improvements and the payment of impact fees, fees may also be established by
the city for building permits, encroachment permits, filing of various
applications, inspection of improvements, site plan reviews, connection to
water facilities and other similar purposes. The amounts of these fees shall be
listed in the consolidated fee schedule and may hereafter be set or amended by
resolution of the city council.
B.   No application or request shall be accepted or application taken thereon
until the applicant has paid to the city the required fee(s) listed in the
consolidated fee schedule applicable to such application or request. (Ord. 241,
6-17-1997; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
CHAPTER 6
JUSTICE COURT FEES, FINES AND FORFEITURES
SECTION:
5-6-010: Fines, Fees, And Forfeitures Collected; Deposits And Reports
5-6-020: Civil Filing Fees; Disposition
5-6-030: Special Assessments
5-6-010: FINES, FEES, AND FORFEITURES COLLECTED; DEPOSITS AND REPORTS:
A.   Payment; Deposit: All fines, fees and forfeitures, or any other sums
collected by the justice court shall be paid to the city treasurer within two
(2) business days of receipt for deposit no later than the third business day
of receipt. The city treasurer shall monthly report all sums so collected and
deposited with the treasurer to the finance director who shall by the end of
the month next succeeding the report to the treasurer a portion and remit the
proceeds of such collections according to law.
B.   State Statutes Violations: For violation of the state statutes collected
by the city justice court, one-half (1/2) of the amount collected shall be
retained by the city treasurer and one-half (1/2) of the amount collected shall
be remitted by the city treasurer to the state of Utah as provided by law. A
special account shall be established by the city treasurer to deposit money
collected such as bail, restitutions, unidentified receipts, fines, fees and
forfeitures, and other monies which require special accounting treatment. All
fees, fines, and forfeitures, or any other sums collected by the justice court,
shall be paid to the city treasurer within two (2) business days of receipt for
deposit no later than the third business day of receipt. Disbursements from the
account shall not require the approval of the finance director or the city
council. The account shall be reconciled at least quarterly by the finance
director or persons authorized by the city council to perform such
reconciliations. (Ord. 1094, 4-15-2014)
5-6-020: CIVIL FILING FEES; DISPOSITION:
Civil filing fees in justice of the peace courts are one-fourth (1/4) the
amount of comparable items in the district court, except that the fee for
filing of a complaint or petition or original jurisdiction is the same as for
the circuit court. Fees collected in connection with civil actions filed in
justice court shall be remitted in their entirety to the treasurer of the city.
(Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-6-030: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
Before a final distribution of all fines, fees and forfeitures from the justice
court can be utilized by the city, all such fines, fees and forfeitures must be
classified pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 77, chapter 38a, the crime
victims restitution act, and Utah Code Annotated title 63M, chapter 7, the Utah
office for victims of crime, which require certain dispositions of all fines,
fees and forfeitures to be paid to respective accounts for the violation of
certain laws and criminal acts. The justice of the peace and/or those delegated
to do so by the city council shall make a record of such fines, fees and
forfeitures and for what type of violation of civil or criminal acts they have
been levied and paid. Such accounting shall then determine the most correct
distribution of those fines, fees and forfeitures to the appropriate entity,
body or state department pursuant to statute. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 7
AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN FEES
SECTION:
5-7-010: Allocation Of Fees
5-7-020: Collection; Deposit
5-7-010: ALLOCATION OF FEES:
The city manager shall propose and suggest a fee schedule which shall be
approved by the city council through resolution setting a determination of fees
and costs that shall be paid by recipients of all such ambulance services or
emergency services as are provided by the city. Said fee schedule shall be
available in the office of the city recorder or city treasurer. (Ord. 160, 12-
5-1994)
5-7-020: COLLECTION; DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer shall have the responsibility of collecting such fees and
costs as are assessed above for ambulance and emergency medical technician
services. Responsibility may be delegated to another in the office of the city
treasurer or other city employee. All such fees as are collected shall be
deposited within three (3) business days of receipt. (Ord. 1094, 4-15-2014)
CHAPTER 8
ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
SECTION:
5-8-010: Allocation
5-8-020: Collection And Deposit
5-8-010: ALLOCATION:
The city manager shall propose and the city council shall set by virtue of a
resolution setting forth a schedule of fees or costs pursuant to the animal
control ordinance found in title 7, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 160, 12-5-
1994)
5-8-020: COLLECTION AND DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer shall have the responsibility of collection of all animal
control fees or someone in the city treasurer's office who has been delegated
that responsibility by the city council. All such fees and costs as are
collected shall be paid to the city treasurer or designee within two (2)
business days of receipt for deposit no later than the third business day of
receipt. (Ord. 1094, 4-15-2014)
CHAPTER 9
PARK CONCESSION AND RENTAL FEES
SECTION:
5-9-010: Allocation
5-9-020: Collection; Deposit
5-9-010: ALLOCATION:
Pursuant to the authority set forth in section
15-1-020 of this code, the city council may establish, by resolution, a fee
schedule for concessions and rental of all city parks, trails and recreational
facilities. (Ord. 378, 7-18-2000)
5-9-020: COLLECTION; DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer or designee shall have the responsibility of collecting all
such fees for concessions or rentals. All sums collected shall be paid to the
city treasurer or designee within two (2) business days of receipt for deposit
no later than the third business day of receipt. (Ord. 1094, 4-15-2014)
CHAPTER 10
RENTAL OF CITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-10-010: Rental Of City Hall
5-10-020: Collection; Deposit
5-10-030: Use Of City Facilities
5-10-010: RENTAL OF CITY HALL:
Rooms in city hall not being used by the city will be available to
organizations sponsored by Draper City on a priority basis at no charge. All
other users will be rented to on a first come, first served basis. Rental rates
shall be as established in the consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 1050, 6-18-
2013)
5-10-020: COLLECTION; DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer or designee shall have the responsibility of collecting all
fees for concessions and rentals. All sums collected shall be deposited within
seven (7) days after receipt in the appropriate designated bank account. (Ord.
1094, 4-15-2014)
5-10-030: USE OF CITY FACILITIES:
A.   City buildings and facilities other than city hall may be used by city
commissions, boards and committees at no charge on a first reserved basis. City
buildings and facilities may also be used for all city sponsored functions.
B.   Private individuals or groups may use city buildings and facilities other
than city hall for community or private events only on a reservation by fee
basis. (Ord. 1050, 6-18-2013)
CHAPTER 11
WATER SERVICE FEES
SECTION:
5-11-010: Allocation
5-11-020: Collection; Deposit
5-11-010: ALLOCATION:
The city manager shall propose a schedule with the advice and consent of the
city council by resolution setting out fees and costs to be charged for the
providing of water services pursuant to such charges and services that the
water department shall provide pursuant to title 16, chapter 1 of this code as
have been established. (Ord. 160, 2-5-1994)
5-11-020: COLLECTION; DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer shall have the responsibility of collecting all such fees
for concessions or rental or someone who has been delegated that authority in
the city treasurer's office by the city council. All such sums as are collected
for water service fees shall be deposited within three (3) business days after
receipt in the appropriate designated bank account. (Ord. 1094, 4-15-2014)
CHAPTER 12
WASTE REMOVAL FEES
SECTION:
5-12-010: Allocation
5-12-020: Collection; Deposit
5-12-010: ALLOCATION:
The city manager shall propose a schedule to the city council which shall
confirm that schedule by resolution for certain fees or costs that are to be
charged for the city providing of waste removal services for residential
properties within the boundaries of Draper City. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-12-020: COLLECTION; DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer or designee shall have the responsibility of collecting all
such fees for waste removal. The city treasurer or designee shall keep an
accurate account of all monies received hereunder and all such sums as are
collected for waste removal fees shall be deposited within three (3) business
days after receipt in the appropriate designated bank account. (Ord. 1094, 4-
15-2014)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE TV FRANCHISE FEE
SECTION:
5-13-010: Allocation
5-13-020: Collection; Deposit
5-13-030: Previously Granted Franchises
5-13-010: ALLOCATION:
The city council may by resolution or ordinance that is certified by the city
recorder grant a franchise to a vendor to provide cable TV within the confines
and boundaries of Draper City. All such revenue, fees or royalties which are
derived from the granting of a cable TV franchise by the city council shall be
paid to the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
5-13-020: COLLECTION; DEPOSIT:
The city treasurer shall have the responsibility of collecting all such fees
for cable TV franchises or someone who has been delegated that authority in the
city treasurer's office by the city council. All such sums as are collected
shall be deposited within three (3) business days after receipt in the
appropriate designated bank account. (Ord. 1094, 4-15-2014)
5-13-030: PREVIOUSLY GRANTED FRANCHISES:
In the event that the city council has by ordinance granted a cable TV
franchise prior to the adoption of this code, all such ordinances granting any
entity to the cable TV franchise rights within Draper City shall remain in full
force and effect pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement and prior ordinance. In the event that any future cable TV franchises
are granted, extended, amended, or modified in any way whatsoever, the city
council shall be entitled to do so by resolution which is certified by the city
recorder. A copy of the franchise agreement, amendment, modification, or
addendums shall be on file with the city recorder's office for public
inspection. (Ord. 160, 12-5-1994)
CHAPTER 14
ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
5-14-010: Purpose
5-14-020: Definitions
5-14-030: Energy Sales And Use Tax
5-14-040: Exemptions From The Energy Sales And Use Tax
5-14-050: Existing Franchise Agreements Not Affected; Credit For Franchise Fees
5-14-060: Collection Of Taxes By State Tax Commission
5-14-070: Incorporation Of State Code Tax Collection Provisions
5-14-080: Additional License For Collection Of Tax Not Required
5-14-090: Effective Date
5-14-010: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of Draper City to provide both a stable revenue source and
create a more competitive environment for the energy industry by repealing its
utility franchise tax levied on gas and electricity and adopting a municipal
energy sales and use tax pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code
Annotated section 10-1-301 et seq., the municipal energy sales and use tax act.
(Ord. 239, 6-10-1997)
5-14-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the energy sales use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
A.   A fee:
1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
B.   A fee:
1.   Similar to subsection A of this definition; or
2.   Any combination of subsection A of this definition and this subsection B.
DE MINIMIS AMOUNT: An amount of taxable energy that does not exceed the greater
of:
A.   Five percent (5%) of the energy of supplier's estimated total Utah gross
receipts from sales of property or services; or
B.   Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
DELIVERED VALUE:
A.   The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in
the municipality and includes:
1.   The value of the energy itself; and
2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges, or
other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to
each class of customer in the municipality.
B.   "Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under:
1.   Title 59, chapter 12, part 1, tax collection; or
2.   Title 59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales and use tax act.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except that the commission
may by rule exclude from this definition a person supplying a de minimis amount
of taxable energy.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX:
A.   A franchise tax;
B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
C.   Any combination of subsections A and B of this definition.
PERSON: As defined in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-102(10).
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity. (Ord. 239, 6-10-1997)
5-14-030: ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within Draper City equaling six
percent (6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This
tax shall be known as the energy sales and use tax.
A.   The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy
to the consumer.
B.   The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy
imposed by Draper City or by the state of Utah. (Ord. 239, 6-10-1997)
5-14-040: EXEMPTIONS FROM THE ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
A.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b), the following are
exempt from the energy sales and use tax:
1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, or special fuel subject to
taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
2.   The sales and use of taxable energy that Draper City is prohibited from
taxing under federal law or the constitution of the United States or the Utah
constitution;
3.   The sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored in the state for
resale;
4.   The sales or use of taxable energy to a person if the primary use is for
use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation
under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13, motor and special fuel tax act;
5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
6.   The sales or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than use as a
fuel or energy; and
7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the corporate limits of Draper
City.
B.   The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt
from the energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter, provided:
1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal
energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the state; and
2.   Draper City has paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the
tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
C.   No exemptions shall be granted from the energy sales and use tax imposed
by this chapter except those specifically set forth herein. (Ord. 239, 6-10-
1997)
5-14-050: EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS NOT AFFECTED; CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE
FEES:
A.   This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between the
city and energy suppliers.
B.   An energy supplier which has entered a franchise agreement with the city
shall receive credit for a contractual franchise fee paid if:
1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city
pursuant to a franchise agreement which is in effect on July 1, 1997;
2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to
a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 239, 6-10-1997)
5-14-060: COLLECTION OF TAXES BY STATE TAX COMMISSION:
A.   On or before the effective date hereof, the city shall contract with the
state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the administration
and collection of the energy sales and use tax, in accordance with this
chapter. This contract may be a supplement to the existing contract with the
commission to administer and collect the local sales and use tax, as provided
in section
5-1-080 of this title. The city may enter into such supplementary agreements
with the state tax commission as may be necessary and proper for the continued
administration and operation of the energy sales and use tax ordinance enacted
by this chapter.
B.   An energy supplier shall pay the energy sales and use tax revenue
collected from consumers directly to the city if:
1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
a.   The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax
collected annually from its Utah customers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
b.   The energy supplier collects the energy sales and use tax. (Ord. 239, 6-
10-1997)
5-14-070: INCORPORATION OF STATE CODE TAX COLLECTION PROVISIONS:
A.   Except for the direct payment provisions of subsection
5-14-060B of this chapter, the state tax commission shall collect, enforce and
administer the municipal energy sales and use tax according to the procedures
established in Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, tax
collection. Said provisions of title 59, chapter 12, part 1, are hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. This adoption and
incorporation by reference shall include any amendments to those provisions
that relate to the levying or collecting of a municipal energy sales and use
tax.
B.   The name of Draper City shall be substituted for all references to the
"taxing agency" in title 59, chapter 12, part 1, which are intended to refer to
the state of Utah, insofar as it is necessary to carry out the purposes of that
part, as well as Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 3, part 3. However,
nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name
of Draper City for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title
of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name
of Draper City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the
result of such substitution would require action to be taken by or against
Draper City or any agency thereof rather than by or against the state tax
commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter. (Ord. 239, 6-10-1997)
5-14-080: ADDITIONAL LICENSE FOR COLLECTION OF TAX NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect the energy sales and use tax levied by this
chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a
license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord. 239, 6-10-
1997)
5-14-090: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter is effective June 30, 1997. The energy sales and use tax shall be
levied effective July 1, 1997, and thereafter. (Ord. 239, 6-10-1997)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATION AND FINANCING
SECTION:
5-15-010: Definitions
5-15-020: Premature Installation Of Public Improvements
5-15-030: Reimbursement For Oversizing Public Improvements
5-15-040: Credit And Reimbursement For System Improvements Included In The
City's Capital Improvement Plan
5-15-050: Severability
5-15-010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have
the following meanings:
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: A long range plan of capital projects, with estimated
costs and proposed methods of financing.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN: Current fiscal period appropriated capital
expenditures and the five (5) next consecutive years of capital expenditure
costs and allocated funding sources outlined in the capital facilities plan.
CITY: Draper City, a Utah municipal corporation.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure or
use, and change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of
land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities and public
improvements.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from the city that authorizes
the commencement of development activity.
IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition
of development approval in accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 11,
chapter 36a.
OVERSIZING OR OVERSIZED PUBLIC FACILITIES: Installing public facilities that
are larger or in excess of those required to service or benefit the subdivision
or development activity proposed by the developer.
PRACTICAL EXCLUSION: Construction of a public facility in a manner, size,
location or with other limiting factors which would physically or financially
tend to preclude the future construction of higher capacity or otherwise more
appropriate and necessary public facilities identified in the capital
facilities plan.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Site improvements and facilities that are:
A.   Planned and designed to provide service for development resulting from a
development activity; and
B.   Necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of
development resulting from a development activity.
Project improvements does not mean system improvements.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Only the following capital facilities that have a life
expectancy of ten (10) or more years and are owned or operated by or on behalf
of the city:
A.   Water rights and water supply, storage, treatment, and distribution
facilities;
B.   Stormwater, drainage, and flood control facilities;
C.   Roadway facilities;
D.   Parks, recreation facilities, open space, and trails; and
E.   Public safety facilities.
SERVICE AREA: A geographic area designated by the city on the basis of sound
planning or engineering principles in which a defined set of public facilities
provide service within the area. A service area may, but shall not be required
to, include the entire city.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
A.   Existing public facilities that are designed to provide services to
service areas within the community at large; and
B.   Future public facilities identified in and included as part of the city's
capital facilities plans that are intended to provide services to service areas
within the community at large.
System improvements does not mean project improvements.
(Ord. 296, 11-3-1998; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
5-15-020: PREMATURE INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Constructing public facilities which are not included in the capital
improvement plans shall be considered premature. Wherever a development
activity requires the installation of public facilities which are not included
in the capital improvement plans and it is determined by the city council that
the construction of such public facilities as will not lead to the practical
exclusion of constructing future public facilities as projected in the capital
facilities plan, such improvements may be authorized, but shall be constructed
by the developer solely at developer's cost without city financial
participation. (Ord. 296, 11-3-1998)
5-15-030: REIMBURSEMENT FOR OVERSIZING PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Reimbursement for oversizing public facilities not included in the capital
improvement plan in order to avoid the practical exclusion of constructing
future system improvements included in the long term capital facilities plan:
A.   Authorization To Construct Oversized Improvements: The city council in its
sole discretion may determine it necessary for the city to participate in
oversizing of developers installed public facilities in areas otherwise
premature for service by city installed improvements in order to avoid the
practical exclusion of constructing planned city infrastructure in the future.
Where authorized and approved in writing by the city council, developers may
construct oversized public facilities for new developments within the city and
receive reimbursement for such construction. Responsibility to pay for the
construction of any such oversized public facilities shall rest entirely with
the developer pending any reimbursement. A reimbursement to avoid a practical
exclusion shall be paid from impact fees collected in anticipation of the
construction of future system improvements within the same service area.
B.   Facilities Eligible For Reimbursement: No public facilities shall be
eligible for oversizing reimbursement, unless specifically approved prior to
construction in writing by the city council. Project improvements shall not be
eligible for reimbursement.
1.   Calculation And Approval Of Amount Of Reimbursement: Developers seeking
reimbursement for oversizing of public facilities shall prior to commencing
construction submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications and
construction cost estimates to the city engineer in accordance with current
city standards. The city engineer shall recommend the maximum amount of
reimbursement for the proposed oversized portion of the improvements based on
either these cost estimates or on alternative engineering criteria and
construction cost estimates if the estimates submitted by the developer are
deemed by the city engineer to be either unreliable, inaccurate, or excessive.
Based on this review, the city council shall by resolution determine any amount
and method of reimbursement, taking into consideration the proportionate share
of the benefit of the improvements to the developer's project and to fulfilling
the capital facilities plan.
2.   Reimbursement Agreement: The city manager shall, prior to commencement of
construction of the oversized public facilities, provide the developer with a
letter or certificate setting forth the maximum dollar amount of reimbursement,
the rationale for the reimbursement, and the legal description or other
adequate description of the oversized public facility or facilities for which
reimbursement will be approved. The developer shall sign and date a duplicate
copy of such letter or certificate indicating developer's agreement to the
terms set forth and return the signed document to the city manager prior to any
reimbursement or credit being paid or granted. The failure of the developer to
sign, date, and return such document within thirty (30) days from receipt shall
nullify the reimbursement approval.
C.   Finding Of Sufficiency: Before approving any reimbursement for oversized
public facilities which are not included in the city's capital improvement
plan, the city council must find that the sufficient impact fees scheduled to
be received from previously approved development activities within the same
service area are available to pay the portion of the expense of capital outlay
or debt service to be paid from impact fees as shown in the city's capital
improvement plan.
D.   Appeals Of Reimbursement Amount: Where extraordinary, unanticipated costs
are incurred in the actual construction of the oversized portion of the public
facilities, the developer may appeal the reimbursement amount to the city
council.
E.   Limits On Reimbursement: Notwithstanding anything contained in this
chapter to the contrary, reimbursements shall not be made by the city for
exactions required by the city as a condition of development approval or for
public facilities provided voluntarily by the developer or provided in exchange
for other negotiated considerations granted to the development by the city,
unless approved in writing in advance by the city. No interest shall be paid on
any reimbursement amount. The reimbursement agreement shall not confer benefit
on any third party, except as security for financing as required by the
developer.
F.   Expiration Of Reimbursement Agreement: The reimbursement agreement for
oversized public facilities shall expire ten (10) years from the date of its
execution by the developer unless a longer period is approved in writing in
advance by the city council or is extended by the city upon request by the
developer. Any extended reimbursement period shall be specified in the
reimbursement agreement and subject to a finding by city council that
sufficient impact fees scheduled to be received from previously approved
development activities within the same service area are available to pay the
portion of the expense of capital outlay or debt service to be paid from impact
fees as shown in the city's capital improvement plan.
G.   Acceptance Of Improvements: No reimbursement shall be made or granted
unless:
1.   Construction of oversized public facilities is completed to the
satisfaction of the city, and the facilities are formally accepted by the city;
2.   Suitable maintenance and warranty security is received and approved by the
city engineer;
3.   All design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and acceptance
procedures are in strict compliance with the then current city street,
drainage, or other applicable ordinances and standards.
H.   Proportional Distribution Of Impact Fees Received: Wherever an oversizing
reimbursement is due, impact fees collected within the applicable service area
shall be utilized first as required to implement the capital improvement plan,
then divided among outstanding systems improvement reimbursement agreements in
proportion to the amounts due, and the balance divided among outstanding
oversizing reimbursement agreements in proportion to the amounts due.
I.   Schedule Of Reimbursements: When the city council authorizes reimbursement
for oversizing, it will schedule the reimbursement as follows: If the total
amount of the reimbursement is less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), the city will issue a onetime lump sum payment, providing
adequate impact fees are available, after all oversized public facilities
giving rise to the reimbursement have been given final acceptance by the city.
If the total amount of the reimbursement is more than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), the city will make semiannual payments based on the
percentage completion of the oversized improvements giving rise to the
reimbursement, with each payment being made only after review and approval of
appropriate documentation of the construction. Any such semiannual payments
shall be made only upon certification by the city manager that applicable
impact fees have been collected in the previous semiannual period in excess of
the amounts required in subsection C of this section. Impact fees from one type
of improvement may not be utilized to provide a reimbursement to a developer
for another type of improvement. (Ord. 296, 11-3-1998)
5-15-040: CREDIT AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS INCLUDED IN THE
CITY'S CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN:
A.   Authorization To Construct Systems Improvements: Where authorized and
approved by the city council pursuant to this chapter, developers may construct
system improvements which are included in the capital improvement plan and
receive credit against related impact fees and reimbursement for such
construction. Responsibility to pay for the construction of any such system
improvements shall rest entirely with the developer.
B.   Only System Improvements Are Eligible For Credits And Reimbursement: Only
system improvements are eligible for credits and reimbursements. Project
improvements shall not be eligible for credits or reimbursements.
C.   Calculation And Approval Of Amount Of Credits And Reimbursement:
Developers seeking credits for system improvements shall, prior to commencing
construction, submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications and
construction cost estimates to the city engineer in accordance with current
city standards. The city engineer shall recommend the maximum amount of credits
and reimbursement for the proposed system improvements based on either these
cost estimates or on alternative engineering criteria and construction cost
estimates if the estimates submitted by the developer are deemed by the city
engineer to be either unreliable, inaccurate, or excessive. Based on this
review, the city council shall by resolution determine the amount of credits
due, taking into consideration the proportionate share of the benefit of the
improvements to the developer's project and to fulfilling the capital
facilities plans. The balance of the construction cost of the system
improvement as approved by the city engineer shall be reimbursed from impact
fees collected for the same purpose in the same service area over the ten (10)
year period following acceptance by the city acceptance of the completed system
improvements.
D.   Credit/Reimbursement Agreement: Based on this review and determination,
the city manager shall, prior to commencement of construction of the system
improvements, provide the developer with a letter of certificate setting forth
the maximum dollar amount of credit and reimbursement, the rationale for the
credit and reimbursement, and the legal description or other adequate
description of the system improvements for which credits and reimbursement will
be approved. The developer shall sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter
or certificate indicating developer's agreement to the terms set forth and
return the signed document to the city manager prior to any credit and
reimbursement being paid or granted. The failure of the developer to sign,
date, and return such document within thirty (30) days from receipt shall
nullify the credit and reimbursement approval.
E.   Acceptance Of Improvements And Granting Of Credit And Reimbursement:
Credit and reimbursement shall not be granted or made unless:
1.   Construction of the system improvement public facilities is completed to
the satisfaction of the city, and the facilities are formally accepted by the
city;
2.   Suitable maintenance and warranty surety is received and approved by the
city engineer;
3.   All design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and acceptance
procedures are in strict compliance with the then current city street,
drainage, or other applicable ordinances and standards.
F.   Appeals Of Credit/Reimbursement Amount: Where extraordinary, unanticipated
costs are incurred in the actual construction of the system improvements, the
developer may appeal the credit and reimbursement amount to the city council.
Approved credits may be used only to reduce the amount of impact fees from the
developer for the same type of improvement. Except as provided below, approved
credits shall not be paid to the developer in cash or in credits against any
impact fee for a different type of improvement or against any other monies due
from the developer to the city and shall not constitute a liability of the city
except as set forth herein. Each time a request to use approved credits is
presented and approved by the city, the city shall reduce the amount of the
applicable impact fee otherwise due from the developer and shall note in the
city records the amount of credit remaining, if any. Upon request of the
developer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credits
available.
G.   Limits On Credits/Reimbursements: Notwithstanding anything contained in
this chapter to the contrary, credits and reimbursement shall not be granted by
the city for exactions required by the city as a condition of development
approval or for system improvements provided voluntarily by the developer or
provided in exchange for other negotiated considerations granted to the
development by the city, unless approved in advance in writing by the city. No
interest shall be paid on any credit or reimbursement. The credit and
reimbursement agreement shall not confer benefit on any third party, except as
security for financing as required by the developer.
H.   Expiration Of Credit/Reimbursement Agreement: The credit/reimbursement
agreement shall expire ten (10) years from the date of its execution by the
developer unless a longer period is approved in writing in advance by the city
council or is extended by the city council upon written request by the
developer. Any extended credit/reimbursement period shall be specified in the
credit/reimbursement agreement.
I.   Proportional Distribution Of Impact Fees Received: Wherever a system
improvement reimbursement is due, impact fees collected within the applicable
service area shall be utilized first as required to implement the capital
improvement plan, and then divided among outstanding system improvement
reimbursement agreements in proportion to the amounts due. Reimbursements for
system improvements may be made only from impact fees paid for the same type of
improvement.
J.   Schedule Of Reimbursements: When the city council authorizes
reimbursement, it will schedule the reimbursement as follows: If the total
amount of the reimbursement is less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), the city will issue a onetime lump sum payment, providing
adequate impact fees are available, after all system improvements giving rise
to the reimbursement have been given final acceptance by the city. If the total
amount of the reimbursement is more than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), the city will make semiannual payments based on the percentage
completion of the system improvements giving rise to the reimbursement, with
each payment being made only after review and approval of appropriate
documentation of the construction. Any such semiannual payments shall be made
only upon certification by the city manager that applicable impact fees for the
same type of improvement have been collected in the previous semiannual period
in excess of the amounts required to fund the capital improvement plan. (Ord.
296, 11-3-1998)
5-15-050: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause or portion of this chapter is declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be affected thereby
and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 296, 11-3-1998)
CHAPTER 16
CONDUIT FINANCING
SECTION:
5-16-010: City Purpose For Issuing Conduit Financing Obligations
5-16-020: Fees Imposed
5-16-030: Information Required
5-16-040: Creditworthiness For Conduit Issues
5-16-010: CITY PURPOSE FOR ISSUING CONDUIT FINANCING OBLIGATIONS:
A.   Not For Profit Conduit Financing:
1.   The city will not issue conduit financing obligations for any not for
profit entity other than a Utah not for profit corporation possessing a current
determination from the internal revenue service that it currently qualifies as
exempt from federal taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code.
2.   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed project fulfills or
complements a legitimate city or county purpose as defined by state law or
reduces a public burden that is currently imposed on Utah governmental
entities. Specific attention and consideration will be given to projects which
expand opportunities or services for populations that are currently under
served.
B.   For Profit Conduit Financing Obligations: The city may, at its discretion,
act as an issuer for conduit financing obligations for other entities if the
proposed project qualifies for financing under Utah's private activity bond
authority, including multi-family housing projects, pollution and waste control
projects, and qualifying small manufacturing projects. (Ord. 762, 5-15-2007)
5-16-020: FEES IMPOSED:
The city shall impose and collect the fees set forth in the Draper City
consolidated fee schedule. Whenever the city evaluates a proposal for the
issuance of debt or issues debt, the city shall be compensated for costs
incurred in reviewing the proposed issue, any revenue lost to the city by
virtue of the project, any risk assumed by the city in issuing the debt, and
the costs of issuance, including reimbursement of the city for time devoted by
city officers and employees and resources provided by the city. Fees imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall not be waived. (Ord. 762, 5-15-2007)
5-16-030: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Each applicant shall submit an application to the city on forms and in a format
specified by the city. Application forms shall be obtained from the director of
finance. No application shall be considered unless and until all information
specified in the application or requested by the city is provided and the
application fee has been paid. The city may request such additional information
as deemed necessary to evaluate the proposed issuance. (Ord. 762, 5-15-2007)
5-16-040: CREDITWORTHINESS FOR CONDUIT ISSUES:
The city will not act as an issuer on behalf of any third party unless the
following creditworthiness is established:
A.   Governmental entities must have a bond rating from a national rating
agency of "A" or higher;
B.   Private entities must have a bond rating from a national rating agency of
investment grade or higher or must provide credit enhancement in the form of a
direct pay letter of credit (LOC) or bond insurance in a form acceptable to the
city. Any LOC guarantee must be issued by a bank authorized to do business in
the state of Utah with a rating of no less than "A". Bond insurance shall be by
a national insurer acceptable to the city.
C.   Private entities proposing a direct private placement of the debt issue
must provide a letter from the purchaser describing the direct purchaser as a
sophisticated "accredited investor" within the meaning of section 2(15) of the
securities act of 1933. (Ord. 762, 5-15-2007)
TITLE 6
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-010: Definitions
6-1-020: Business License Required
6-1-025: Temporary Business License Required
6-1-030: Business License Official; Duties And Responsibilities
6-1-040: License Application Requirements
6-1-050: Issuance Of A Business License
6-1-060: Renewals Of Business Licenses
6-1-070: Inspections
6-1-080: Payment Dates Of Business License Fees
6-1-090: Term Of Business Licenses
6-1-100: License; Transfer Of Name Or Location; Fee
6-1-110: License; Transfer To Other Persons Prohibited
6-1-120: License; Posting And Display Required
6-1-130: Reciprocal Recognition Of Business Licenses
6-1-140: Constructive Notice Of Time Periods
6-1-150: Penalty
6-1-010: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable throughout this title unless a
different meaning is clearly intended:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES: Class A, class B, class C or class D beer
licenses, nonprofit club licenses or liquor consumption licenses, as defined in
chapter 4 of this title.
APPLICANT: Any person applying for any license provided for in this title. If
the person is a partnership or corporation, then each partner, officer or
director is considered an applicant and must qualify accordingly.
APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of any license permitted
under this title.
AUTHORIZED OFFICERS: Those persons authorized by the city or other entities to
inspect businesses and enforce the provisions of this title or other applicable
regulations, including peace officers, ordinance enforcement officers, and
employees of the health department, fire department, community development
department, finance department, city attorney's office, city manager, or
business license official.
BUSINESS: Means and includes all trades, occupations, professions or activities
engaged in within Draper City, carried on for the purpose of gain or economic
profit, except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall
not be included in the term "business" unless otherwise specifically provided.
BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL OR LICENSE OFFICIAL: The individual or his/her
designee who is responsible for administering the provisions of this title.
CITY: Draper City.
CITY MANAGER: The Draper City manager as referred to in title 2, chapter 3 of
this code.
CITY RECORDER: The Draper City recorder.
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE: The schedule of fees adopted each year by resolution
of the Draper City council setting forth the various fees charged by the city.
EMPLOYEE: All individuals who work for an employer for salary or commission or
wages, and who are subject to the direction and control of such employer.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of real or
personal property at retail or wholesale, the bartering or trading of property
or services, the manufacturing of goods or property and the rendering of
personal services for others for a consideration by persons engaged in any
profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling, except the
rendering of personal services by an employee to his employer under any
contract of personal employment.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake County fire department.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake Valley health department.
HEARING BOARD: Draper City council as defined in section
6-3-050 of this title.
LICENSEE: The person who has obtained any type of license provided for in this
title. The term shall also include any employee or agent of the licensee.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee, whether or not under the same name, within the city from which
business is engaged in.
SIMILAR BUSINESS: Any business which is owned and/or operated by the same
person, having the same Draper City business license category, as determined by
the business license official, as another business being conducted, or proposed
to be conducted, at the same location, except where said business maintains a
separate and distinct address. A "similar business" shall apply to those
businesses which qualify for a joint business license only.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: A business operating for a period of one hundred eighty
(180) days or less per calendar year according to the terms of chapter 16 of
this title and licensed according to this title.
VIOLATED OR VIOLATING: That there exists reasonable cause to believe that any
ordinance, code, statute or law has been or is being violated and is not
limited to pleas of guilty or convictions for violating said ordinances, codes,
statutes or laws. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005; amd. Ord. 908, 10-20-2009; Ord. 1100,
4-29-2014)
6-1-020: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
business within the city without first having obtained a business license
pursuant to this title, or to continue doing business after a previously issued
business license has expired without renewing said license and paying any
applicable fees and penalties. A separate license shall be required for each
type of business defined herein and for each place of business. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-1-025: TEMPORARY BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
temporary business within the city without first obtaining a license for
temporary business pursuant to this title and a temporary use permit pursuant
to chapter 16 of this title. A separate license shall be required for each
location of business. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate
violation. Temporary business licenses may be issued for one to five (5) days,
six (6) to ten (10) days, or eleven (11) or more days, up to the maximum
allowable duration established in chapter 16 of this title, with fees for each
established in the Draper City consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 908, 10-20-
2009)
6-1-030: BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the business license official to:
A.   Enforce the provisions of this title;
B.   Assess all business license fees and all alcoholic beverage license fees
and assure their collection by the finance department;
C.   Process all applications and renewals of all licenses provided for in this
title;
D.   Obtain any necessary approvals from the various city departments,
divisions and/or other agencies, before issuing any business licenses or
alcoholic beverage licenses; and
E.   Deny, suspend or revoke licenses as provided in chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-1-040: LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Applications for licenses and permits required by this title shall be made
in writing to the license official in the absence of provision to the contrary,
which applications shall be made upon forms provided by the city. The
application shall show:
1.   The name of the person desiring a license;
2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on;
3.   The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into classes;
4.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number, if such business, calling, trade or
profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure;
5.   The period of time for which such license is desired to be issued;
6.   The application shall also state such additional information as may
reasonably be required by the city as needed for the proper guidance of city
officials in issuing the permit or license applied for.
It may also show that the proposed use of any premises by the applicant will
not be in violation of city zoning regulations, that the principals of the
applicant's business are properly bonded if bonding is required, and that the
applicant will otherwise be in full compliance with all applicable city, state
and federal laws and ordinances.
B.   The city may, by resolution, establish a requirement for certain
categories of business licenses to provide a background security check with an
application. Such a requirement shall only be imposed where the nature of the
business justifies the background security check.
C.   Truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of all of said information
provided by applicant shall be attested to by an authorized representative of
the business.
D.   Failure to provide all required information or providing false or
misleading information in the application shall constitute grounds for denial
of the application or revocation of an existing permit or license, and shall
constitute a misdemeanor, if such is done wilfully with the intent to mislead
the city. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-1-050: ISSUANCE OF A BUSINESS LICENSE:
A.   An applicant for a business license shall fill out the application in full
and sign it as verification under penalty of law that all information contained
therein is true.
B.   The application shall be returned to the business license official along
with full payment of all business license fees.
C.   If required by separate ordinance, the business license official shall
submit copies to other departments, divisions or agencies of the city for their
review.
D.   Only after signed, written approvals from any required department,
division or agency, the business license official shall be authorized to
prepare a certificate of license for issuance.
E.   The certificate of license shall be signed by the license official and the
mayor and shall contain the following information:
1.   The person's name to whom the certificate is issued;
2.   The business name;
3.   The type of business licensed;
4.   The date the license was issued;
5.   The expiration date of the license;
6.   The address of the place of business licensed; and
7.   The business license number.
F.   If the business is licensed to conduct more than one type of business, as
defined herein, the certificate of license shall state each type of business
licensed. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-1-060: RENEWALS OF BUSINESS LICENSES:
A.   Each year, licensees shall renew their business licenses by completing an
application for a license renewal, signed under penalty of law that all
information contained therein is true and returning it, along with the proper
fees, including any annual fee, to the business license official within the
time period set forth in subsection
6-1-080B of this chapter. Renewal applications for businesses which required
police background checks of the licensees under the original license
application shall be submitted to the Police Department to determine whether
the licensee still meets the necessary qualifications.
B.   Upon receipt of the application fees, and Police Department approval, if
applicable, the business license official shall be authorized to prepare a
certificate of license as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-070: INSPECTIONS:
A.   Authorized officers shall be permitted to make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this title or any other applicable statute or
ordinance, and may enter any building or may enter upon any premises during
regular business hours; or, if there are no regular business hours, the
officers or their authorized representatives shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry.
B.   No owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of
any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the authorized officer or
his representative(s) for the purpose of inspection and examination to ensure
compliance with this title. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-080: PAYMENT DATES OF BUSINESS LICENSE FEES:
A.   Business license fees for new businesses shall be due and payable upon
making application to the business license official. The application shall not
be processed until the fee is paid.
B.   From the effective date of this title, business license fees for renewal
of all license types, except for beer licenses, shall be due and payable on or
before the annual anniversary date of each license. To implement renewal
schedule on existing licenses, the business license official shall prorate the
fees due by administrative order codified as exhibit A of this section as
reference for one year as of date of implementation of this title. Penalties
for nonpayment on or before the due date, as extended by any administrative
order, will be assessed as set forth in the current consolidated fee schedule.
If a business does not renew the business license but reapplies to do business
at the same location(s) within the one year period, the application will be
considered a renewal business and all fees and penalties must be paid prior to
the issuance of the business license.
C.   Beer licenses renewal fees shall be due and payable as set forth in
section
6-4-040 of this title.
D.   Penalty fees may be appealed to the business license official and the City
Manager who may, for good cause shown, refund all or part of the applicable
penalty fee that has been paid. The decision of the business license official
and the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council as set forth in
chapter 3 of this title. The City Council may, upon good cause, recommend that
all or part of the penalty fee be refunded.
EXHIBIT A
BUSINESS LICENSE FEE FOR PERIOD
BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2006 (TRANSITION PERIOD)
 
Anniversary  Jan   Feb   March April May   June  July  Aug   Sept  Oct   Nov   Dec
Date In 2006
Pro rata
share due                0.250 0.333 0.417 0.500 0.583 0.667 0.750 0.833 0.917 1.000
January 1,
20061
Due on
lanniversary 1.000 1.083 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
date - 20062
 
Notes:
    1.    During October 2005, business license official will send notices to
businesses with explanation of fee structure.
    2.    2 months before anniversary date Business Licenses Office will send
notices to each business.
All new businesses will pay 100 percent of the licenses fee with their
application beginning January 1, 2005.
Beer licenses will continue to be due at the beginning of each calendar year.
(Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-090: TERM OF BUSINESS LICENSES:
All business licenses shall expire one year from the date of issuance of such
license. Beer licenses shall expire on the dates shown in section
6-4-040 of this title. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-100: LICENSE; TRANSFER OF NAME OR LOCATION; FEE:
A.   Any person to whom a business license has been issued to transact or carry
on some business, calling, trade or profession at a definite location in the
City may make application for the transfer of his/her business license for the
sole purpose of transacting or carrying on the same business, calling, trade or
profession as is therein mentioned at some other definite location in the City
by himself or herself by filing said application with the license official,
together with a fee as set forth in the City's current consolidated fee
schedule.
B.   Any person who wishes to change his/her business name shall also make
application for the change of name of such person's business license, for the
sole purpose of transacting or carrying on the same business, calling, trade or
profession as is therein mentioned under a new name, by filing an application
with the license official, along with a fee as set forth in the City's current
consolidated fee schedule.
C.   The consolidated fee schedule may set forth a greater fee if the business
in question has any other licenses which are required under this title, or its
successor.
D.   The change of name or location fee shall be nonrefundable regardless of
whether the application is granted or denied. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-110: LICENSE; TRANSFER TO OTHER PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of any ordinance of
the City shall be in any manner assignable, transferable or authorize any
person other than the person named therein as the licensee to carry on or
conduct the licensed business, except as may be otherwise specifically provided
by ordinance. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-120: LICENSE; POSTING AND DISPLAY REQUIRED:
Every certificate of license issued shall be posted by the licensee in a
conspicuous place upon the wall of the building, room or office of the store or
place in which such licensed business, calling, trade or profession is carried
on, so that the same may be easily seen. When such certificate of license shall
have expired, it shall be removed by the licensee from such place in which it
has been posted; and no certificate of license which is not in force and effect
shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or any part of any room,
store, office or place of business after the period of such certificate or
license has expired. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-130: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF BUSINESS LICENSES:
A.   A business license shall not be required for operation of any vehicle or
equipment in this city when:
1.   Such vehicle is merely passing through the city; or
2.   Such vehicle is used exclusively in interstate commerce.
B.   A business license shall not be required of any person whose only business
activity in this city is the mere delivery in the city of property sold by him
at a regular place of business maintained by him outside the city where:
1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by the
Utah city or county in which such place of business is situated; and
2.   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of this city
making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms as are granted by this section; and
3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it was
manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority of
this city for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by this
city; and
4.   The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made prominently
displays at all times a license plate or symbol issued by the licensing
authority to evidence such business license. Such plate or symbol shall
identify the licensing authority by which it is issued, shall indicate that it
evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term for
which it is effective.
C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, a business license shall not be
required of any person who is duly licensed in another county or another city
in Utah, has no business location in the city and the county or other licensing
city would also reciprocate if the same business were located in the city.
1.   Before reciprocity is granted, the person must fill out a business license
application and show proof of a valid business license in a qualifying city or
county.
2.   Reciprocity shall not be granted to solicitors, mobile food units or any
business requiring police checks or police ID cards.
D.   The city recorder shall, at the request of any person upon payment of
copying and postage costs, certify a copy of this section to any city or county
of the state of Utah. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-140: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF TIME PERIODS:
A.   All businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants are obligated to be aware
of and are deemed to have constructive notice of all time periods and/or
deadlines and the effect of noncompliance with said time periods and/or
deadlines as set forth in this title relating to the application, issuance,
renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating to business licenses,
alcohol licenses, or any other licensing matters set forth in this title.
B.   Nothing in this title shall be construed as requiring the city to take any
affirmative action to notify businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants of
any time periods and/or deadlines, or the effect of noncompliance with said
time periods and/or deadlines set forth in this title relating to the
application, issuance, renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating to
business licenses, alcohol licenses, or any other licensing matters as set
forth in this title. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-1-150: PENALTY:
A.   Any violation of any provision or restriction of this title shall be a
class B misdemeanor, unless a separate penalty is specifically delineated.
B.   Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord.
1100, 4-29-2014)
CHAPTER 2
ASSESSMENTS AND LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
6-2-010: Definitions
6-2-020: Provisions As A Regulatory Measure
6-2-030: License Fee; Required To Do Business
6-2-040: License Fee; Not Required When
6-2-050: License Fee Additional To All Regulatory Licenses
6-2-060: Fee; No Undue Burden On Interstate Commerce
6-2-070: License Fees Levied
6-2-080: Joint Licenses
6-2-090: Branch Establishments
6-2-100: License Fees; Debt To City; Collection
6-2-110: Fees; Delinquent Payments; Penalty
6-2-120: Returns Not To Be Made Public
6-2-130: Filing False Return Prohibited
6-2-140: License; Revocation Conditions
6-2-010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein prescribed:
BUSINESS: Means and includes all activities engaged in within the corporate
limits of Draper City carried on for the business of gain or economic profit,
except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be
included in the term "business" unless otherwise specifically prescribed.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of said place of business and any
persons employed by such person in the operation of the place of business in
any capacity, and also any salesperson, agent or independent contractor engaged
in the operation of said place of business in any capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Means and includes, but is not limited to, the sale of
tangible personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods
or property, and the rendering of personal services for others for a
consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business,
occupation or other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an
employee to his employer under any contract of personal employment.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust,
estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company,
business trust, corporation, association, society or other group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or
otherwise.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within the city from which business activity is conducted or
transacted. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-020: PROVISIONS AS A REGULATORY MEASURE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter is intended to serve as a means for the
city to recoup the administrative costs associated with the issuance and
renewal of business licenses issued within the city. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-030: LICENSE FEE; REQUIRED TO DO BUSINESS:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business within the city without
first paying all license fees required by this title and any other city or
state taxes, fees or assessments. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-040: LICENSE FEE; NOT REQUIRED WHEN:
A.   Exemptions: No license fee shall be imposed under this chapter upon any
person:
1.   Engaged in business for solely religious, charitable, eleemosynary or
other types of strictly nonprofit purpose who is tax exempt in such activities
under the laws of the United States and the state of Utah;
2.   Engaged in a business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and
fees by the laws of the United States or the state of Utah; or
3.   Not maintaining a place of business within the city who has paid a like or
similar license tax or fee to some other taxing unit within the state of Utah,
and which taxing unit exempts from its license tax or fee, by reciprocal
agreement, businesses domiciled in the city and doing business in such taxing
unit. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-050: LICENSE FEE ADDITIONAL TO ALL REGULATORY LICENSES:
The license fee imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes or license fees imposed by any other provisions of the ordinances
of Draper City, including the regulatory fees imposed by any other chapter
within this title. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-060: FEE; NO UNDUE BURDEN ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE:
None of the license fees provided for within this title shall be applied as to
occasion an undue burden on interstate commerce. In any case where a license
fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden
upon such commerce, such person may apply to the city council for an adjustment
of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to
such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six (6) months
after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit
and supporting testimony, show the method of applicant's business, the gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business, and such other information as the
council may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such
undue burden on such commerce. The council may designate a person to conduct an
investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like
nature. The council's designee shall make findings of facts; shall determine
whether the fee fixed by this chapter is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair
as to applicant's business; and shall recommend to the council a license fee
for the applicant in an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair.
If the council is satisfied that such license fee is the amount that the
applicant should pay, the license fee shall be fixed in such amount. If the
regular license fee has already been paid, the council shall order a refund of
the amount over and above the fee fixed by the council. In fixing the fee to be
charged, the council shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of
gross sales, and the number of employees, or may use any other method which
will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on
businesses of like nature. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-070: LICENSE FEES LEVIED:
A.   Fees For Businesses Located In The City: There is hereby levied upon the
business of every person engaged in business in the city, an annual license fee
as set forth in the city's consolidated fee schedule.
B.   Fee For Businesses Located Outside The City: There is levied upon every
person engaged in business in the city, not having a place of business in the
city, and not exempt as provided by section
6-2-040 of this chapter, or its successor, a license fee based upon the
percentage of gross sales and/or services made or performed from a place of
business outside the corporate limits of the city from which business within
the city is transacted, and by applying such percentage to the fee which would
otherwise be assessed for such place of business were it located within the
corporate limits of Draper City.
C.   Fee Nonrefundable: In the event any initial or renewal business license
application is denied by the city or is withdrawn by the applicant, the city
shall be entitled to retain the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) as
nonrefundable business license application fee from any license fees paid or
payable to the city, unless another nonrefundable business license application
fee is otherwise provided for under the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 590, 2-
15-2005)
6-2-080: JOINT LICENSES:
Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same
location within the city, such person shall be required to obtain a separate
license for the conducting of each business. The license fee to be paid shall
be computed as if all said businesses were one business being conducted as such
location, if the businesses are similar in license type. If the businesses are
not of the same license type, a fee shall be charged for each and every
business at such location. Where two (2) or more persons conduct separate
businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a license for
such business and pay the required license fee for such business. (Ord. 590, 2-
15-2005)
6-2-090: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location
of business engaged in, within the city, as if such branch establishment or
location were a separate business, and each license shall authorize the
licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in
the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and
distributing places used in connection with or incident to a business license
under this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or
branch establishments. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-100: LICENSE FEES; DEBT TO CITY; COLLECTION:
Any license fee due and unpaid under this chapter and all penalties thereon
shall constitute a debt to Draper City, and shall be collected by court
proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy
shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-110: FEES; DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; PENALTY:
License fees for renewal of an existing business license shall be due on or
before the annual anniversary date of each license each year. In the event any
fee is not paid on or before such date, a penalty shall be assessed pursuant to
the provisions of section
6-1-080 of this title, or its successor section, which penalty shall become
part of the license fee imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-120: RETURNS NOT TO BE MADE PUBLIC:
A.   Returns made to the license official, as required by this chapter, shall
not be made public nor shall they be subject to the inspection of any person
except the city manager or his/her authorized agent, or to those persons first
authorized to do so by order of the mayor.
B.   It is unlawful for any person to make public or to inform any other person
as to the contents of any information contained in, or permit the inspection of
any return, except as is in this section authorized. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-130: FILING FALSE RETURN PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to make a return that it false, knowing the same
to be so. (Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
6-2-140: LICENSE; REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 590, 2-15-
2005)
CHAPTER 3
REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF LICENSES
SECTION:
6-3-010: Denial Of A Business License
6-3-020: Reasons For Suspension Or Revocation
6-3-030: Enforcement
6-3-040: Procedure For Suspension Or Revocation
6-3-050: Appeal Procedure
6-3-060: Hearing
6-3-070: Decision Of The City Council
6-3-080: Appeal Of City Council Decision
6-3-090: Licensing After Revocation
6-3-100: Validity Of Business License Or Alcoholic Beverage License During
Appeal
6-3-010: DENIAL OF A BUSINESS LICENSE:
After a person has made application to the city for a business license, the
application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
A.   The applicant does not meet the qualifications for a license as provided
under this title.
B.   For a new application, nonpayment of a returned check for the required
license fees at the time the application is made. For a business license
renewal application, nonpayment of the required license fees plus penalty three
(3) months after it is due.
C.   Any reviewing department, division or agency of the city provided for in
this title has disapproved the application pursuant to any applicable provision
of this code.
D.   False or incomplete information given on the application.
E.   Noncompliance with any requirement or condition set by the city council,
planning commission or community development department, if applicable, under a
conditional use permit or by the appeals and variance hearing officer or
community development department, if applicable, granting a variance or special
exception.
F.   Noncompliance with any city, state or federal statutes or any health
department regulations governing the applicant's proposed business.
G.   Any other reason expressly provided for in this title. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-
2014)
6-3-020: REASONS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
An existing business license may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following reasons:
A.   The license does not now meet the qualifications for a license as provided
under this title;
B.   False or incomplete information given on an application;
C.   The licensee has violated or is violating any provision of this title or
provision of this code, state or federal statutes or regulations governing the
licensee's business;
D.   The licensee has obtained or aided another person to obtain a license by
fraud or deceit;
E.   The licensee has failed to pay property taxes, the utility tax or sales
tax;
F.   The licensee has refused authorized representatives of the city to make an
inspection or has interfered with such representatives while in the performance
of his duty in making such inspection;
G.   The licensee is not complying with a requirement or condition set by the
city council, planning commission or community development department, if
applicable, under a conditional use permit; by the appeals and variance hearing
officer or community development department, if applicable, granting a variance
or special exception; by the city council, or by agreement;
H.   Violation of this title by the agents or employees of a licensee and
violations of any other laws by the agents or employees committed while acting
as an agent or employee of the licensee; or
I.   Any other reason expressly provided for in this title. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-
2014)
6-3-030: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   The business license official shall have the authority without a hearing,
to deny a license for the reasons provided for in this chapter.
B.   The business license official shall have the authority to suspend or
revoke a business license or an alcohol license without a hearing, for reasons
provided for in this chapter. However, the suspension or revocation shall not
take effect until the time period for appealing the decision as set forth in
this chapter below has passed.
C.   The business license official may, on their own initiative or in response
to complaints from the general public or any city department or division,
investigate and gather evidence of violations of this title or other
circumstances which may give rise to a denial, suspension or revocation. (Ord.
1100, 4-29-2014)
6-3-040: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The business license official shall cause written notice to be given by
personal service or registered mail to the licensee of his or her decision to
suspend or revoke a license, the reason for such decision, that operation of a
business or the sale of alcohol after the effective date of the suspension or
revocation is a class B misdemeanor, the licensee's right to appeal the
business license official's decision and have a hearing, and the appeal
procedure. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-3-050: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   Appeals of the business license official's decision to deny, suspend or
revoke a license may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
recorder within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of denial,
suspension or revocation.
B.   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth with
specificity the reasons for which the appeal is taken. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-3-060: HEARING:
A.   After the notice of appeal is determined to be complete, the city recorder
shall schedule a hearing before the city council. Prior to the hearing, the
business license official shall transmit to the appellate body all papers
constituting the record of the action which is appealed.
B.   At the hearing, the business license official shall present the reasons
for the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license.
C.   The applicant or licensee, in person or through his or her attorney, may
then present any evidence showing reason why the decision was in error.
D.   If the denial, suspension, or revocation appealed from is based on a
finding by the building division, planning and zoning division, fire
department, health department, or police department that the business was or
would be in violation of any applicable ordinances or regulations, then that
finding shall be conclusive on the city council, and the council's decision may
be based only on whether the license was properly denied, suspended, or revoked
because of the building division, planning and zoning division, fire
department, health department, or police department finding.
E.   If the denial, suspension, or revocation appealed from is based on a
determination by the business license official that grounds existed pursuant to
this code, the city council may examine the factual nature of the grounds and
determine whether such grounds are sufficient to sustain the decision of the
business license official. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-3-070: DECISION OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
After the city council makes a decision, the business license official shall
give the applicant written notice of the decision. The city council may affirm
or reverse the decision of the business license official. The decision shall be
in writing and shall be based only upon findings of fact. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-
2014)
6-3-080: APPEAL OF CITY COUNCIL DECISION:
Any decision of the city council may be appealed by the applicant, licensee, or
city to the district court within thirty (30) days from when the written
decision is made. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-3-090: LICENSING AFTER REVOCATION:
A person, whose license has been finally revoked, after all available hearings,
may not be issued a license for a period of twelve (12) months after the
revocation. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
6-3-100: VALIDITY OF BUSINESS LICENSE OR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE DURING
APPEAL:
Throughout the administrative appeal process as outlined above, a licensee
holding a suspended or revoked license may continue to operate his or her
business or to sell alcohol in accordance with federal, state and local laws
pending final decision on the appeal, or until the time for appeal has passed,
whichever occurs first. (Ord. 1100, 4-29-2014)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSES
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 1660,
adopted 7-1-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
6-4-010: Authority
6-4-020: Definitions
6-4-030: General Considerations
6-4-040: License Application, Local Consent, Expiration And Renewal
6-4-050: On-Premises Licenses
6-4-060: Off-Premises Licenses
6-4-070: Special Use Permits
6-4-080: Manufacturer Licenses
6-4-090: Penalties For Violations By A Licensed Establishment
6-4-010: AUTHORITY:
Draper City may prohibit, except as provided by law, any person from knowingly
possessing any intoxicating alcoholic beverages, and the manufacture, sale,
keeping or storing for sale, offering or exposing for sale, importing,
carrying, transporting, advertising, distributing, giving away, exchanging,
dispensing or serving of intoxicating alcoholic beverages. The authority for
this chapter is derived from Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-42 and the Utah
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018)
6-4-020: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACT: The Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act as found in Utah Code Annotated
section 32B-1-101, et seq.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: A beverage consisting of beer or liquor as the terms are
defined in this section.
BANQUET: An event that is held at one or more designated locations approved by
the City or on the premises of a hotel, resort facility, sports center, or
convention center for which there is a contract between a person operating a
facility listed above and another person and under which the person operating a
facility is required to provide an alcoholic product at the event and at which
foods and alcoholic products may be sold, offered for sale or furnished.
BAR ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE: A license issued to an equity organization,
fraternal organization, or a bar which allows for the storage, sale, service
and consumption of on-premises alcoholic beverages where a variety of on-
premises prepared food must be available for the customer the entire time the
bar is open; but, there is no required percentage of food sales.
BEER: A product that contains at least 0.5 percent alcohol by volume, but not
more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent by weight, and
is obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of any malted grain. Such
products may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products. Beer includes
products referred to as beer, ale, porter, stout lager or a malt or malted
beverage. Beer does not include a flavored malt beverage.
BEER-ONLY RESTAURANT LICENSE: An establishment that is issued a license which
allows for the storage, sale, service, and consumption of beer on the premises
where the business is engaged in primarily serving meals to the general public,
where patrons may only purchase beer in conjunction with an order of food that
is prepared, sold and served at the restaurant, and where the restaurant
maintains a percentage of the total restaurant business from the sale of food
as required by the Act.
BREWER: Any person or facility engaged in manufacturing beer, heavy beer, or
flavored malt beverage.
CHURCH: A building set apart for the purpose of worship, in which religious
services are held, with which clergy is associated and which is tax exempt
under the laws of this State.
CITY: Draper City.
COMMISSION: The Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission as defined in the Act.
COMMUNITY LOCATION: A public or private school, church, public library, public
playground, or public park.
CONTAINER: A receptacle that contains an alcoholic product, including a bottle,
a vessel, or a similar item.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any establishment covered by this
chapter during hours such establishment is open to its members or to the
public, whether or not pecuniary compensation is provided or offered therefor.
EQUITY LICENSE: A license having the same meaning as defined in the Act.
FLAVORED MALT BEVERAGE: A beverage that contains at least 0.5 percent alcohol
by volume, is treated by processing, filtration, or another method of
manufacture that is not generally recognized as a traditional process in the
production of a beer as described in 27 CFR section 25.55 and to which is added
a flavor or other ingredient containing alcohol, except for a hop extract; and
for which the producer is required to file a formula for approval with the
Federal Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau pursuant to 27 CFR section
25.55, or that is not exempt under subdivision (f) of 27 CFR section 25.55. A
flavored malt beverage is considered liquor.
FRATERNAL LICENSE: A license having the same meaning as defined in the Act.
FULL-SERVICE HOTEL: A hotel that offers full availability of requisite
standardized industry amenities which are not limited to, but including the
following: on-premises restaurant, room service, business center, concierge,
fitness center, banquet halls, various room type selection such as suites.
FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSE: A license that allows for the storage, sale,
service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a restaurant
that is primarily engaged in serving meals to the general public, where patrons
may only purchase alcoholic beverages in conjunction with an order of food that
is prepared, sold and served at the restaurant, and where the restaurant
maintains a percentage of the total restaurant business from the sale of food
as required by the Act.
HEAVY BEER: A product that contains more than four percent (4%) alcohol by
volume and is obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of malted grain.
Heavy beer is considered liquor for purposes of this chapter.
HOSPITALITY AMENITY LICENSE: A license granted to a hotel that permits the
storage, sale, furnishing, and consumption of alcoholic products on the
licensed premises for hospitality social events.
HOTEL: Commercial lodging establishment that offers at least forty (40) rooms
as temporary sleeping accommodations for compensation.
LICENSED PREMISES: A building, enclosure or room occupied by any person
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on any premises under this chapter or the
Act.
LICENSEE: A person granted a license under this chapter. This term shall also
include any employee, management or personnel of the licensee.
LIMITED-SERVICE RESTAURANT: A restaurant that is issued a liquor license which
allows for the storage, sale, service, and consumption of wine, beer and heavy
beer on the premises where the business is engaged in primarily serving meals
to the general public, where patrons may only purchase wine, beer, and heavy
beer in conjunction with an order of food that is prepared, sold and served at
the restaurant, and where the restaurant maintains a percentage of the total
restaurant business from the sale of food as required by the Act.
LIQUOR: Alcohol or an alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other
liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or
fermented, or all other drink, or drinkable liquid that contains at least 0.5
percent alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for beverage purposes.
"Liquor" includes heavy beer, wine and a flavored malt beverage. "Liquor" does
not include any beverage defined as beer.
MANUFACTURE: To distill, brew, rectify, mix, compound, process, ferment, or
otherwise make an alcoholic product for personal use or for sale or
distribution to others.
MANUFACTURER LICENSE: A license granted under the Act, which includes a brewer,
winery or distillery.
MEMBER: A person, who after paying regular dues, has full privileges of an
equity licensee or fraternal licensee under this chapter.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
OFF-PREMISES BEER RETAILER: A beer retailer who is licensed and engaged in the
retail sale of beer to a patron for consumption off the beer retailer's
premises.
ON-PREMISES BANQUET LICENSE: A license which allows the sale, storage, service
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises (not open to the general
public) in connection with a banquet such as a hotel, resort facility, sports
center or convention center as defined in the Act.
ON-PREMISES BEER RETAILER: A beer retailer who is authorized to sell, offer for
sale, or furnish beer under a license issued in accordance with the Act and is
engaged in the sale of beer to a patron for consumption on the beer retailer's
premises and is operated as a tavern.
OUTLET: A location other than a State store or package agency where alcoholic
beverages are sold pursuant to a license issued by local authority.
PARK: A piece of public ground that is set apart for the use of the public,
whether developed or undeveloped, and that is usually, or may be, planted with
trees, lawns, or other shrubbery. The park may include facilities for sport,
entertainment, dancing, recreation, or swimming, or a park may be planned for
such future use of any and all other facilities. A park may consist solely of a
single purpose facility, either actual or proposed, such as an equestrian park,
open-air theater, or playground. For purposes of this chapter, a golf course is
not a park. A trail is not considered a park for these purposes.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, limited liability
company, association, business trust, or other form of business enterprise,
including a receiver or trustee, and the plural as well as the singular number,
unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context.
PLAYGROUND: A public, private or neighborhood area which may or may not include
play equipment where children go for physical activity or to play.
PREMISES: Any building, enclosure, designated area, or room used in connection
with the sale, storage, furnishing, manufacture, distribution or consumption of
alcoholic product, unless otherwise defined in this chapter.
PRIVATE EVENT: A specific social, business, or recreational event for which an
entire room, area or hall is leased or rented in advance by an identified
group, and that is limited in attendance to people who are specifically
designated and their guest. A private event does not include an event to which
the general public is invited whether for an admission fee or not.
RECEPTION CENTER: A business that operates facilities that are at least five
thousand (5,000) square feet, and has as its primary purpose the leasing of the
facilities to a third party for the third party's event.
RECEPTION CENTER LICENSE: A license that allows for the storage, sale, offer
for sale, furnishing, and consumption of an alcoholic product on premises
operated as a reception center.
RESTAURANT: A business establishment engaged primarily in serving meals at
which a variety of foods are prepared and complete meals are served. For the
purposes of this chapter, restaurant includes a full-service restaurant
licensee, a limited-service restaurant licensee, or a beer-only restaurant
licensee.
RETAILER: A person engaged in the sale or distribution of an alcoholic beverage
to a consumer.
SCHOOL: A building used primarily for the general education of minors. "School"
does not include a nursery school, an infant day care center, or a trade or a
technical school.
SELL, SALE, OR TO SELL: A transaction, exchange, or barter whereby, for
consideration, an alcoholic beverage is either directly or indirectly
transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by means or under
pretext is promised or obtained, whether done by a person as a principal,
proprietor, or as an agent, servant, or employee, unless otherwise defined in
this chapter or the rules made by the commission.
SERVE: To place an alcoholic product before an individual.
SINGLE EVENT: A convention, civic, or community enterprise conducted by a bona
fide corporation, church, political organization, or association or a
recognized subordinate lodge, chapter, or other local unit thereof. A single
event permit includes both a one hundred twenty (120) hour single event permit,
which authorizes the storage, sale, offering for sale, furnishing and
consumption of liquor for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120)
consecutive hours; or a seventy-two (72) hour single event permit, which
authorizes the storage, sale, offering for sale, furnishing, and consumption of
liquor for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive hours; or a
temporary beer event permit.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit issued by the commission for the purchase, sale,
storage, use, consumption, or manufacture of alcoholic products in limited
types and quantities, and for limited purposes. Permits may be granted for the
following purposes: a religious wine use permit; an industrial or manufacturing
use permit; a scientific or educational use permit; or a public service permit.
STAFF: An individual who engages in activity governed by this chapter on behalf
of a business, at the request of the business, or under the authority of the
business. Staff includes an officer, a director, an employee, personnel
management, an agent including a managing agent, an operator or a
representative.
STATE STORE: A facility for the sale of package liquor located on premises
owned or leased by the State and operated by a State employee. The term "State
store" does not apply to a licensee, permittee, or package agency.
TAVERN: A business establishment that is engaged primarily in the retail sale
of beer to a public patron for consumption on the establishment's premises.
"Tavern" includes beer bar, parlor, lounge, cabaret, and night club if the
revenue from the sale of beer exceeds the revenue of the sale of food, although
food need not be sold in the establishment.
TRAIL: A linear corridor of property which is planned as part of the Parks and
Trails Master Plan or recognized as a City facility by the Parks and Trails
Master Plan, although not classified as a park, and maintained by the City for
the purpose of recreation and alternate transportation as a part of the
transportation system, thus not designed or intended for use by unaccompanied
small children. A trail is not a park for purposes of this chapter.
WINE: An alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits, plants, honey, or milk, or other like substance, whether or
not another ingredient is added. Wine is considered liquor for the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 1527, 3-1-2022; Ord. 1660, 7-1-
2025)
6-4-030: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:
A.   All licensees shall comply with this chapter, the Act, and the regulations
of the commission.
B.   No person or business may serve alcohol without first obtaining local
consent and the necessary approvals of the City as well as the required license
(s) or permit(s) issued by the commission. A license will not be issued to a
person or business that is not also licensed to operate in the City. Licenses
issued under the provisions of this chapter are categorized into the following
types, each with specific privileges and responsibilities set forth in this
chapter and the Act:
1.   Bar establishment.
2.   Beer-only restaurant.
3.   Full-service restaurant.
4.   Hospitality amenity.
5.   Limited-service restaurant.
6.   Manufacturer.
7.   Off-premises beer retailer.
8.   On-premises banquet.
9.   On-premises beer retailer.
10.   Reception center.
11.   Single-event permit.
12.   Special use permit.
C.   A separate license shall be required for each place of sale. Each licensee
shall display in a prominent place on the premises the license issued by the
City and the license issued by the commission.
D.   In determining compliance with the numerical requirements of this chapter,
any computation resulting in a fractional number, except for proximity
requirements, shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
E.   Conflicts between this chapter and the Act shall be resolved according to
Utah Code Annotated 32B-1-204. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 1527, 3-1-2022;
Ord. 1660, 7-1-2025)
6-4-040: LICENSE APPLICATION, LOCAL CONSENT, EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
A.   License Application Process: A person seeking the issuance of a license
under this chapter shall provide a written application on forms provided by the
City.
B.   Local Consent Procedure: Any application for local consent shall follow
the City's application procedures.
1.   Business License Official: Each application for a license shall be
referred to the business license official. Upon receiving a complete
application, the business license official shall submit the request to
appropriate City departments for their review and comment.
2.   Distance Requirements:
a.   A bar establishment, hospitality amenity, on-premises banquet, on-premises
beer retailer, or reception center license shall not be granted to a business
located within six hundred feet (600') of any community location as measured
from the nearest patron entrance of the proposed outlet by following the
shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel to the property boundary of the
community location or within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed outlet
measured in a straight line from the nearest patron entrance of the proposed
outlet to the nearest property boundary of the community location.
b.   A beer-only restaurant, full-service restaurant, or limited- service
restaurant license shall not be granted to any applicant for any location
situated within three hundred feet (300') of any community location as measured
from the nearest patron entrance of the proposed restaurant by following the
shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel to the property boundary of the
community location or within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed restaurant
measured in a straight line from the nearest patron entrance of the proposed
restaurant to the nearest property boundary of the community location.
c.   No manufacturer license, off-premises beer retail license, or special use
permit for a special use permittee operating on a for-profit basis shall be
issued wherein the premises would be located within three hundred feet (300')
of a community location as measured from the nearest patron entrance of the
outlet by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel to the
property boundary of a community location.
3.   City Council Approval:
a.   The request for local consent shall be reviewed by the City Council at a
regularly scheduled meeting not more than forty-five (45) days after a complete
application is received.
b.   The Council shall take public comment on the request. After review of the
request and accompanying information, the Council shall vote on whether to
grant its consent for the issuance of the license.
c.   In deciding whether to grant or deny local consent, the City may also
consider the proximity of any educational, religious, or recreational facility,
or any other relevant factor in reaching a decision on a proposed location.
d.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application for a single- event permit
in conjunction with a regularly-conducted festival or event which, in previous
years, received single-event permit approval from the City, may be approved by
the Community Development Director upon a showing the applicant has not
violated a provision of this chapter or the Act since the issuance of the last
license and that the application meets current ordinances, rules and
regulations.
C.   Issuance Of License: The City shall issue a license upon compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and the applicant providing proof of the
issuance of the appropriate license by the commission.
D.   Expiration: Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall expire as follows:
1.   Commencing July 1, 2018, off-premises beer retail licenses expire on the
last day of February.
2.   Full-service restaurant, hospitality amenity, limited-service restaurant,
on-premises banquet, and reception center licenses expire on October 31.
3.   Bar establishment licenses expire on June 30.
4.   Beer-only restaurant and on-premises beer retailer licenses expire on the
last day of February.
5.   Manufacturer licenses and special use permits expire on December 31.
E.   Renewal:
1.   Renewal Generally: Licenses shall be issued for one year from the date of
expiration shown in subsection D of this section. To implement the expiration
date of existing licenses, the initial license renewal for licenses existing on
the effective date of this chapter shall be prorated to the next expiration
date. In the event renewal fees are not received at the office of the license
official within forty-five (45) days after the due date each year, the licensee
must reapply for the applicable retail license and pay a penalty of twenty five
percent (25%) of the regulatory fees due as part of the re-issuance fee, in
addition to the applicable regulatory license fees. In the event the renewal
fees are not received at the office of the license official within seventy-five
(75) days of each year when due, the licensee must reapply for the applicable
license and pay a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the fee due as part
of the re- issuance fee, in addition to the applicable regulatory license fees.
Failure to meet the renewal requirements shall result in an automatic
forfeiture of the license effective on the date the existing license expires.
2.   Sale; Change In Ownership: If any licensee sells the business, the
existing license for that business shall be canceled. The purchaser of the
business may apply for a license to sell alcoholic beverages in accordance with
the procedures and requirements of this chapter. If any licensee does not
immediately notify the City of any change in ownership of business, the City
shall revoke that license.
3.   Renewal Information Required: Applications for renewal of licenses issued
under this chapter shall be accompanied by updated information as outlined in
subsection A of this section.
4.   Fees: Renewal applications for licenses under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the City business license fee and the complete regulatory fees
established by the City's consolidated fee schedule, as amended. (Ord. 1317, 3-
27-2018; amd. Ord. 1527, 3-1-2022; Ord. 1660, 7-1-2025)
6-4-050: ON-PREMISES LICENSES:
A.   General Operational Restrictions: Each person granted an a bar
establishment license, beer-only restaurant license, full-service restaurant
license, hospitality amenity license, limited-service restaurant license, on-
premises beer retailer license, on-premises banquet license, reception center
license, or single-event permit and their employees, management and personnel
shall abide by the Act and the following conditions and requirements. Failure
to comply may result in suspension or revocation of the license or other
disciplinary action taken against the business, individual employees, or
management personnel.
1.   Restaurants: A beer-only restaurant, full-service restaurant, and limited-
service restaurant license shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic
beverages only with the purchase of food, on the premises described therein, in
containers allowed under the Act. Only bona fide restaurants shall be entitled
to a full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, or beer-only
restaurant license.
2.   Bar Establishment License, Hospitality Amenity License, On-Premises
Banquet License, Reception Center License, or Single-Event Permit: A bar
establishment license, hospitality amenity license, on-premises banquet
license, reception center license, or single-event permit shall entitle the
licensee to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises described therein, for
consumption only on the licensed premises.
3.   Underage Service: No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall
sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
4.   Removal From Premises: Alcoholic beverages shall not be removed from the
licensee's premises except as allowed in accordance with the Act.
5.   Bring Onto Premises: Except as otherwise permitted herein, a person shall
not bring onto the premises of an on-premises banquet, reception center, beer-
only restaurant, full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, special-
event or bar establishment any liquor or beer, for on-premises consumption. A
person may bring bottled wine onto the premises of a full-service restaurant,
limited-service restaurant or bar establishment, provided the wine is delivered
to a server upon entering the premises. Officers, managers, employees, or
agents shall not allow a person to bring onto the licensed premises liquor or
beer for on-premises consumption or allow consumption of any such liquor or
beverage on its premises. If any licensee or any of its officers, managers,
employees, or agents violates this subsection, the City may immediately suspend
or revoke the license.
6.   No Consumption While On Duty: An employee of a licensee, while on duty,
shall not consume an alcoholic beverage or be under the influence of alcoholic
beverages.
7.   License Displayed: Each licensee shall display in a prominent place on the
premises:
a.   The license issued by the City and the license issued by the commission;
and
b.   All applicable signs required by the Act.
8.   Transfer From Location: There shall be no transfer of a license from one
location to another.
9.   Transfer From Entity: There shall be no transfer of a license from one
entity to another without approval by the City Council, except that the
Community Development Director may grant a request to transfer a bar
establishment, beer-only restaurant, full-service restaurant, hospitality
amenity, limited-service restaurant, on-premises banquet, on-premises beer
retailer, or reception center license from a current licensee to a proposed
licensee who will operate at the same location, so long as the following
conditions are met:
a.   The type of alcoholic beverage to be sold is not changed;
b.   The on-site management staff has not changed;
c.   There have been no citations for alcohol-related offenses issued to either
the current licensee or the proposed licensee within the last two (2) years;
and
d.   The proposed licensee's application complies in all respects with all
other provisions of this chapter.
B.   Specific On-Premises License Restrictions:
1.   Full-Service Restaurant, Limited-Service Restaurant And Beer-Only
Restaurant Licenses:
a.   Licenses Obtained: Before any full-service restaurant, limited-service
restaurant, or beer-only restaurant may sell alcoholic beverages at retail for
on-premises consumption, it shall obtain:
(1)   A full-service restaurant, a limited-service restaurant or beer-only
restaurant license from the City as defined in this chapter; and
(2)   A full-service restaurant, a limited-service restaurant or beer-only
restaurant license from the commission.
b.   Maintain Records: Licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
c.   Restriction On Licenses: There shall be no limitation on the number of
full-service or limited-service, or beer-only restaurant licenses granted by
the city.
2.   Bar Establishment Licenses:
a.   Licenses Obtained: Before any bar establishment including an equity
license, a fraternal license, or a bar may sell alcoholic beverages for on-
premises consumption, it shall obtain:
(1)   A bar establishment license from the City; and
(2)   A bar establishment license from the commission.
b.   Maintain Records: Licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
c.   Restriction On Licenses: The total number of bar establishment licenses in
the City shall not exceed eight (8).
3.   On-Premises Beer Retailer Licenses:
a.   License Types: There are two (2) types of on-premises beer licenses
defined by the Act:
(1)   On-premises beer retailer which includes restaurants, cafes, and bowling
centers or golf course food and beverage facilities; and
(2)   Taverns, which include beer bars, parlors, lounges, cabarets, or
nightclubs. No tavern licenses shall be issued within Draper City.
b.   Licenses Obtained: Before any establishment may sell beer at retail for
on-premises consumption, it shall obtain:
(1)   An on-premises beer retailer license from the City; and
(2)   An on-premises beer retailer license from the commission.
c.   Maintain Records: Licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
d.   Restriction On Licenses: The total number of on-premises beer retailer
licenses in the City shall not exceed one per each four thousand (4,000)
population of the City based on the latest population estimate provided by the
State of Utah Department of Workforce Services.
4.   On-Premises Banquet Licenses:
a.   An on-premises banquet license may only be issued for a hotel, resort
facility, sports center or convention center.
b.   Before any on-premises banquet licensee may sell or furnish an alcoholic
product at retail for on-premises consumption, it shall obtain:
(1)   An on-premises banquet license from the City; and
(2)   An on-premises banquet license from the commission.
c.   On-premises banquet licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
d.   There shall be no limitation on the number of on-premises banquet licenses
granted by the City.
5.   Single-Event Permits:
a.   Number Of Permits: Qualifying organizations may apply for up to four (4)
single event permits per calendar year if one or more of the single event
permits is a one hundred twenty (120) hours single event permit; or up to
twelve (12) single event permits per calendar year if each of the single event
permits is a seventy-two (72) hour single event permit. A single event permit
may also include a temporary beer event permit.
b.   Permits Obtained: Before any operator, participant or sponsor of a single
event may sell beer or alcohol at retail for on-premises consumption at the
event, it shall obtain:
(1)   A single-event permit from the City; and
(2)   A single-event permit from the commission.
c.   Maintain Records: Permittees shall maintain records as per the Act.
d.   Limited Duration Of Event: A single-event permit shall state whether it is
a seventy two (72) hour single event permit or a one hundred twenty (120) hour
single event permit.
e.   Restrictions On Licenses: There shall be no limitation on the number of
single-event permits granted by the City.
6.   Reception Center License:
a.   A reception center license may only be issued for a reception center.
b.   Before any reception center licensee may store, sell offer for sale, or
furnish an alcoholic product on the licensee's premises as a reception center,
it shall obtain:
(1)   A reception center license from the city; and
(2)   A reception center license from the commission.
c.   Reception center licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
d.   There shall be no limitation on the number of reception center licenses
granted by the city.
7.   Hospitality Amenity License:
a.   A hospitality amenity license may only be issued for a hotel.
b.   Before any hospitality amenity licensee may store, sell, offer for sale,
or furnish an alcoholic product on the licensee's premises it shall obtain:
(1)   A hospitality amenity license from the city; and
(2)   A hospitality amenity license from the commission.
c.   Hospitality amenity licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
d.   There shall be no limitation on the number of hospitality amenity licenses
granted by the city. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 1527, 3-1-2022; Ord.
1648, 5-6-2025; Ord. 1660, 7-1-2025)
6-4-060: OFF-PREMISES LICENSES:
A.   General Operational Restrictions: Licensees shall comply with the
following operational restrictions:
1.   An off-premises beer retailer shall only purchase, acquire, possess for
the purpose of resale, or sell beer that the off- premises beer retailer
lawfully purchases from a beer wholesaler licensee or a small brewer that
manufactures the beer.
2.   An off-premises beer retailer may not possess, sell, offer for sale, or
furnish beer in a container larger than two liters (2 L).
3.   A minor may not sell beer on the licensed premises unless the sale is done
under the supervision of a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who is
on the licensed premises and the minor is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
4.   Adhere to all display and signage requirements established by the
commission by rule.
5.   Staff who directly supervises the sale of beer or who sells beer to a
patron for consumption off the premises of the off- premises beer retailer
shall wear the required identification badges identified as per the Act.
6.   An off-premises licensee may sell beer beginning at the hour of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ending at the hour of one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
7.   It shall be unlawful for any off-premises licensee to permit the
consumption of beer on any licensed premises or to allow intoxicated persons to
remain in or about any licensed premises.
8.   Beer may not be sold, delivered, or furnished to any:
a.   Minor;
b.   Person actually, apparently, or obviously intoxicated;
c.   Known interdicted person; or
d.   Known habitual drunkard.
9.   An off-premises licensee shall make every reasonable effort to limit the
potential for theft of beer from licensed premises. A clear, unobstructed view
of all portions of the interior of storage and display areas shall be available
at all times from a point within the licensed premises at or near the main
public entrance. A beer inventory shrinkage record shall be kept by the
licensee and made available at any time upon request to the Chief of Police or
Community Development Director for inspection or audit. Failure of a licensee
to properly maintain the alcoholic beverage inventory shrinkage or failure to
submit such records for inspection and audit shall be a Class B misdemeanor and
shall be cause for suspension or revocation of an off-premises license.
10.   There shall be no transfer of an off-premises license from one location
to another.
11.   There shall be no transfer of an off-premises license from one entity to
another without approval by the City Council, except that the Community
Development Director may grant a request to transfer an off-premises license
from a current licensee to a proposed licensee who will operate at the same
location provided:
a.   The type of alcoholic beverage to be sold is not changed;
b.   The on-site management staff has not changed;
c.   There have been no citations for alcohol related offenses issued to either
the current licensee or the proposed licensee within the last two (2) years;
and
d.   The proposed licensee's application complies in all respects with all
other provisions of this chapter.
12.   Each off-premises beer licensee shall comply with the provisions of
employee training requirements and operational provisions established by the
Act.
13.   Beginning July 1, 2018, obtain a State issued off-premises beer retailer
license.
B.   Maintain Records: Licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
C.   Restriction On Licenses: The total number of off-premises licenses in the
City shall not exceed one per each one thousand (1,000) population of the City
based on the latest population estimate provided by the State of Utah
Department of Workforce Services.
D.   Enforcement: The City shall comply with the enforcement provisions of Utah
Code Annotated 32B-7-303. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 1660, 7-1-2025)
6-4-070: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A.   Types Of Special Use Permits: A special use permit shall be classified
under the following types:
1.   A religious wine permit.
2.   An industrial or manufacturing use permit.
3.   A scientific or educational use permit.
B.   Permit Application Process: A person seeking to purchase, use, store,
sell, offer for sale, allow consumption, or manufacture an alcoholic product in
a manner that requires a special use permit, shall comply with section
6-4-040 of this chapter, except that persons seeking a special use permit
located within a community location are exempt from the distance requirements
of section
6-4-040 of this chapter.
C.   General Operational Restrictions:
1.   A special use permittee may not use, mix, store, sell, offer for sale,
furnish, manufacture, or allow consumption of an alcoholic product in a
location other than as designated in a special use permittee's application.
2.   A special use permittee may not sell, offer for sale, or furnish an
alcoholic product to:
a.   A minor;
b.   A person actually, apparently, or obviously intoxicated;
c.   A known interdicted person; or
d.   A known habitual drunkard.
3.   A special use permittee may not employ a minor to handle an alcoholic
product.
4.   The location specified in a special use permit may not be transferred from
one location to another location, without prior written approval of the
commission.
5.   A special use permittee may not sell, transfer, assign, exchange, barter,
give or attempt in any way to dispose of the permit to another person whether
for monetary gain or not.
6.   A special use permittee may not purchase, use, mix, store, sell, offer for
sale, furnish, consume or manufacture an alcoholic product for a purpose other
than that authorized by the special use permit.
D.   Maintain Records: Permittees shall maintain records as per the Act.
E.   Restriction On Permits: There shall be no limitation on the number of
special use permits granted by the City. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018)
6-4-080: MANUFACTURER LICENSES:
A.   Manufacturer License: A person may not manufacture for retail sale any
alcoholic beverage unless an alcoholic beverage manufacturing license has been
issued by the commission.
B.   License Application Process: A person seeking a manufacturer license shall
comply with section
6-4-040 of this chapter.
C.   General Operational Restrictions:
1.   A separate license is required for each place of manufacture, storage, and
sale of alcoholic beverages.
2.   Whether independent or associated with a restaurant, a brewer or other
form of manufacturing requires local consent from the City Council.
3.   Manufacturer licensees shall comply with all provisions and operational
regulations for a manufacturer as established by the Act.
4.   Violation of this subsection is a Class B misdemeanor.
D.   Maintain Records: Licensees shall maintain records as per the Act.
E.   Restrictions: No more than two (2) manufacturer licenses shall be issued
within Draper City. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018)
6-4-090: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS BY A LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT:
A.   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
for the violation by the licensee or the licensee's agent or employee of any
provision of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance or law relating to
the possession, consumption, storage or sale of alcoholic beverages. If any
person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter no longer possesses
the qualifications required by this chapter for obtaining that license, the
City may revoke or suspend that license.
B.   In addition to the suspension or revocation of licenses, the City may
bring criminal charges or seek any other civil remedy or enforcement available
to the City for the violation of any provision of this chapter. Criminal
violations shall be punished as a Class B misdemeanor.
C.   Civil enforcement for violations of this chapter by a licensee or agent of
a licensee which occur within any 24-month period may be punished as follows:
1.   Upon a first violation of this chapter the licensee shall be issued a
warning.
2.   Upon any violation of this chapter which occurs within twenty-four (24)
months of a prior violation, the licensee shall pay a civil fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00).
3.   Upon any violation of this chapter which occurs within twenty-four (24)
months of two (2) prior violations, the licensee shall pay a civil fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and the licensee shall have its license suspended for
a period of three (3) consecutive days concurrent with any suspension imposed
by the State.
4.   Upon any violation of this chapter which occurs within twenty-four (24)
months of three (3) prior violations, the licensee shall pay a civil fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the licensee shall have its license
suspended for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days concurrent with any
suspension imposed by the State. In addition, the licensee shall be placed on
probation by the City for a period of one year. Any violation of this chapter
by the licensee or any employee of the licensee during the period of probation
shall result in the revocation of the licensee's license. The licensee shall
not be eligible to reapply for a new license for at least six (6) months from
the date of revocation.
D.   Failure to pay any fine imposed for a violation of any provision of this
chapter within thirty (30) days of the imposition of such fine shall be grounds
for revocation of the license. (Ord. 1317, 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 1660, 7-1-2025)
CHAPTER 5
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
6-5-010: Title For Citation
6-5-020: Purpose And Findings
6-5-030: Application Of Provisions
6-5-040: Definitions
6-5-050: Obscenity And Lewdness; Statutory Provisions
6-5-060: Location And Zoning Restrictions
6-5-070: Business License Required
6-5-080: Business Categories; Number Of Licenses
6-5-090: License Fees
6-5-100: License; Bond
6-5-110: License; Premises Location And Name
6-5-120: Issuance Of License
6-5-130: Inspection
6-5-140: Expiration Of License; Denial Of Renewal
6-5-150: Suspension
6-5-160: Revocation
6-5-170: Judicial Review
6-5-180: No Transfer Of License
6-5-190: License Display
6-5-200: License; Statement In Advertisements
6-5-210: Regulations And Unlawful Activities
6-5-220: Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
6-5-230: Additional Regulations For Adult Motels
6-5-240: Adult Business; Design Of Premises
6-5-250: Regulations Pertaining To Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films And
Videos
6-5-260: Seminude Entertainment Business; Design Of Premises
6-5-270: Seminude Entertainment Business; Location Restriction
6-5-280: Seminude Dancing Agencies
6-5-290: Performers; Prohibited Activities
6-5-300: Patrons; Prohibited Activities
6-5-310: Existing Businesses; Compliance Time Limits
6-5-320: Exterior Portions Of Sexually Oriented Businesses
6-5-330: Signage
6-5-340: Massages Or Baths Administered By Person Of Opposite Sex
6-5-350: Hours Of Operation
6-5-360: Exemptions
6-5-370: Notices
6-5-380: Injunction
6-5-390: Severability
6-5-400: Penalty
6-5-010: TITLE FOR CITATION:
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to
as the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 565,
3-9-2004)
6-5-020: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene materials.
B.   Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available
to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City Of Los
Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City Of Erie v. Pap's
A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
City Of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Arcara v. Cloud
Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697 (1986); Iacobucci v. City Of Newport, Ky, 479 U.S. 92
(1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); California v.
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS,
Inc. v. City Of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir.1997); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap
County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir.1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City Of Arlington, 65
F.3d 1248 (5th Cir.1995); South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City Of Miami,
734 F.2d 608 (11th Cir.1984); and N.W. Enterprises v. City Of Houston, 27
F.Supp. 2d 754 (S.D. Tex.1998), as well as studies conducted in other cities,
including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove,
California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas;
Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont,
Texas; and findings reported in the final report of the attorney general's
commission on pornography (1986), the report of the attorney general's working
group on the regulation of sexually oriented businesses (June 6, 1989, state of
Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the U.S. department of health and
human services, centers for disease control and prevention, the city council
finds that:
1.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the
establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make owners of
these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
2.   Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex related
crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented
businesses are located.
3.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
4.   Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
5.   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually
oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of
such sexually oriented businesses.
6.   At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and
shigella infections.
7.   As of June, 2001, the total number of reported cases of AIDS in the United
States caused by the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was 793,025.
8.   The total number of cases of genital chlamydia trachomatis infections in
the United States reported in 2000 was 702,093, a six percent (6%) increase
over the year 1999.
9.   The total number of cases of early (less than 1 year) syphilis in the
United States reported during the twelve (12) year period 1996-2000 was
212,672.
10.   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually
remains at a high level, with a total of 1,730,911 cases reported during the
period 1996-2000.
11.   The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22,
1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected
blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn.
12.   According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.
13.   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy,
in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the
owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and
maintain those facilities.
14.   Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids,
including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented
businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films.
15.   Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases
sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity.
16.   Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug
dealing and drug use.
17.   Alcohol consumption in adult establishments increases the likelihood of
crime, illegal drug use, and illegal sexual activity, and encourages
undesirable behavior that is not in the interest of the public health, safety,
and welfare.
18.   The findings noted in subsections B1 through B17 of this section raise
substantial governmental concerns.
19.   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
20.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the
burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of sexually
oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place a heretofore
nonexistent incentive on operators to see that the sexually oriented business
is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate
to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of
the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises
and activities occurring therein.
21.   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the
premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult
establishments.
22.   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity.
23.   It is desirable, in the prevention of crime and the spread of
communicable diseases, to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct this chapter is designed to
prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
24.   The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has
been convicted of a sex related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this chapter.
25.   The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in sexually
oriented businesses for a period of five (5) years for a previous felony
conviction serves as a deterrent to further criminal conduct, and prevents
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
26.   The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of this
city will be promoted by enactment of this chapter.
27.   When more than one sexually oriented business use occupies the same
location or business address, the secondary effects caused by such businesses
are increased. Secondary effects are eliminated or controlled to a greater
degree when only a single sexually oriented business use is allowed to occupy
the same location. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-030: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances,
including, but not limited to, those codified in other chapters and provisions
of the business regulations of the city. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-040: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image
producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment that, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion picture, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other
visual representations that are characterized by the depicting or describing of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities".
A principal business purpose exists if materials offered for sale or rental
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" generate twenty percent (20%) or more of the business income, or account
for twenty percent (20%) or more of inventory, or occupy twenty percent (20%)
or more of total floor space. A commercial establishment may have other
principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental
of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" and still be categorized as "adult bookstore" or "adult video
store". Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video
store" so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for
sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that are characterized
by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, cafe or similar commercial
establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features:
A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, photographic
reproductions, or other image producing devices that are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or
D.   Persons who engage in "exotic" or erotic dancing or performances that are
intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
A.   Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right
of way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
twenty four (24) hours; or
C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a
period of time that is less than twenty four (24) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently
shown that are characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features
persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or seminudity, and/or
live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
DIRECTOR: The chief of police and such employee(s) of the city police
department as he or she may designate to perform the duties of the director
under this chapter.
EMPLOYEE: A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or independent
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a
salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a person exclusively on
the premises as a patron or customer.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any sexually oriented business;
C.   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
E.   A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented
business is located.
LICENSED DAYCARE CENTER: A facility licensed by the state of Utah, whether
situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education,
custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12) children under
fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than
twenty four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is
operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
LIVE THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE: A play, skit, opera, ballet, concert, comedy, or
musical drama.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or
displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons for consideration.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal
cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with
less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort
or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
PREMISES: The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership,
control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a
business license pursuant to section
6-5-070 of this chapter.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and the
male or female genitals, pubic region, and anus shall be fully covered by an
opaque covering no narrower than four inches (4") wide in the front and five
inches (5") wide in the back, which shall not taper to less than one inch (1")
wide at the narrowest point.
SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership, or
any other entity or individual which furnishes, books, or otherwise engages or
offers to furnish, book, or otherwise engage the service of a professional
dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or appearance at a
business licensed for adult theaters.
SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a seminude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
A.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of
the opposite sex; or
B.   Activities between persons of the opposite sex and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
A principal business purpose exists if the services offered are intended to
generate business income.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center or seminude
entertainment business.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises
of a sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually oriented
portion of the business. This includes all managing employees, dancers,
escorts, models, and other similar employees, whether or not hired as
employees, agents, or as independent contractors. Employees shall not include
individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of the
business, such as janitors, bookkeepers, and similar employees. Sexually
oriented business employees shall not include cooks, serving persons, and
similar employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the
business. All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter, including
escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs, and other similar
employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business employees.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
A.   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and
opaquely covered;
B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any similar sex related offenses to those described
above under the criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other
countries;
B.   For which:
1.   Fewer than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
2.   Fewer than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense;
3.   Fewer than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are for two (2) or
more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period;
C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
A.   Acts of:
1.   Masturbation,
2.   Human sexual intercourse,
3.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast,
4.   Fellatio,
5.   Cunnilingus,
6.   Bestiality,
7.   Pederasty,
8.   Buggery, or
9.   Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male, human
female, or beast;
B.   Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
1.   The genitals of a human,
2.   The pubic area of a human,
3.   The uncovered female nipple and areola;
C.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask
or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: The increase in floor
areas occupied by the business by more than twenty five percent (25%), as the
floor areas existed on January 1, 2004.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and
includes any of the following:
A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
B.   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-050: OBSCENITY AND LEWDNESS; STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter which
is contrary to the provisions of title 13 of this code, lewdness, as defined in
this code, or other applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting obscenity.
(Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-060: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any
location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually oriented
businesses licensed as adult business or seminude entertainment businesses
pursuant to this chapter shall only be allowed in areas where they are
specifically designated as permitted or conditional uses pursuant to title 9 of
this code. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-070: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A.   Unlawful Activities: It shall be unlawful:
1.   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business operator's license ("operator's license") issued by
the director pursuant to this chapter; or
2.   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a
person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented
business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented
business employee license ("employee license") issued to such employee by the
director pursuant to this chapter; or
3.   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if
such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee
license issued to such person by the director pursuant to this chapter.
4.   It shall be a defense to subsections A2 and A3 of this section if the
employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or
maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
B.   Drawing Of Premises; Inspection: An application for a sexually oriented
business operator's license must be made on a form provided by the city. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (±6"). Prior to issuance of an operator's license, the premises must be
inspected by the health department, building department, and zoning department.
Prior inspection by the health department and building department shall be
required only when the provisions set forth in sections
6-5-240 and/or
6-5-260 of this chapter are applicable.
C.   Form Of Application: An application for a sexually oriented business
employee license must be made on a form provided by the city.
D.   Qualifications Of Applicant: All applicants for a license must be
qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may
request, and the applicant shall provide, such information reasonably necessary
(including fingerprints) to enable the city to determine whether the applicant
meets the qualifications established under this chapter. The applicant has an
affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received
subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed.
E.   Applicant Signatures: If a person who wishes to own or operate a sexually
oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for an
operator's license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten
percent (10%) or greater interest in the business must sign the application for
an operator's license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a
sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a
business, all corporate officers and directors must sign the application for an
operator's license as applicant.
F.   Submittal; Information Required: Applications for an operator's license,
whether original or renewal, must be made to the director by the intended
operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted to the office of the
director or the director's designee during regular working hours. Application
forms shall be supplied by the director. The following information shall be
provided on the application form:
1.   The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the
applicant(s);
2.   The applicant's social security number and/or his/her state or federally
issued tax identification number;
3.   The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general
description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends to operate
the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant;
he or she must state: a) the sexually oriented business fictitious name; and b)
submit the required registration documents;
4.   Whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending
charges, of a "specified criminal activity", as defined herein, and, if so, the
"specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of
each;
5.   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or
other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed
under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose business license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;
6.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other
similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and,
if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;
7.   The single classification of license, as found in section
6-5-080 of this chapter, for which the applicant is filing;
8.   The telephone number of the establishment;
9.   The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be located;
10.   If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s)
acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the
date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented
business at the location for which the business license is sought;
11.   If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date
(which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the
business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten (10)
days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed
explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of
the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for
accomplishing the same;
12.   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other
than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or
booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films,
videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in section
6-5-250 of this chapter.
G.   Additional Requirements: Each application for an operator's license shall
be accompanied by the following:
1.   Payment of the application fee in full;
2.   If the establishment is a state of Utah corporation, a certified copy of
the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto;
3.   If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all
amendments thereto;
4.   If the establishment is a limited partnership or limited liability company
formed under the laws of the state of Utah, a certified copy of the certificate
of limited partnership or limited liability company, together with all
amendments thereto;
5.   If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership or limited liability
company, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership or limited
liability company and the qualification documents, together with all amendments
thereto;
6.   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
7.   If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in
subsection G6 of this section is not also the owner of the sexually oriented
business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease
option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right
of the owner(s) or proposed owner(s) of the sexually oriented business to have
or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be
used for the sexually oriented business;
8.   A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty
(30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented
businesses within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified;
and the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue,
school, public park or recreation area within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted;
9.   Any of subsections G2 through G8 of this section shall not be required for
a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously
furnished to the director with the original application or previous renewals
thereof remain correct and current.
H.   Employee Applications: Applications for an employee license to work and/or
perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal,
must be made to the director by the person to whom the employee license shall
issue. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment
of the application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the
director. Applications must be submitted to the office of the director or the
director's designee during regular working hours. Each applicant shall be
required to give the following information on the application form:
1.   The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is
or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases;
2.   Age, and date and place of birth;
3.   Height, weight, hair color, and eye color;
4.   Present residence address and telephone number;
5.   Present business address and telephone number;
6.   Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state
issued identification card information;
7.   Social security number; and
8.   Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years old.
The personal information provided in this subsection H shall be confidential,
and shall not be disclosed to the public except to the extent required by state
or federal law.
I.   Attachments To Application Form: Attached to the application form for any
license under this chapter shall be the following:
1.   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face,
and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department.
Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
2.   A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or
country, has ever had any license, permit, or authorization to do business
denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or
permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought
and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe
in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any
order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
3.   A statement whether the applicant has, within the past five (5) years,
been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified
criminal activity", as defined herein and, if so, the "specified criminal
activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
J.   Statement Under Oath: Every application for a license under this chapter
shall contain a statement under oath that:
1.   The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the
application, and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith
is true and correct; and
2.   The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
K.   Separate Application And License: A separate application and operator's
license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification as
set forth in section
6-5-080 of this chapter.
L.   No Exemption: The fact that a person possesses other types of state or
city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business operator or employee license. (Ord. 565,
3-9-2004)
6-5-080: BUSINESS CATEGORIES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A.   Number Permitted: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or
be licensed for more than one category of sexually oriented business, except
that a business may have a license for both outcall services and a seminude
dancing agency on the same premises.
B.   Categories: The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
1.   Outcall services;
2.   Adult businesses;
3.   Seminude entertainment businesses;
4.   Seminude dancing agency. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-090: LICENSE FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall be
required to pay regulatory license fees as set forth in the consolidated fee
schedule. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-100: LICENSE; BOND:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall post, with the
community development director, a cash or corporate surety bond payable to
Draper City in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any fines
assessed against the business, officers, or managers for violations of city
ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10)
days after notice of the fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this
chapter. In the event the funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to
pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against
it. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-110: LICENSE; PREMISES LOCATION AND NAME:
A.   It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to this
chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to which
telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall require a
separate license.
B.   It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in the
city under any name other than the business name specified in the application.
(Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-120: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A.   Sexually Oriented Business; Issuance; Referral For Investigation: Upon the
filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the
director shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application
shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for investigation to
be made on the information contained in the application. The application
process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of the
completed application. After the investigation, the director shall issue an
employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence
that one or more of the following findings is true:
1.   The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
2.   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years; or
3.   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity", as
defined herein; or
4.   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
5.   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary
license previously issued is immediately rendered null and void. Denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall
be subject to appeal as forth in subsection I of this section.
B.   Content Of License: A license issued pursuant to subsection A of this
section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it
is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented
business. While engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually
oriented business premises, an employee shall, at all times, possess the
license in such manner as to be available for immediate inspection upon lawful
request.
C.   Annual Review: A license issued pursuant to subsection A of this section
shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the
applicant and a finding by the director that the applicant has not been
convicted of any "specified criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, or
committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be
grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew
a license shall be made within thirty (30) days of the completed application.
The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section
6-5-090 of this chapter. Nonrenewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as
set forth in subsection I of this section.
D.   Operator's License: If application is made for a sexually oriented
business operator's license, the director shall approve or deny issuance of the
license within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application. The
director shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:
1.   An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
2.   An applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
3.   An applicant has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually
oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or whose license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding
twelve (12) months;
4.   An applicant is overdue in payment to the city for taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to the sexually
oriented business for which license is sought, or the property on which the
sexually oriented business is located or will be located;
5.   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity", as
defined herein;
6.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been
approved by the health department, building department, and zoning department
as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, if such approval is
required under other sections of this chapter;
7.   The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid;
8.   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in
compliance with one or more of the provisions of this chapter.
E.   Content Of License: A license issued pursuant to subsection D of this
section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons
to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually
oriented business, and the business classification as set forth in section
6-5-080 of this chapter for which the license is issued. The license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
F.   Certification Of Premises: If so required under other sections of this
chapter, the health department, building department, and zoning department
shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the completed application by
the director. The certification shall be promptly presented to the director.
Failure of an appropriate department to timely certify its inspection shall not
be grounds for refusing to issue a license within the mandatory time period
prescribed in subsection D of this section. In the event the director fails to
render a decision on the application within the time specified herein, the
operator shall be permitted to commence operation of the business.
G.   License For One Classification: A sexually oriented business license shall
issue for only one business classification, as set forth in section
6-5-080 of this chapter.
H.   Denial: In the event that the director determines that an applicant is not
eligible for a sexually oriented operator's license, the applicant shall be
given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within thirty (30) days
of the receipt of the completed application by the director; provided, that the
applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that
such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days
in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter. Notice of
denial shall be sent to the applicant in accordance with the notice provisions
set forth in section
6-5-370 of this chapter.
I.   Appeal: An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding a
denial to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
recorder within ten (10) days from receipt of the notice of denial. The notice
of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out
fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The
director may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of filing of the notice of
appeal, submit a responsive memorandum to the city council. After reviewing
such memoranda, as well as the director's written decision, if any, and
exhibits submitted to the director, the city council shall vote either to
uphold or overrule the director's decision. Such vote shall be taken within
twenty one (21) calendar days after the date on which the city recorder
receives the notice of appeal. The status quo immediately prior to denial of
the license shall be maintained during the pendency of the appeal. Judicial
review of a denial by the director and city council may be made pursuant to
section
6-5-170 of this chapter. The status quo shall continue to be maintained during
the pendency of judicial review.
J.   Annual Review: A license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject
to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding
by the director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified
criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial
license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made
within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license
shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section
6-5-090 of this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-130: INSPECTION:
The city shall regularly inspect the premises of the sexually oriented business
in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. An applicant
or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department and/or health
department to inspect the premises at any time the establishment is open for
business. Such inspection shall be limited to visual assessment of the
activities conducted in areas to which patrons have access or are allowed
access; to requests for inspection of the licenses required under this chapter;
and to requests for identification of those individuals who reasonably appear
to be under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-140: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; DENIAL OF RENEWAL:
A.   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in section
6-5-070 of this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration date. When application is made less than thirty
(30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be
affected.
B.   When the director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, in the event a licensee appeals the nonrenewal of a
license, the status quo immediately prior to nonrenewal shall be maintained
throughout the pendency of the appeal, up to and including judicial review on
the merits as set forth in section
6-5-170 of this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-150: SUSPENSION:
The director shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days if he or she determines that licensee or an employee of licensee has:
A.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
B.   Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while
intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances;
C.   Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
D.   With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
A licensee may appeal the revocation of a license to the city council in
accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection
6-5-120I of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section,
in the event a licensee appeals the suspension of a license, the status quo
immediately prior to suspension shall be maintained throughout the pendency of
the appeal, up to and including judicial review on the merits as set forth in
section
6-5-170 of this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-160: REVOCATION:
A.   Authority: The director shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in
section
6-5-150 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
proceeding twelve (12) months.
B.   Conditions For Revocation: The director shall revoke a license if he or
she determines that:
1.   A licensee gave materially false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
2.   A licensee was convicted of a "specified criminal activity" on a charge
that was pending prior to the issuance of the license;
3.   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
4.   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises;
5.   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the premises;
6.   A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
7.   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or
on the licensed premises;
8.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties relating to the sexually oriented business or the
premises thereon;
9.   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person under eighteen (18)
years of age to enter or remain in the establishment;
10.   A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold,
assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business
to a nonlicensee of the establishment; or
11.   A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to engage
in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
C.   Term Of Revocation; Appeal: When the director revokes a license, the
revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a
license for one year from the date revocation became effective. A licensee may
appeal the revocation of a license to the city council in accordance with the
procedure set forth in subsection
6-5-120I of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
in the event the licensee appeals the revocation of a license, the status quo
immediately prior to revocation shall be maintained throughout the pendency of
the appeal, up to and including judicial review on the merits as set forth in
section
6-5-170 of this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-170: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Within thirty (30) days of a denial of an initial or renewal application by the
director and city council, or suspension or revocation of a license by the
director, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such
administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 565, 3-9-
2004)
6-5-180: NO TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A.   A licensee shall not transfer his/her employee license to another, nor
shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application and
set forth in the operator's license.
B.   An operator's license shall not be transferable from one location to
another. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-190: LICENSE DISPLAY:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the
boundaries of the city to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this
chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful
for any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter to fail to carry, at all
times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of
the city, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude,
such license shall be visibly displayed within the same room the employee is
performing. When requested by police, city licensing or other enforcement
personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the appropriate
licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries
of the city. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-200: LICENSE; STATEMENT IN ADVERTISEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or
employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the
city, and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-210: REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to:
A.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed
premises, except that in adult businesses which exclude minors from less than
all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas;
B.   Allow, offer, or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons under
the age of eighteen (18) years;
C.   Allow, offer, or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used, or
consumed on or in the licensed premises;
D.   Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any customer is
in the premises;
E.   Allow, offer, or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
F.   Allow, offer, or agree to any sexually oriented business employee touching
any patron or customer; except that outcall employees and customers may touch,
except that any touching of specified anatomical area, whether clothed or
unclothed, is prohibited;
G.   Allow, offer, or agree to illegal possession, use, sale, or distribution
of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
H.   Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell, or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business;
I.   Allow, offer, or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities harmful to a
minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall employee
or business, the outcall employee committing, offering, or agreeing to commit
prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution,
soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
J.   Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any sex act as validly defined by city
ordinances or state statute in the presence of any customer or patron;
K.   Allow, offer, or agree to any employee appearing before any customer or
patron in a state of nudity;
L.   Allow, offer, or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in the
presence of a sexually oriented business employee or on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
M.   Appear in a state of nudity before a patron on the premises of a sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-220: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee to provide outcall services
contracted for in the city to fail to comply with the following requirements:
A.   Written Contract Required: All businesses licensed to provide outcall
services pursuant to this chapter shall provide to each patron a written
contract in receipt of pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall
clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such
services shall be performed, the total amount such services shall cost the
patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be
performed. The contract need not include the name of the patron. The business
licensee shall keep and maintain a copy of each written contract entered into
pursuant to this section for a period not less than one year from the date of
provision of services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered
into a register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees
involved in the contract, and pecuniary compensation paid.
B.   Office Maintained: All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this
chapter shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the licensee or
licensee's designated agent may be personally contacted during all hours
outcall employees are working. The address and phone number of the license
location shall appear and be included in all patron contracts and published
advertisements. For outcall businesses which premises are licensed within the
corporate limits of the city, private rooms or booths where the patrons may
meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open office or any
other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the
business premises.
C.   Prohibited Advertising: Outcall services shall not advertise in such a
manner that would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified
sexual activities would be performed by the outcall employee.
D.   Employee License Required: All employees of outcall services who provide
outcall services within the city shall be licensed in accordance with this
chapter, regardless of the primary location of the business. (Ord. 565, 3-9-
2004)
6-5-230: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS:
A.   Rebuttable Presumption: Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel,
or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two (2) or more
times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the enterprise is an "adult motel", as that term is defined in
this chapter.
B.   License Required: It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of
a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does
not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or subrents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented,
he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C.   Terms Defined: For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms
"rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any
form of consideration.
D.   Penalty: Violation of subsection B of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-240: ADULT BUSINESS; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
A.   Design, Construction: In addition to the general requirements of
disclosure for a sexually oriented business, any applicant for a license as an
adult business shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of
the license. The design and construction, prior to granting a license or
opening for business, shall conform to the following:
1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
2.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of the
business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person being
allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time,
and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's station
areas.
3.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all windows,
doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or otherwise
constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the inside of
the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the
premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into the
area from which they are excluded.
4.   The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional engineer's or
architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked internal
dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for illumination
capacity.
B.   Unobstructed View From Manager's Station: It shall be the duty of the
licensee and the licensee's employees to ensure that the views from the
manager's station in subsection A1 of this section remain unobstructed by any
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or any other materials at all times
that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted.
C.   Lighting: The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
foot-candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and
the licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-250: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS AND
VIDEOS:
A.   Requirements: A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in
a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space,
a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the
following requirements:
1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The director may waive the foregoing diagram
for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since said diagram was prepared.
2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may
be made without the prior approval of the director or his designee.
4.   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that
at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
5.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
6.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area
specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed at all times.
No doors, walls, partitions, curtains, merchandise, display racks, or other
object(s) shall obstruct from view of the manager's station any portion of the
premises to which patrons have access. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the
premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to subsection A1 of
this section.
7.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as measured at
the floor level.
8.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
9.   No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
10.   No opening of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths.
11.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of
any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no more than
one person at a time occupies a viewing booths or rooms, and to ensure that no
person attempts to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or
rooms.
12.   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, each business day,
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
13.   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor
coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting.
14.   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall
surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty eight
inches (48") of the floor.
B.   Violation: A person having a duty under subsections A1 through A14 of this
section is in violation of this chapter if he/she, with knowledge, fails to
fulfill that duty. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-260: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
A.   Unlawful Designs: It is unlawful for business premises licensed for
seminude entertainment to:
1.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress, or similar item in any room on the premises,
except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public or in
any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in an adult
theater such items may be on the stage as part of a performance;
2.   Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the door to
an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors, and restroom
doors to be lockable from the inside;
3.   Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patron or
patrons are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier at
least three feet (3') high and six inches (6") wide. The patron or patrons
shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall
remain on the other side of the barrier.
B.   Separation Of Performance Area: Adult theaters shall also require that the
performance area shall be separated from the patrons by a minimum of three feet
(3'), which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three
feet (3') high. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-270: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; LOCATION RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful for any business licensed for seminude entertainment to be
located within five hundred feet (500') of a business licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-280: SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCIES:
A.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or otherwise
engage the services of a professional dancer, model, or performer to appear in
a state of seminudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any seminude
entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this chapter,
unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
B.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or otherwise
engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer, model, or
performer in a state of seminudity or nudity, either gratuitously or for
compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, unless
such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-290: PERFORMERS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model, or performer, while
performing in any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, to:
A.   Appear before any customer or patron in a state of nudity;
B.   Touch in any manner any other person;
C.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
D.   Accept any money, drink, or any other object directly from any person;
E.   Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or
object on the performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or
F.   Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while
performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity. (Ord. 565, 3-9-
2004)
6-5-300: PATRONS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any business to touch in any
manner any performer; to place any money or object on or within the costume or
person of any performer; or to give or offer to give any such performer any
drinks, money, or object while such performer is performing; except that money
may be placed on the stage, which shall not be picked up by the performer
except by hand. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-310: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of the provisions codified in
this chapter and regardless of whether such persons and businesses are
currently licensed to do business in the city:
A.   Outcall Services: All such persons and businesses requiring outcall
service licenses shall have forty five (45) days from the effective date of the
ordinance codified herein, or until their current license expires, whichever is
first in time, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   Seminude Dancing Agencies: All seminude dancing agency licenses shall have
seventy five (75) days from the effective date of the ordinance codified
herein, or until their license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
C.   Adult Businesses, Seminude Entertainment Businesses: All adult businesses
and seminude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred thirty five (135)
days from the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or until their
current license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-320: EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A.   Visibility Limited: It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a
sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the
establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment.
B.   Exterior Representations: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator
of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually
oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner
except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
C.   Building Color: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a
sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to
be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall
not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:
1.   The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
2.   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit
center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same
color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of
the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
D.   Painting Not Required: Nothing in this article shall be construed to
require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-330: SIGNAGE:
A.   Regulations; Conflicts: In addition to applicable city ordinances
regarding signs, the following sign regulations shall apply to all sexually
oriented businesses within the city. In the event of conflict between the
provisions of this section and the provisions of the city sign ordinances, the
more restrictive provisions shall apply. Notwithstanding any other city
ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect,
construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than
the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided herein.
B.   Primary Signs: Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display
surfaces. Each such display surface shall:
1.   Not contain any flashing lights;
2.   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
3.   Not exceed seventy five (75) square feet in area; and
4.   Not exceed ten feet (10') in height or ten feet (10') in length.
C.   Primary Signs: Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the
name of the enterprise.
D.   Lettering; Background: Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall
be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print type, size and
color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary
sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
E.   Secondary Signs: Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such
display surface shall:
1.   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
2.   Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
3.   Not exceed five feet (5') in height and four feet (4') in width; and
4.   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
F.   Additional Applicability To Secondary Signs: The provisions of subsections
B1, C and D of this section shall also apply to secondary signs. (Ord. 565, 3-
9-2004)
6-5-340: MASSAGES OR BATHS ADMINISTERED BY PERSON OF OPPOSITE SEX:
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
in a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, massage parlor
or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of
such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-350: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:
00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays. No sexually oriented business shall open
for business or remain open for business on Sunday or any legal holiday
recognized by the state of Utah. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-360: EXEMPTIONS:
A.   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing
in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1.   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Utah, a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
B.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, movies rated G, PG,
PG-13, or R, by the Motion Picture Association Of America (MPAA), or live
theatrical performances with serious artistic, social, or political value, that
depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities,
are expressly exempted from regulation under this chapter. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-370: NOTICES:
A.   Personal Delivery Or Certified Mail: Any notice required or permitted to
be given by the director or any other city office, division, department or
other agency under this chapter to any applicant, operator or owner of a
sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by
certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the
license, or any notice of address change that has been received by the
director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon signature for
receipt. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal
service, the director or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the
principal entrance to the establishment. Notice by posting shall be deemed
given twenty four (24) hours from time of posting.
B.   Notice To Director: Any notice required or permitted to be given to the
director by any person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and
unless it is received in the office of the director.
C.   Notification Of Changes To Director: It shall be the duty of each owner
who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish
notice to the director in writing of any change of residence or mailing
address. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-380: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid operator's license, or in violation of section
6-5-060 of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so
operates is a separate offense or violation. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-390: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, or clause of this chapter shall be deemed to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections,
subsections, and clauses shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
6-5-400: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein or provided by law, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, subject to fines, forfeitures, penalties and/or imprisonment as
provided by law. (Ord. 565, 3-9-2004)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-6-010: Definitions
6-6-020: Sale, Discharge And Possession Of Fireworks Restricted
6-6-030: Application For License To Sell Fireworks
6-6-040: Posting Of License And Map
6-6-050: Enforcement
6-6-060: Temporary Stands, Trailers, And Tents
6-6-010: DEFINITIONS:
All words used in this chapter shall mean the same as they are defined in Utah
Code Annotated 53-7-202, as amended. (Ord. 969, 5-3-2011)
6-6-020: SALE, DISCHARGE AND POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED:
A.   License Required: It is unlawful and shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor for any person to sell or offer for retail sale any fireworks
without first obtaining a license from the city and paying the required
regulatory fee as set forth in the city's consolidated fee schedule.
B.   Permitted Fireworks: It is a class B misdemeanor for any person to sell,
offer for retail sale, discharge, or have in their possession any fireworks in
Draper City, other than class C common state approved explosives as authorized
by Utah Code Annotated 53-7-201 et seq., as amended, the rules adopted by the
Utah fire prevention board pursuant thereto, and this chapter, except as
otherwise permitted by state law.
C.   Discharge Distance To Structures: It shall be unlawful to discharge any
fireworks within twenty feet (20') of any residence, dwelling or other
structure.
D.   Prohibited Discharge In Specified Areas: Due to perennial extreme
hazardous fire conditions in certain portions of Draper City, the City Council
in consultation with the Draper City fire chief, shall determine boundaries
where fireworks are prohibited based on historical hazardous environmental
conditions. A map showing the boundaries for discharge of fireworks in Draper
City with any changes shall be published by June 1 of each calendar year, and
shall be maintained for public inspection at City Hall.
E.   Displays Require Permit: It is unlawful and shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor for any person to discharge display fireworks, special effects, or
flame effects performances, without first receiving a Draper City permit
therefor. Evidence shall also be provided that the display operator, special
effects operator, or flame effects operator who will set up and discharge the
display has received a license from the state fire marshal, division department
of public safety. The operator shall also provide a certificate of insurance
naming the city as an additional insured in the minimum amount of three million
dollars ($3,000,000.00) for flame effects or five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) for firework displays and special effects.
F.   Sky Lanterns And Similar Devices Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and
shall constitute a class B misdemeanor for any person to discharge or launch a
"sky lantern" or similar type of unmanned fire. "Sky lantern" means a small
unmanned hot air balloon with an opening at the bottom where a fire is
suspended. "Sky lanterns" are sometimes called "Chinese lanterns", "sky
candles" or "fire balloons" and usually consist of a wire frame with a paper
shell and a candle or other fuel, by which the burning candle or fuel creates
hot air that makes the lantern float and glow. (Ord. 1052, 6-18-2013; amd. Ord.
1444, 7-7-2020; Ord. 1654, 6-17-2025)
6-6-030: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE TO SELL FIREWORKS:
A.   Requirements: All applications for a license to sell fireworks shall:
1.   Set forth the proposed location where the fireworks are to be sold and
whether the location is a temporary stand, trailer, tent, or permanent
structure;
2.   Be accompanied by certificates of insurance evidencing:
a.   Liability coverage in the minimum amounts of two hundred thousand dollars/
four hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00/$400,000.00), property damage
coverage in the minimum amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00)
with each naming the city as an additional insured;
b.   Products liability coverage in a minimum amount of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00);
c.   A statement that Draper City will be given ten (10) days' written notice
prior to any cancellation of the insurance by the insurance company; and
3.   Be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's Utah sales tax license.
B.   Time To File Application: Applications shall be made at least three (3)
business days prior to when the applicant wishes to begin selling fireworks
within the time constraints set forth in state law. (Ord. 969, 5-3-2011)
6-6-040: POSTING OF LICENSE AND MAP:
A.   License Display Required: Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in a temporary stand, trailer or tent, and in
a conspicuous place in the vicinity of the fireworks in a permanent structure.
B.   Presentation Upon Request: The city license shall be available for
presentation upon request to duly authorized officials.
C.   Map Display Required: A map showing the boundaries for discharge of
fireworks in Draper City shall be posted at all retail fireworks locations.
(Ord. 969, 5-3-2011)
6-6-050: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Responsibility Of Officials: Every officer charged with the enforcement of
state and city laws, including the fire marshal, is hereby charged with
responsibility to enforce this chapter.
B.   Seizure And Destruction; Revocation Of License: Fireworks sold or offered
for sale in violation of this chapter may be seized and destroyed and the
license of the person selling or offering fireworks for sale may be revoked.
C.   Violation; Nonrenewal: Any violation of this chapter may serve as a basis
for nonrenewal of a license in future years. (Ord. 969, 5-3-2011)
6-6-060: TEMPORARY STANDS, TRAILERS, AND TENTS:
A.   Building Code Applicability: Temporary stands, trailers, and tents used
for the retail sale of fireworks shall meet the requirements of the latest
edition of the building code adopted by the city. Each licensee shall pay the
inspection fee and each licensed premises shall be inspected prior to any
sales.
B.   Removal: Temporary fireworks stands, trailers, and tents shall be removed
within seven (7) days after the fireworks sales period has ended. (Ord. 969, 5-
3-2011)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC RECREATION LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 1187, 2-2-2016)
CHAPTER 8
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
6-8-010: Purpose
6-8-020: Definitions
6-8-030: Unregistered Solicitation Prohibited
6-8-040: Exemptions From Registration
6-8-050: Application For Certificate Of Registration, Review, Issuance, Denial
6-8-060: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
6-8-070: "No Soliciting" Notices
6-8-080: Application For Badge Of Registration, Review, Issuance, Denial
6-8-090: Time Of Day
6-8-100: Right To Cancel Residential Solicitation Sale
6-8-110: Penalties
6-8-120: Private Right Of Action
6-8-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect Draper City residents from
unreasonable intrusions upon residential privacy, consumer fraud, and
deceptive, high pressure, factually unbalanced, or otherwise unfair consumer
sales practices in a manner consistent with the constitutional rights of
residential commercial solicitors to communicate their messages to willing
residential listeners. (Ord. 748, 3-13-2007; amd. Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: A person or organization that applies for a badge of registration.
APPLICATION: The form provided by the city to apply for a badge of registration
or the process of applying for a badge of registration.
BADGE OF REGISTRATION (or “BADGE”): The authorization to engage in commercial
solicitation from the community development department of Draper City.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: A sale of goods or services in which a person initiates
contact and engages in a face-to-face solicitation of the sale at a residence
and the resident's agreement or offer to purchase is there given to a person.
"Home solicitation sale" shall not include a sale made between parties at a
business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered
or exhibited for sale, or a sale made within a residence to a third person
invited therein by the resident where such sale was not initiated by
unsolicited contact by a nonresident of the residence.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person registered pursuant to this chapter who has
obtained a valid badge of registration from the community development
department of Draper City.
RESIDENCE AND RESIDENTIAL: Any:
A.   Living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by
any person as a dwelling in conformity with the zoning laws of Draper City,
together with the lot or other real property on which such residence is
located;
B.   Any apartment, nursing home room, assisted living home room, group home,
or other similar location; or
C.   Any building or structure that houses the residence, together with the lot
or other real property on which such building or structure is located.
RESIDENT: Any person living in a residence.
SOLICIT, SOLICITED, SOLICITING OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities
engaged in with a resident person-to-person at his or her place of residence:
A.   Seeking to obtain orders for or the direct sale or exchange of services,
goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of
remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, financial services, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money, services, or anything of value
for the benefit of any person, association, organization, corporation, or
program;
D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services;
or
E.   Seeking to obtain appointments or other opportunities to engage in any of
the activities listed in subsections A through D of this definition.
SOLICITOR: A person engaged in soliciting residents at their residences. (Ord.
748, 3-13-2007; amd. Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-030: UNREGISTERED SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Badge Of Registration Required: All persons desiring to engage in soliciting
within Draper City who are not exempt under section 6-8-040 of this chapter
shall obtain from the Draper City business license official a badge of
registration as solicitor prior to starting to solicit. The executed original
of this badge of registration shall be maintained by the business license
official, and a legible copy shall be worn by the registered solicitor at all
times while soliciting in the city and shall be produced for inspection upon
the request of any resident being solicited or any Draper City police officer.
(Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-040: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGISTRATION:
The following activities are exempt from the registration requirements of
section
6-8-030 of this chapter:
A.   Invited Solicitation: Solicitation which occurs as the result of a
resident's prior and express invitation to the solicitor to come onto such
resident's property. An invited solicitation shall not include the circumstance
where the resident invites back a solicitor who initiated the contact with the
resident at the residence. A resident's failure to post a "No Soliciting"
notice in accordance with section
6-8-070 of this chapter shall not be construed as an exemption from
registration under this section, as an invitation to solicitation by such
resident, or as an expression of such resident's desire to hear or receive
solicitations.
B.   Noncommercial Solicitation: Solicitation which occurs as an incident to
political, religious, or other noncommercial door to door canvassing,
pamphleteering, or other dissemination of ideas.
C.   State Regulated Charitable Solicitation: Solicitation on behalf of:
1.   A charitable organization as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 13-22-
2(2)(a); or
2.   An organization listed in Utah Code Annotated section 13-22-8(1);
provided, that:
a.   The solicitor claiming this exemption or the charitable organization has
provided written verification of the organization’s charitable status to the
Draper City business license official prior to the commencement of solicitation
within the city;
b.   The principal or other person authorized by the school under 13-22-8(1)(g)
or the applicable school district shall provide written notice to the city that
the school or school district has approved the solicitation prior to the
commencement of solicitation with the city; and
c.   Any solicitor relying on this exemption shall carry photo identification
showing the nature of affiliation with the charitable or other organization
exempt from registration under this subsection on whose behalf he is
soliciting.
D.   Burden Of Proof: Any solicitor claiming an exemption under this section
shall bear the burden of proving his or her eligibility for, or the
applicability of, the exemption claimed. (Ord. 748, 3-13-2007; amd. Ord. 1584,
9-12-2023)
6-8-050: APPLICATION FOR BADGE OF REGISTRATION, REVIEW, ISSUANCE, DENIAL:
A.   Information And Documents Required: The Draper City business license
official shall provide a standard application form. The applicant shall state
upon oath or affirmation that the information is truthfully provided to the
best of the knowledge and belief of the applicant.
B.   Incorrect Or Incomplete Information: If any information contained in the
application for registration becomes incorrect or incomplete, the applicant or
registered solicitor shall correct the application within thirty (30) days.
C.   Fees: The applicant shall pay application and processing fees as
reasonable administrative costs incurred by the city to process an application
and maintain the related records.
D.   Grounds For Denial: A badge of registration shall not be issued if:
1.   The applicant has falsified information on the application;
2.   The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon fraud,
deceit, misrepresentation, false statements, or dishonesty has been entered
within five (5) years of the date of application;
3.   The applicant has, within the past five (5) years, been enjoined by any
court, or is the subject of an administrative order issued in this or another
state, if the injunction or order includes a finding or admission of fraud,
material misrepresentation, or if the injunction or order was based on a
finding of lack of integrity or truthfulness;
4.   The applicant has been convicted of any felony, or a misdemeanor involving
fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false statements, or dishonesty, within five
(5) years of the date of application;
5.   The applicant is subject to registration as a sex offender under Utah law
or the corresponding law of another state, or has been criminally convicted of
violating any part of the following Utah Code chapters or the corresponding
laws of another state:
a.   76-5;
b.   76-5b;
c.   76-6 parts 2-7 or 11-13;
d.   76-6a;
e.   76-9 parts 402, 407 or 408;
f.   76-9-702.1 or 702.5; or
g.   76-10 parts 16, 18, or 24.
6.   The applicant has been denied a badge of registration under this chapter,
as amended, within the year preceding the date of application, unless the
applicant has corrected the deficiency on which the previous application was
based;
7.   The applicant has had a badge of registration under this chapter, as
amended, revoked within the year preceding the date of application, unless the
applicant has corrected the reason for which the certificate was revoked;
8.   The applicant's badge of registration has been revoked within the year
preceding the date of application for violation of the nontransferability
provision of this chapter, as amended;
9.   The applicant has failed to supply any of the documents or information
listed in this section, or has failed to pay any of the fees set by the city in
accordance with this chapter; or
10.   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of this chapter, as
amended, within one year preceding the date of application.
E.   Proof Of Identification Required: No badge of registration shall be issued
to any applicant until the applicant submits one of the following to establish
proof of identification:
1.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
2.   A valid United States uniformed service identification card;
3.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
4.   Any other official document issued by the United States or any state
thereof which contains the name and photograph of the applicant.
F.   Registration Complete Upon Completion Of Application: Registration shall
be deemed complete when the license officer has received all of the information
and documents listed in this section and the applicant has paid the applicable
fee. The badge of registration shall be issued within five (5) business days
following the applicant's completion of registration, unless one of the
circumstances listed in subsection D of this section applies.
G.   Form Of Badge:
1.   Each badge of registration shall include:
a.   A badge number;
b.   The name of the individual solicitors and any organization on whose behalf
the registered solicitor is authorized to solicit, and the date on which the
badge of registration expires;
c.   The signature of the business license official or his or her authorized
designee;
d.   A solicitor-supplied photograph of the solicitor approximately one and
one-half inches by one inch (1-1/2" x 1") that was taken within one year
preceding the issuance of the badge of registration.
2.   All badges are and remain the property of the city.
3.   By issuing a badge of registration, the city does not guarantee the
accuracy of any representation contained in the application for registration or
the badge of registration, nor does it warrant that any statement made by the
registered solicitor is truthful. The city makes no certification as to the
worthiness of any organization, its products or services, on whose behalf a
solicitation is made nor as to the moral character of the registered solicitor.
4.   The following statement shall appear on each badge of registration:
DRAPER CITY MAKES NO CERTIFICATION AS TO THE WORTHINESS OF ANY ORGANIZATION OR
ITS PRODUCTS OR SERVICES ON WHOSE BEHALF A SOLICITATION IS MADE NOR AS TO THE
MORAL CHARACTER OF THE REGISTERED SOLICITOR.
5.   Each solicitor must prominently wear the badge of registration at all
times while the solicitor is engaged in soliciting.
H.   Renewal: A badge of registration shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of issuance. Any registered solicitor in good standing may renew
a badge of registration for an additional period of not to exceed one year. An
applicant desiring to obtain a badge of registration upon expiration shall make
a new application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and pay any
applicable fee as set by the city from time to time; provided, however, that
the total of any such fee shall not exceed reasonable administrative costs
incurred by the city to process the certificate of registration renewal and
maintain the related records. A registered solicitor is not in good standing if
he satisfies one or more grounds for denial or revocation within the meaning of
this chapter.
I.   Nontransferability: Badges of registration shall be issued only in the
name of the applicant and the firm, corporation or association on whose behalf
the applicant is authorized to solicit. The badge of registration is
nontransferable. It is a violation of this chapter for a solicitor to solicit
on behalf of any other person or firm, organization, or association not
specified on the badge of registration or for any purpose other than that
specified in the application. Any certificate of registration used by a person
other than the person to whom it was originally issued is void, and the city is
authorized to confiscate and immediately cancel any such certificate of
registration.
J.   Badge Registry: The business license official shall maintain a registry of
all badges of registration issued, and all pending and denied application. Each
new application shall be numbered in consecutive order and each badge of
registration issued shall be assigned a number exclusive to the registered
solicitor. The business license official shall furnish to the chief of police
or the director of public safety a listing of all badges of registration issued
and renewed and such chief or director shall maintain such listing for public
inspection and for identification.
K.   Revocation Of Certificate: Any certificate of registration shall be
revoked if, the registered solicitor is convicted of a violation that would
serve as grounds of denial of a badge of registration under subsection D of
this section. The business license official shall immediately provide notice of
revocation to the registered solicitor by personal service or certified mail to
the address listed on the application and, if applicable, to the organization
for which the registered solicitor was soliciting. The notice shall set forth
the factual basis for the revocation and shall outline the licensee’s right to
appeal the decision of revocation and the appeal procedure. Immediately upon
giving notice, the badge of registration shall become void and shall remain so
until the revocation is rescinded. Upon receiving notice of revocation of any
badge of registration, the registered solicitor shall return the related badge
to the city.
L.   Appeal of Decision to Deny or Revoke a Badge of Registration: The appeal
procedure shall follow the same process outlined in chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-060: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
A.   False, Misleading Statements: No solicitor shall make any materially
false, misleading, or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
B.   Disclosure Required: A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the
resident at the beginning of any face-to-face solicitation, either verbally or
by means of a writing to be handed to the resident: 1) the name of the
solicitor; 2) the name and address of the entity with whom the solicitor is
associated or for which the solicitor is soliciting; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the resident.
C.   Use Of Legal Name Required: No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an
alias, or any name other than his or her legal name.
D.   Represent Endorsement By City Prohibited: No solicitor shall represent
directly or by implication that the city endorses the solicitation, or that the
granting of a badge of registration implies endorsement by the city of the
solicitor or his or her product or service. (Ord. 748, 3-13-2007; amd. Ord.
1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-070: "NO SOLICITING" NOTICES:
A.   Permitted: Any resident may give notice of his or her unwillingness to
listen to solicitations or receive solicitors by displaying at his or her
residence a placard or sign no smaller than sixteen (16) square inches stating
"No Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Trespassing" or words of similar import
on or near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to
the sidewalk leading to the residence.
B.   Applicability: The display of a "No Soliciting" or similar sign or placard
shall constitute notice to any solicitor that the resident is unwilling to
listen to solicitations. (Ord. 748, 3-13-2007; amd. Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-080: CERTAIN SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED:
A.   Obligation To Check For Posting: It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any solicitor to attempt to solicit at a residence at or on which has been
posted a "No Soliciting" sign or placard in accordance with section
6-8-070 of this chapter. All solicitors are under the legal obligation to
affirmatively check each residence for any such sign or placard. If such sign
or placard is posted, a solicitor shall desist from any efforts to solicit at
the residence and shall immediately depart therefrom.
B.   Violation When Posted: It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor
to knock on the door, ring the door bell, or in any other manner attempt to
attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No
Soliciting" or similar sign or placard. It is a violation of this chapter for
any solicitor through ruse, deception, or concealment of a purpose to solicit,
to take action calculated to secure an audience with the occupant of a
residence that has posted a "No Soliciting" or similar sign or placard.
C.   Failure To Depart: It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor who
is at any time asked by the resident to leave, to fail to immediately and
peacefully depart. (Ord. 748, 3-13-2007)
6-8-090: TIME OF DAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a registered solicitor or not, to
solicit any person at a residence before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on business days, or before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays as
set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-1-301, unless the solicitor has
express prior permission from the resident to do so. (Ord. 748, 3-13-2007; amd.
Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-100: RIGHT TO CANCEL RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION SALE:
In any residential solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the seller to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the solicitor shall
present to the resident and obtain resident's signature to a written statement
which informs the resident of his or her unconditional right to cancel the sale
on or before the third business day after the date of sale. Any documents
memorializing the sale shall accurately set forth the date of the sale. Such
notice of "buyer's right to cancel" shall be in the form required by Utah Code
Annotated section 70C-5-103, or a current or amended version thereof or any
state or federal law modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 748, 3-13-
2007; amd. Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-110: PENALTIES:
Any person who engages in soliciting without complying with the requirements of
this chapter or violates any other terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed
six (6) months. (Ord. 1584, 9-12-2023)
6-8-120: PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION:
A resident who has suffered injury or damage as the result of violation of this
chapter shall have the right to bring a civil action for damages against the
violator in the appropriate court within the state of Utah. (Ord. 748, 3-13-
2007)
CHAPTER 9
EVENTS CHARGING ADMISSION OR WITH VENDORS MAKING TAXABLE SALES
SECTION:
6-9-010: Definitions
6-9-020: Events Charging Admission Or Hosting Vendors
6-9-010: DEFINITIONS:
SPECIAL EVENT BUSINESS LICENSE: Business license issued to the event organizer
which authorizes (1) the event organizer to hold the event; and (2) all vendors
making taxable sales to participate in the event.
EVENT: Any athletic event, City event, entertainment event, filming event,
large scale event, block party, political event, or outdoor sales event,
whether held for profit, nonprofit or charitable purposes held on private or
public property within the city.
EVENT ORGANIZER: Individual or business in charge of administering the event.
(Ord. 1587, 10-17-2023)
6-9-020: EVENTS CHARGING ADMISSION OR HOSTING VENDORS:
   A.   A special event business license must be obtained before any event is
held which charges admission or where taxable sales occur. The event organizer
shall apply for the special event business license at least two weeks prior to
the event on a form provided by the city. The event organizer shall fill out
the application in full and sign it as verification under penalty of law that
all information contained therein is true.
   B.   The event organizer shall pay the required license fee and any
additional fee as set forth in the city's consolidated fee schedule unless
exempted by ordinance or other applicable local, state or federal law. No fee
shall be assessed for a City event as defined in section
15-4-030.
   C.   The special event business license may only be issued upon the
submission of a complete application, payment of any applicable license fee,
the issuance of temporary sales tax licenses by the Utah State Tax Commission
to all applicable vendors, and issuance of a special event permit to the event
organizer unless exempted by section
15-4-040.
D.   The certificate of license shall be signed by the license official and the
mayor. (Ord. 1587, 10-17-2023)
CHAPTER 10
CABLE TV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
6-10-010: License Required
6-10-010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any vendor who is to provide a cable TV service or franchise for the city shall
be required to obtain a license under the terms of this title and to enter into
a TV franchise agreement with the city in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in title 5, "Revenue And Finance", of this code. (Ord.
260B, 12-16-1997)
CHAPTER 11
HOME OCCUPATION
SECTION:
6-11-010: Definition And Scope
6-11-020: License Required
6-11-030: Conditional Use
6-11-040: Penalty
6-11-010: DEFINITION AND SCOPE:
The term "home occupation" means a commercial or other nonresidential use
conducted within a dwelling unit, as more particularly defined in section
9-3-040 of this code, and regulated by title 9, chapter 34 of this code. Any
home occupation must meet the terms and conditions of this chapter and all
applicable provisions of the Draper City zoning ordinance, including, but not
limited to, the terms and provisions of title 9, chapter 34 of this code. Any
violation of such provisions shall be deemed a violation of any business
license issued hereunder. (Ord. 689, 6-27-2006)
6-11-020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A business license shall be required of any person who conducts a home
occupation. Any such person shall apply for a business license before the
business license official as is designated by the city and shall pay all
applicable business license fee and any additional fee as set forth in the
city's consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 689, 6-27-2006)
6-11-030: CONDITIONAL USE:
If any home occupation requires a conditional use permit as provided in title
9, chapter 34 of this code, approval of such conditional use permit shall be
obtained prior to issuance of any business license for the home occupation.
(Ord. 689, 6-27-2006)
6-11-040: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions or restrictions of this chapter shall be a
class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 689, 6-27-2006)
CHAPTER 12
FOOD AND FOOD DEALERS
SECTION:
6-12-010: City-County Health Department Regulations
6-12-020: Definitions
6-12-030: License; Required Fee
6-12-040: License; Application And Issuance
6-12-050: License; Revocation Conditions
6-12-060: Violation; Penalty
6-12-010: CITY-COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS:
The provisions of the Salt Lake City-County health department, health
regulation no. 5, entitled "food service establishments" as currently adopted
by the Salt Lake City-County board of health under authority of Utah Code
Annotated section 26-22-20, as amended, are hereby incorporated in their
entirety by reference. Three (3) copies of the current regulations shall be
filed with and retained by the city recorder of Draper City and with the Salt
Lake City-County health department for examination by any person. (Ord. 237, 6-
10-1997)
6-12-020: DEFINITIONS:
FOOD: As used in this chapter, means and includes beverages.
FOOD DEALER: As used in this chapter, means and includes every person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of selling food at retail for human
consumption. (Ord. 237, 6-10-1997)
6-12-030: LICENSE; REQUIRED FEE:
It is unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business without having
first secured a city business license. Application for such licenses shall be
made in compliance with the general provisions of these ordinances relating
thereto, and it shall be stated thereon the kind of food intended to be handled
or sold. (Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-12-040: LICENSE; APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
All applications for a license to conduct a business connected with the
storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall be referred to the Salt Lake City-County health department,
which shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be
used, and report its findings thereon, recommending or advising against the
issuance of the license. Providing the health department deems it advisable to
issue a license, the department shall issue a permit to the applicant which
shall be presented to the city business license official with the application
for a license to conduct business, and no such license shall be issued unless
accompanied by the permit. (Ord. 237, 6-10-1997)
6-12-050: LICENSE; REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
Any food dealer's license may be revoked for repeated violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or for violation of any other ordinance provision
or applicable law relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the
premises, the articles sold, or the license required. (Ord. 237, 6-10-1997)
6-12-060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter or any health regulation
incorporated into this chapter shall constitute a class B misdemeanor. Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punished as such. (Ord. 237, 6-10-1997)
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
6-13-010: Municipal Transient Room Tax Levied
6-13-020: Quarterly Tax And Report
6-13-030: Penalties
6-13-010: MUNICIPAL TRANSIENT ROOM TAX LEVIED:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 59-12-301 et seq., as amended, there is hereby
levied a municipal transient room tax equal to one percent (1%) on charges for
the accommodations and services described in Utah Code Annotated subsection 59-
12-103(1)(i), as amended, which are amounts paid or charged for tourist home,
hotel, motel, or trailer court accommodations and services that are regularly
rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. This municipal transient
room tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax levied on charges for
accommodations and services authorized by the local sales and use tax act, Utah
Code Annotated 59-12-201 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 971, 5-31-2011)
6-13-020: QUARTERLY TAX AND REPORT:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable to the state tax
commission on a quarterly basis on or before the thirtieth day of the month
immediately following the calendar quarterly period for which the tax is
imposed, or as otherwise required by the state tax commission. Every person or
business assessed a tax by this chapter shall file with the state tax
commission a tax report with applicable schedules at the same time as the tax
due date or as otherwise required by the state tax commission. (Ord. 971, 5-31-
2011)
6-13-030: PENALTIES:
Any tax or return due under this chapter which is not paid or submitted when
due shall be subject to penalties and interest as set forth in Utah Code
Annotated sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402, as amended. All penalty fees assessed
shall be in addition to any other taxes or fees payable to the city.
Additionally, nonpayment of any penalty fee imposed by this section shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of a business license. (Ord. 971, 5-31-
2011)
CHAPTER 14
MULTIPLE-FAMILY AND RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
6-14-010: Definitions
6-14-020: License Required
6-14-030: Fees
6-14-010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: Any buildings or apartment buildings so
arranged, designed, built, rented, loaned, let or hired out to be used or
occupied as the home, residence or dwelling unit of three (3) or more families
living independently of each other. This definition includes triplexes even if
the owner lives in one of the units. Note: The building code considers anything
other than single-family detached residences as multi-family dwelling units.
OWNER: The owner in fee simple of real property as shown in the records of the
Salt Lake County recorder's office, including the plural as well as the
singular, and may mean either a natural person, firm, association, partnership,
trust, corporation, company, or other entity authorized by the state of Utah,
or any combination of the foregoing.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: Any individual dwelling unit that is rented, loaned, let
or hired out to be used or occupied as a home or residence. (Ord. 590, 2-15-
2005)
6-14-020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every owner of a multiple-family dwelling unit or of four (4) or more rental
dwelling units located within the city shall obtain and maintain a business
license from the city in accordance with the application procedures of this
title. Every owner of less than four (4) rental dwelling units within the city
shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 590, 2-
15-2005)
6-14-030: FEES:
Every owner of multiple-family dwelling unit(s) or rental dwelling units
required to be licensed under this chapter shall pay the appropriate fees for
such license as set forth in the city's consolidated fee schedule and in
accordance with the provisions of this title. If there is more than one owner,
including purchases under contract, each owner shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay the business license fee. The fee shall be paid at the time of
application for a new or renewal license. The city may, in its sole discretion,
enter into a payment plan agreement with the owner alleging the license to pay
the fees required hereunder in two (2), three (3) or four (4) equal installment
payments made at regular intervals during the term of the license. Failure to
make timely payments required pursuant to a payment plan may result in the
suspension or revocation of the license and imposition of penalty fees as set
forth by the city, or as otherwise provided in the payment plan agreement.
(Ord. 590, 2-15-2005)
CHAPTER 15
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
6-15-010: Pawnbroker Defined
6-15-020: License; Bond Required
6-15-030: Hours Of Business
6-15-040: Recordkeeping Requirements
6-15-050: Records; Legibility; Access For Inspection
6-15-060: Records; Copies To Police Department
6-15-070: Receiving Items From Certain Persons Prohibited
6-15-080: Furnishing Of False Information
6-15-090: Receiving Items With Altered Identification Numbers
6-15-100: Licensee Liable For Acts Of Employees
6-15-010: PAWNBROKER DEFINED:
"Pawnbroker" means any person who loans money on deposit of personal property,
or deals in the purchase, exchange of possession of personal property on
condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or who
loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage
security thereon and takes or receives such personal property into his or her
possession, and who sells the unredeemed pledges, together with such new
merchandise as will facilitate the sale of same. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord.
364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-020: LICENSE; BOND REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued to a pawnbroker under the provisions of this
chapter, the applicant for such license shall execute and deliver to the city a
bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), executed by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in the state of Utah, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of such licensee of all ordinances of the city respecting
pawnbrokers. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-030: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way of pawn or
pledge, or to keep his place of business open before the hour of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of any day. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998;
amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-040: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Book Maintained: It is unlawful for any person licensed by this chapter to
fail to keep upon the licensed premises a substantial and well bound book in
which he shall enter in the English language at the time of receiving any
goods, including those on consignment and including coins and currency, which
coins and currency are obtained at a price other than face value:
1.   An accurate account and description of each item received, including, but
not limited to, all names, numbers and other identifying marks, and including
all indications of ownership thereon;
2.   The amount of money paid or value of property traded;
3.   The date, both day and hour, of receiving said items;
4.   The name, address and description of the person making the transaction;
5.   A numerical identifier obtained from identification containing a
photograph of the person making the transaction. The person presenting the
identification must be the same person whose photograph appears upon the
identification;
6.   The date of sale, disposal or scrapping of the item shall be added when
the item is sold, scrapped or otherwise disposed of.
B.   Additional Information: The description required by subsections A1 and A2
of this section shall include such further information or description or
identification marks as may be required by the police department in bulletins
given to licensees from time to time.
C.   Cross Reference Record: Each licensee shall also keep a separate record
which shall be sent to the police department and which shall be cross
referenced to the book referred to in subsection A of this section, and which
shall contain, in addition to the requirements of said subsection:
1.   A certificate, accompanied by the signature of the person delivering said
item(s) that he/she has the legal right to pawn or sell said item(s);
2.   A legible fingerprint of the person making the transaction, preferably the
right thumbprint;
3.   A legible signature of the person receiving the item at time of
transaction of each item.
D.   Defacing Prohibited; Availability: No entries on any record shall be
erased, obliterated or defaced, and the receiving licensee shall keep the
record available during business hours for inspection by any city police
officer.
E.   Term Before Disposal: It is unlawful for any person to dispose of or alter
any items received for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of receiving
such items, except to return to the person originally pawning the item. Such
items shall be available for inspection by any city police officer during
reasonable business hours while in licensee's possession or control.
F.   Evidence: If requested to do so by a peace officer of the city police
department, any item delivered to the licensed business must be retained and
held, until released by the police department or placed in the custody of a
police agency to be held as evidence.
G.   Term Of Maintaining Records: The records required to be maintained by this
chapter shall be maintained by the business for a period of two (2) years from
the date of transaction. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-050: RECORDS; LEGIBILITY; ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
All entries shall be made with nonerasable ink in a legible manner. The police
department shall also be permitted to have access, during business hours, to
all premises licensed under this chapter for the purpose of the inspection of
such premises and records. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-060: RECORDS; COPIES TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful for any person licensed by this chapter to fail to submit a copy
of all entries required to be maintained by this chapter to the city police
department upon request by such agency. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-
21-2000)
6-15-070: RECEIVING ITEMS FROM CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to this chapter or any employee
of any person licensed pursuant to this chapter to receive any items from a
person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or who is either intoxicated or
obviously mentally deficient. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-080: FURNISHING OF FALSE INFORMATION:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully give the licensee or his or her
agents or employees false or misleading information which the licensee is
required by this chapter to obtain from such person. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd.
Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-090: RECEIVING ITEMS WITH ALTERED IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS:
No business licensed pursuant to this chapter shall receive any item which has
obviously had the manufacturer's serial number or an owner's personal
identification mark altered, defaced or obviously mutilated or removed. (Ord.
280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
6-15-100: LICENSEE LIABLE FOR ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
The holder of a license under this chapter is strictly liable for any and all
acts of his or her own employees for any violation by them of any provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 280, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 364, 3-21-2000)
CHAPTER 16
TEMPORARY USES
SECTION:
6-16-010: Purpose
6-16-020: Scope
6-16-030: Temporary Uses Allowed
6-16-040: Temporary Use Permits
6-16-050: Standards For Temporary Uses
6-16-060: Enforcement And Penalties
6-16-070: Exempt Organizations
6-16-080: Temporary Uses On Vacant Properties
6-16-090: Development Projects
6-16-100: Zoning Administrator Interpretation
6-16-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A.   Accommodate certain land uses which are temporary in nature and may not
otherwise be permitted;
B.   Establish procedures, rules, and regulations for conducting public events;
C.   Establish proper conditions to protect health, safety, and welfare of the
public associated with such uses and events; and
D.   Establish proper conditions to protect the owners, occupants, and users of
properties adjacent to the site of such uses and events. (Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the temporary uses and events
enumerated herein. Any building or structure not conforming to the requirements
of this chapter shall be deemed a permanent use and shall be allowed only if
such use is a permitted or conditional use in the zone where the use is
located. The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to exempt or
limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws.
(Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-030: TEMPORARY USES ALLOWED:
A.   Requirements: A temporary use shall be:
1.   An accessory use in the zone where the use is proposed to be located; and
2.   Compatible, in terms of character and intensity of use, with permitted or
conditional uses allowed in such zone.
B.   Uses Listed: The temporary uses listed in this section shall be allowed up
to the time limits specified for each use. Uses not specifically identified by
this section shall not be allowed as temporary uses. Unless otherwise specified
in this section, occurrences for temporary uses shall be determined by the
business or individual operating the use.
1.   Auctions with no outside storage may be conducted for up to three (3) days
per occurrence with no more than four (4) occurrences per year per site. Up to
two (2) occurrences may run consecutively but shall be counted as separate
occurrences. Auctions that require outdoor storage will be permitted according
to the terms and following the issuance of a special event permit.
2.   Christmas tree sales may be conducted for up to sixty (60) days per year
and shall not occupy an area greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
3.   Fireworks stands, subject to the provisions of chapter 6 of this title,
Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-225, as amended, and any necessary additional
approvals from appropriate fire agencies. Firework stands and associated areas
shall not occupy an area greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
4.   Produce stands may be conducted for up to one hundred eighty (180) days
per year.
5.   Temporary retail sales, in the form of tent or sidewalk sales events, may
be conducted for up to up to three (3) consecutive months or thirty (30) days
per occurrence, with no more than three (3) occurrences per year, subject to
the following:
a.   The sale is contained within parking areas associated with and/or the
sidewalk, exclusive of public rights of way, adjacent to the permanent business
conducting the sale;
b.   The sale provides adequate pedestrian mobility through all sidewalks and
pedestrian walkways; and
c.   The sale does not create hazards such as limited visibility or other
nuisances that could potentially result in accidents or complaints.
6.   Temporary retail sales not directly associated with a permanent business
on the site may be conducted for up to one hundred eighty (180) days per year,
subject to the following:
a.   The sales operation is contained within the parking area of an operating,
permanent business;
b.   The sales operation is conducted with the property owner's permission,
including the availability of restroom use by the permanent business for
employees and customers of the operation;
c.   The sales operation is contained within the parking lot and shall not
occupy an area greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
d.   The sales operation, including all stock and supplies, is completely
contained within an enclosed and portable structure that is temporarily placed
on the site for the time period the business is in operation, and is thereafter
removed from the property;
e.   The sales operation does not prevent or inhibit pedestrian mobility
through all sidewalks and pedestrian walkways; and
f.   The sales operation does not create hazards such as limited visibility or
other nuisances that could potentially result in accidents or complaints. (Ord.
969, 5-3-2011; amd. Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
6-16-040: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
A.   Temporary Use Permit Required: Unless exempt under the provisions of this
section, no person shall install or conduct any temporary use without obtaining
a temporary use permit issued pursuant to the requirements of section
9-5-150 of this code and the development standards of this chapter, in addition
to obtaining a temporary business license.
B.   Exemptions: Temporary use permits shall not be required for the activities
listed in this subsection:
1.   Personal garage or yard sales conducted for two (2) days or less per month
on a residential lot or parcel so long as no nuisance or traffic violations
occur.
2.   Neighborhood lemonade or drink stands conducted by residents on their own
property for passersby. (Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-050: STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES:
A.   Applicability: The standards set forth in this section shall apply to any
temporary use.
B.   Owner Approval: The owner of the property where a temporary use is
proposed must provide a written statement to the city authorizing the use prior
to commencement of the use.
C.   Access: Specific areas shall be designated for ingress and egress of
vehicular traffic and patron admission, the exclusion of persons not entitled
to entry, and the enforcement of state and local laws and ordinances to ensure
the safety of patrons, employees, and property. The adequacy of such areas
shall be based upon the type of use and the number of patrons reasonably
expected to attend the temporary use.
D.   Insurance: Temporary use permit applicants shall provide proof of
liability insurance for benefit of the city when deemed necessary by the zoning
administrator for public health and safety reasons. Such insurance shall at
least:
1.   Name the city as an additional insured;
2.   Hold the city harmless from any claim arising from personal injury or
property damage resulting from the temporary use; and
3.   Provide that the insurance cannot be canceled prior to giving the city at
least ten (10) days' written notice of such cancellation.
E.   Parking: All parking for a temporary use must be accommodated on site.
Parking for temporary uses shall not be allowed within any public right of way
or on any other public property. All ADA parking stalls and other ADA
facilities must remain accessible at all times.
F.   Trash Removal: All trash must be collected in trash bins and be removed
daily, and the area used for the temporary use restored to its prior condition
within three (3) days of the temporary use being concluded.
G.   Inspections: Authorized law enforcement officers, zoning enforcement
officers, fire control officers, and other governmental personnel shall be
permitted free access to the temporary use to make inspections to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section and all other applicable laws.
(Ord. 908, 10-20-2009; amd. Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
6-16-060: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the remedies,
penalties, and procedures set forth in title 9, chapter 7 of this code and this
title, as applicable. (Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-070: EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS:
The following organizations shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter:
A.   Government entities;
B.   Organizations receiving funding from Draper City as a part of their
general operating budget; or
C.   Religious groups where:
1.   The activity is to be held entirely on property under the ownership of the
group;
2.   The property has one or more permanent structures, including restroom
facilities; and
3.   No public services such as police, fire, or ambulance, are anticipated to
be needed on site for the event, whether on standby or for security at the
site. (Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-080: TEMPORARY USES ON VACANT PROPERTIES:
Temporary uses shall not be allowed on properties which are vacant or which
have no active and valid business license operating as a primary use on the
site. (Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-090: DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
Uses which are required to pursue or have been approved for a conditional use
permit and/or a site plan, with the exception of model homes or sales trailers,
shall not be eligible for a temporary use permit. Temporary uses which are
intended to be a yearly operation, although operating seasonally or for only a
portion of the year due to the type of use, shall be required to be approved
for a site plan and a conditional use permit, as required, with the exception
of model homes or sales trailers, prior to operation and shall not be eligible
for a temporary use permit. (Ord. 908, 10-20-2009)
6-16-100: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR INTERPRETATION:
The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to interpret this chapter and
provide written interpretations as outlined in
9-4-070 of the code. (Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
7-1-010: Establishment Of Board Of Health
7-1-020: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
7-1-030: Severability
7-1-040: Enforcement
7-1-010: ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF HEALTH:
Draper City shall establish as the board of health of Draper City the Salt Lake
County health department to serve in all respects as the board of health for
Draper City. (Ord. 1197, 3-29-2016)
7-1-020: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Draper City does hereby adopt the rules and regulations as have been
established by the Salt Lake County health department as are set out below. In
the event that said regulations are amended, altered or changed by the Salt
Lake County health department, those amendments, alterations, and changes shall
be adopted by reference without any further action on the part of the Draper
City council to incorporate those changes. The following health regulations are
hereby adopted with their amendments as are promulgated from time to time:
A.   Solid waste management and permitting (regulation 1).
B.   Design, construction, and operation of pools regulation (regulation 2).
C.   Housing regulation (regulation 3).
D.   Public lodging facilities regulation (regulation 4).
E.   Food sanitation regulation (regulation 5).
F.   General sanitation regulation (regulation 7).
G.   Individual water systems regulation (regulation 11).
H.   Subdivision regulation (regulation 12).
I.   Wastewater disposal regulation (regulation 13).
J.   Watershed regulation (regulation 14).
K.   Temporary mass gatherings regulation (regulation 17).
L.   Massage facilities regulation (regulation 18).
M.   Body art facilities regulation (regulation 19).
N.   Cosmetology facilities regulation (regulation 20).
O.   Community noise pollution control regulation (regulation 21). (Ord. 1197,
3-29-2016)
7-1-030: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable; and if any provision
thereof, or the application of such provision under any circumstances is held
invalid, it shall not affect any other provision of this chapter, or the
application in a different circumstance. (Ord. 1197, 3-29-2016)
7-1-040: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Director: The community development director or his designee is hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions of any of the Salt Lake County health
regulations adopted by reference within this chapter through any appropriate
means, including, but not limited to, civil abatement proceedings or criminal
citation.
B.   Definitions:
   DEPARTMENT: The community development department of Draper City.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the community development department.
   INSPECTOR: The designee of the community development director. (Ord. 1197,
3-29-2016)
CHAPTER 2
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7-2-010: Purposes
7-2-020: Definitions
7-2-030: Regulating Authority
7-2-040: Connections; Private Systems
7-2-050: Subdivisions And Other Developments
7-2-060: Pretreatment And Permits
7-2-070: Interference With Sewer System And Operations
7-2-080: Discharge Prohibitions
7-2-090: Reporting
7-2-100: Prevention Of Prohibited Discharges
7-2-110: Effect Of Amendment
7-2-120: Penalties
7-2-130: Appendices
7-2-010: PURPOSES:
Sewer facilities and services to all of the residents of the city are provided
by South Valley sewer district. The SVSD provides sewage treatment through the
Jordan Basin water reclamation facility (JBWRF), the South Valley water
reclamation facility (SVWRF), and the Timpanogos special service district by
contract. To preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of its
residents, and in cooperation with the SVSD, the city has determined that
regulation of sewage disposal within and by the city is necessary and
desirable. It is also in the public interest that the city participates in
achieving a degree of uniformity in the areas served by the treatment
facilities and enables those facilities to comply with applicable state and
federal law. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context specifically requires otherwise:
BUILDING PERMIT: Any building permit issued pursuant to title 9 or 10 of this
code.
CESSPOOL: A pit or hole in the ground used for final sewage disposal.
CITY: Draper City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
DISCHARGE: To cause a substance to enter the sewer system by any means, whether
directly or indirectly.
FINAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL: The depositing of sewage in the earth, water or
elsewhere, under circumstances which, in time, cause oxidation, together with
dissipation or absorption of the sewage.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any user of the sewer system who discharges wastewater from
commercial or industrial processes.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes, operations, or sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore,
causes the POTW to violate its permit.
JBWRF: The Jordan Basin water reclamation facility.
OCCUPANT: Any person in possession of the property mentioned, either by claim
or of right or, with the consent or acquiescence of the owner of such property.
ORDINARY DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Sewage of the type and contents commonly discharged
from homes, as distinguished from businesses or industries.
OUTHOUSE: A building or other structure located over a cesspool.
OWNER: Any person holding or claiming title, legal or equitable, to the
property mentioned, whether alone or in conjunction with others.
POTW: A publicly owned treatment works.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the POTW's permit, including an increase in magnitude or duration of a
violation.
PERSON: Includes any natural person and any corporation, partnership or other
separate legal entity, as well as the employer of any other person acting
within the scope of his or her employment, the principal of any person who is
an agent with respect to sewer matters, or the contractor of any person
entering into a contract with respect to sewer matters.
PRIVY VAULT: A structure for containing sewage prior to final sewage disposal,
unless such structure is located in a vehicle.
PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE: Any substance listed, described, or referred to as
prohibited in this chapter.
SVSD: The South Valley sewer district, an improvement district organized and
existing pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 17B, chapter 2a, part 4, as
amended, its employees, agents and assigns.
SVWRF: South Valley water reclamation facility.
SEPTIC TANK: Any means of final sewage disposal which is located principally
underground, but does not include the public sewer system.
SERVICE AREA 3: Describes that portion of the SVSD sewer system located in Utah
County, and where sewage flows to and is treated by, the TSSD. A map of service
area 3 is provided in section
7-2-130, appendix A of this chapter.
SEWAGE: Liquid or waterborne waste.
SEWER SYSTEM: The facilities owned or used by the SVSD for collecting,
transmitting, treating, and disposing of sewage, whether located in or out of
the city.
SLUDGE: The accumulated solid slurry separated from liquids such as water or
wastewater during processing, deposits on bottoms of streams or other bodies of
water, or the precipitate resulting from chemical treatment, coagulation, or
sedimentation of waste or wastewater.
SUBSTANCE: Any physical matter, including any solid, liquid or gas whatsoever.
SURFACE WATER: Any water running, standing or found on or within five inches
(5") of the surface of the ground.
TSSD: The Timpanogos special service district.
TREATMENT: The processes employed by the SVSD whereby sewage is rendered less
harmful, objectionable, or less of a health hazard.
TREATMENT PLANT: The JBWRF, SVWRF, or TSSD water reclamation facility. (Ord.
1167, 11-10-2015; amd. Ord. 1473, 1-19-2021)
7-2-030: REGULATING AUTHORITY:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to restrict or limit the extent or exercise
of any power conferred on the SVSD by the laws of Utah. In delegating certain
regulatory authority to the SVSD, the city does not affect any authority the
SVSD may have independent of the city to regulate the same or similar matters
except as may be agreed by the city and the SVSD in a written interlocal
cooperation agreement. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-040: CONNECTIONS; PRIVATE SYSTEMS:
A.   Mandatory Connection Within Three Hundred Feet: The owner or occupant of
real property on which a building has been or is being constructed shall
connect such building to the sewer system within sixty (60) days after
receiving written notice from the SVSD or city that facilities of the sewer
system are available for connection to the building, if any part of such
facilities is situated within three hundred feet (300') of any point of any
property line of such property.
B.   Subsequent Use Of Private Systems: If connection to the sewer system is
required pursuant to subsection A of this section, the owner or occupant
required to connect shall immediately plug any septic tank or privy vault,
remove any outhouse, fill with earth any cesspool located on the property, and
make no further use of those or any other privately owned facilities for final
sewage disposal. Any cesspool, outhouse, or unplugged septic tank or privy
vault on property required to be connected to the sewer system is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
C.   Construction Of Private System: No person shall construct or cause to be
constructed a septic tank or other privately owned means of final sewage
disposal on property required to be connected to the sewer system.
D.   Occupancy: No occupancy permit shall be issued for a newly constructed
building required to be connected to the sewer system if such building is not
connected to the sewer system.
E.   No Obligation On SVSD Or City To Connect Or Retain: Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as creating any obligation of the part of the SVSD
or the city to connect any property to the sewer system or retain any
connection to the sewer system.
F.   Conditions: The SVSD may impose reasonable conditions and requirements for
sewer connections without affecting the obligation of a private person to
either connect to the sewer system, discontinue use of a private system or
otherwise comply with this section. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-050: SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS:
No subdivision, industrial park, or commercial development shall be approved or
recommended by the city planning commission, nor shall a building permit or
certificate of occupancy be issued for any lot or part thereof, unless the city
shall have first received a signed document from the SVSD approving the sewer
aspects of the proposed development. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-060: PRETREATMENT AND PERMITS:
A.   Pretreatment: Persons required to pretreat wastewater pursuant to federal
pretreatment standards, the SVSD's pretreatment rules and regulations, or any
permits issued thereunder shall provide, operate, and maintain the necessary
pretreatment facilities in accordance with the SVSD's pretreatment rules and
regulations.
B.   Industrial Discharge Permits: Industrial users requiring a discharge
permit pursuant to the SVSD's pretreatment rules and regulations shall obtain
such permit prior to discharging into the sewer system. Application shall be in
the form prescribed by the SVSD. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-070: INTERFERENCE WITH SEWER SYSTEM AND OPERATIONS:
A.   Damage: No person shall intentionally or negligently cause any damage to
the sewer system.
B.   Manholes: No person shall open a manhole of the sewer system without first
receiving authorization to do so from the SVSD.
C.   Runoff: No owner or occupant shall permit a condition to exist on his
property whereby surface water, storm drainage, or groundwater is discharged
into the sewer system, nor shall any person install or create such a condition.
(Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-080: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A.   Generally: No person shall discharge into the sewer system any substance
which, under ordinary circumstances, either is harmful or detrimental to or
interferes with either the sewer system, the functioning of the sewer system,
the environment, or the public health, or which causes sewage to pass through
the sewer system without treatment, thereby creating a significant health
hazard or diminishing the quality of the environment.
B.   Violating Pretreatment Rules And Regulations: No person shall discharge
into the sewer system any substance which violates the wastewater discharge
prohibitions and limitations contained within chapter 2, section 2.2 of the
SVSD's pretreatment rules and regulations, as amended, which are incorporated
by this reference as a part hereof as though fully set forth herein, together
with any schedules or appendices which are a part of chapter 2, section 2.2 of
the SVSD's pretreatment rules and regulations.
C.   Discharge Of Substances In Excess Of TSSD Local Limits: No person shall
discharge into the sewer system in service area 3 any substance listed in
section
7-2-130, appendix B of this chapter in excess of the quantities or
concentrations listed therein. Section
7-2-130, appendix B of this chapter is hereby adopted as part of this code.
Discharge of a substance prohibited by one section of section
7-2-130, appendix B of this chapter shall be a separate violation in addition
to discharge of the same or similar substance prohibited by another section of
section
7-2-130, appendix B of this chapter. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015; amd. Ord. 1473, 1-
19-2021)
7-2-090: REPORTING:
A.   Immediate Notification Of Prohibited Discharge: Any person who discharges
a prohibited substance or discovers that a prohibited substance has been
discharged shall immediately notify the SVSD by the most rapid available means,
if such person knows or reasonably should have known that the substance was
discharged and the discharge of the substance was prohibited. Notification
pursuant to this subsection does not relieve the person notifying of any
liability, except liability for violation of this subsection.
B.   Report: Within five (5) days after the discharge of a prohibited
substance, the person who discharged such substance shall file with the SVSD a
written report describing the nature and content of the discharge, the cause of
the discharge, and remedial measures to be taken by the discharger to prevent
similar discharges in the future. The SVSD may inspect the site of the
discharge and interview any person involved to ascertain or confirm what
happened and assure that remedial measures adequate to prevent future accidents
are carried out as represented. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-100: PREVENTION OF PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A.   Generally: Every person conducting an activity which creates a substantial
risk that a prohibited substance will be discharged into the sewer system shall
provide adequate protection against accidental discharge of such a prohibited
substance by either implementing procedures or practices which tend to reduce
the likelihood of such a discharge or installing facilities designed to prevent
such accidental discharge. The SVSD may identify persons required to provide
such protection and direct them to comply with this subsection.
B.   Particular Procedures And Facilities: The SVSD may specify particular
procedures, practices, and facilities which shall be implemented by any person
if the SVSD finds there is substantial risk of a prohibited discharge if
preventive measures are not undertaken, that such procedures, practices and
facilities substantially reduce the risk of discharge prohibited by this
section, and that the cost of implementing such procedures, practices, and
installing such facilities is reasonable in light of both the potential damage
to the sewer system or the environment if an accidental discharge occurs and
the effectiveness of the equipment in preventing such an accidental discharge.
C.   Plans: In every case where facilities are required to be installed
pursuant to this section, the SVSD may require submission of detailed plans for
the required facilities and their operation before construction of the
facilities is begun.
D.   SVSD May Require Changes: If a person has discharged a prohibited
substance and it is likely that the same person will again discharge a similar
prohibited substance if preventive measures are not undertaken, the SVSD may
require the person who discharged the prohibited substance to make changes in
equipment, facilities, procedures, or practices, which changes have the effect
of substantially reducing the risk of a similar discharge in the future and are
found by the SVSD to be reasonable in cost in light of the potential damage to
the system and environment arising out of a similar prohibited discharge in the
future. Nothing in this subsection relieves any person of any liability, except
liability for violation of this subsection.
E.   Self-Monitoring And Reporting: The SVSD may require that persons that
generate and/or discharge wastewater into the sewer system, other than persons
generating and discharging only ordinary domestic sewage, monitor and report
their sewage discharges in a manner and to the extent necessary to provide
adequate compliance with and enforcement of the SVSD's pretreatment rules and
regulations, assess the source of the components of the sewage transmitted,
treated, and disposed of by the SVSD, and charge reasonable fees and surcharges
to dischargers based on actual damages or reasonable classifications of
discharges. The SVSD may also require that such monitoring and reporting be
performed at the expense of the person discharging. Every person required to
monitor and report shall do so as required by the SVSD's pretreatment rules and
regulations and in conformity with this section.
F.   Compliance Monitoring: The SVSD may sample and analyze the sewage of, and
inspect the facilities of person discharging into the sewer system to determine
or verify compliance with this section. The SVSD may also require the
installation of reasonable facilities, such as manholes, to enable such
sampling. However, nothing in this subsection limits any power that the SVSD
may have to investigate or enforce compliance with other sections of this code
or through means not specified in this subsection. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-110: EFFECT OF AMENDMENT:
Any amendment or repeal effected by adoption of this chapter or any section
thereof shall not affect any right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any
penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue of
the section amended or repealed, nor shall any repeal of any section have the
effect of reviving any section heretofore repealed or superseded. (Ord. 1167,
11-10-2015)
7-2-120: PENALTIES:
A.   Criminal Penalties:
1.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 19, chapter 5, as amended, and the
SVSD's pretreatment rules and regulations, a fine not exceeding twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day shall be assessed against any person who
wilfully or with gross negligence:
a.   Discharges pollutants in violation of any condition or limitation included
in a wastewater discharge permit or contract issued pursuant to any applicable
law;
b.   Discharges pollutants in violation of Utah Code Annotated section 19-5-107
(1), as amended;
c.   Violates Utah Code Annotated section 19-5-108, as amended, or any
requirements adopted pursuant thereto;
d.   Violates Utah Code Annotated section 19-5-113, as amended; or
e.   Violates a pretreatment standard or toxic effluent standard adopted by the
SVSD or city.
2.   Any person twice convicted under this section or Utah Code Annotated
section 19-5-115(2)(b), as amended, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per day.
3.   Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained under Utah Code Annotated title 19, chapter 5, or
by any permit, rule, or order issued pursuant thereto, including, but not
limited to, any rule, regulation, order or permit adopted or issued by the
SVSD, who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required to be maintained under Utah Code Annotated
title 19, chapter 5, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by
both.
4.   In addition to all other penalties, a violation of any provision of this
chapter other than subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section, constitutes a
class B misdemeanor carrying with it the maximum punishment permitted under the
laws of Utah. Each day in which the violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
B.   Civil Penalties:
1.   Any person who violates Utah Code Annotated title 19, chapter 5, as
amended, or any permit, rule, or order adopted under it, or any person who
violates the pretreatment rules and regulations adopted by the SVSD, upon a
showing that the violation occurred, is subject in a civil proceeding to a
civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day of
violation.
2.   In addition to all other remedies available, the SVSD may authorize the
commencement of a civil action for any appropriate relief, including a
permanent or temporary injunction, for any violation or threatened violation of
its pretreatment rules and regulations or any of the provisions contained
within Utah Code Annotated title 19, chapter 5, as amended, which are by this
reference deemed implemented as a part hereof by the city pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated section 19-5-115(7), 1953, as amended.
C.   Strict Liability: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty without regard to fault, knowledge, intent, or the state of
mind of the person committing the violation.
D.   Nuisance: Any condition or situation which causes a violation of this
chapter is hereby declared to be public nuisance and may be abated as provided
by law. (Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015)
7-2-130: APPENDICES:
APPENDIX A
SVSD SERVICE AREA 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]
APPENDIX B
TIMPANOGOS SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT LOCAL LIMITS
(Effective February 5, 2015)
Pollutant/Pollutant Property Local Limit Type Of Limit
Pollutant/Pollutant Property   Local Limit Type Of Limit
Aluminum                       809.87      Daily limit
Arsenic                        1.40        30 day average
Cadmium                        1.00        Daily limit
Copper                         6.76        Daily limit
Cyanide                        35.49       Daily limit
Grease/oil (fats, oil, grease) 500         Daily limit
Lead                           7.22        30 day average
Mercury                        0.31        30 day average
Molybdenum                     5.30        30 day average
Nickel                         24.92       Daily limit
pH                             5.0 - 11.5  Daily limit
Selenium                       2.57        Daily limit
Silver                         5.41        Daily limit
Total chromium                 3.56        Daily limit
Zinc                           33.33       30 day average
Ammonia                        Mass limit at 5 percent treatment capacity lbs/
                               day
BOD                            Mass limit at 5 percent treatment capacity lbs/
                               day
TSS                            Mass limit at 5 percent treatment capacity lbs/
                               day
 
Units in mg/l unless otherwise stated.
(Ord. 1167, 11-10-2015; amd. Ord. 1473, 1-19-2021)
CHAPTER 3
FIREWORKS
(Rep. by Ord. 969, 5-3-2011)
CHAPTER 4
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
SECTION:
7-4-010: Possession Of Firearms By Minors (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-020: Carrying Loaded Firearm Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-030: Carrying Concealed Weapon Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-040: Threatening With Dangerous Weapon Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-
2009)
7-4-050: Discharge Of Firearm Prohibited
7-4-060: Illegal Weapons (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-070: Incendiary Weapons Prohibited
7-4-080: Tear Gas Weapons Prohibited
7-4-090: Spring Guns Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-100: Silencers Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-110: Hunting In Designated Areas Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 1113, 6-3-2014)
7-4-120: Confiscation Of Firearms (Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-130: Exemptions
7-4-140: Complaint And Burden Of Proof
7-4-150: Penalty
7-4-010: POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY MINORS:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-020: CARRYING LOADED FIREARM PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-030: CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPON PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-040: THREATENING WITH DANGEROUS WEAPON PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-050: DISCHARGE OF FIREARM PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, BB gun, pellet gun, bow
and arrow, or similar contrivance within the limits of Draper City. This
provision shall not apply to the lawful use of a firearm in self-defense, to
target shooting at an approved gun range, or archery target shooting on private
property, provided the targets are not placed within two hundred feet (200') of
any residence or building. In addition, this provision shall not prevent any
person from discharging a firearm while killing an animal which is destroying
any crops or garden, or which is attacking another animal. (Ord. 384, 8-1-2000)
7-4-060: ILLEGAL WEAPONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-070: INCENDIARY WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to use, make, carry, or possess any type of
"molotov cocktail", gasoline or petroleum base firebomb, or other incendiary
weapon, within the limits of Draper City. "Molotov cocktail" means a bottle or
other container containing gasoline or other flammable liquid with a fuse type
wick inserted therein. (1994 Code)
7-4-080: TEAR GAS WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to carry on his person or in any vehicle a tear
gas gun, projector, or bomb, or any object containing noxious liquid gas or
substance. This provision shall not prohibit persons from carrying a small
amount of CS, CN, or a similar type gas in aerosol containers for self-defense
purpose. (1994 Code)
7-4-090: SPRING GUNS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-100: SILENCERS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-110: HUNTING IN DESIGNATED AREAS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1113, 6-3-2014)
7-4-120: CONFISCATION OF FIREARMS:
(Rep. by Ord. 903, 7-21-2009)
7-4-130: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A.   Peace officers while engaged in the performance of their official duties,
or any persons summoned by any such officer to assist in making arrests or
preserving the peace while engaged in the performance of assisting the officer;
B.   Wardens, superintendents, or keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails,
and other institutions for the retention of persons accused or convicted of an
offense while engaged in the performance of their official duties;
C.   Members of the armed services or reserved forces of the United States, or
the Utah national guard, or the reserve officers training corps, while engaged
in the performance of their official duties;
D.   Watchmen, while engaged in the performance of their official duties of
employment;
E.   Persons lawfully manufacturing, transporting, or selling weapons while
engaged in such manufacturing, transporting or selling;
F.   Persons acting under the authority or direction of a peace officer or
animal control officer. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1455, 10-6-2020)
7-4-140: COMPLAINT AND BURDEN OF PROOF:
A complaint or indictment based upon a violation of this chapter need not
negate the exemptions provided in section
7-4-130 of this chapter. The defendant shall have the burden of proving any
such exemption. (1994 Code)
7-4-150: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and shall be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and/or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months.
(1994 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
7-5-010: Definitions
7-5-020: Animal Control Division
7-5-030: Animal Control Officer
7-5-040: Additional Officers And Employees
7-5-050: Animal Shelter
7-5-060: Dog Licensing
7-5-070: Rabies Vaccination
7-5-080: Rabid Animals
7-5-090: Bites
7-5-100: Attacking Animals
7-5-110: Fierce Or Dangerous Animals
7-5-120: Nuisance Animal
7-5-130: Animals Running At Large
7-5-140: Female Dogs In Heat
7-5-150: Animals Per Household
7-5-160: Harboring Stray Animals
7-5-170: Animals On Nonenclosed Premises
7-5-180: Places Prohibited To Animals
7-5-190: Removal Of Canine Waste
7-5-200: Wild Animals
7-5-210: Sale Of Animals
7-5-220: Cruelty To Animals
7-5-230: Impounding
7-5-240: Permits
7-5-250: Sportsman's Permits (Rep. by Ord. 211, 10-1-1999)
7-5-260: Commercial Permit
7-5-270: Violations
7-5-280: Horse Ownership
7-5-290: Violation
7-5-300: Intentional Feeding Of Wild Deer, Elk Or Moose
7-5-010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings. The examples contained herein are provided for illustrative purposes
only and are not intended to be mutually exclusive or inclusive of all possible
animal species regulated by this Code.
ANIMAL AT LARGE: Any domestic animal, whether or not licensed, not under
restraint, as defined herein.
ANIMAL BREEDER: An establishment that breeds dogs, cats, and other household
pets for sale from the premises on which they were bred and reared.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned and/or operated by a governmental entity, by
an animal welfare organization incorporated within the State of Utah for the
purpose of preventing cruelty to animals, or by any properly authorized
establishment used for the care and custody of seized, stray, homeless,
quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small domestic animals.
ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT: Any animal under the control of its owner or person
having charge, care, custody or control, except a dog shall not be considered
under the control of the owner unless on a leash or lead, confined within a
vehicle, or within the real property limits of the owner.
BITE: Any actual puncture, tear or abrasion to person or property inflicted by
the teeth of an animal.
CAT: Any feline of the domesticated types.
CATTERY: An establishment having three (3) or more cats of any age for the
purpose of boarding, letting for hire, or training for profit.
COMMUNITY CAT: Any feral or free-roaming cat that is without visibly
discernable or microchip owner identification of any kind, and has been
sterilized, vaccinated, and ear-tipped.
COMMUNITY CAT CARETAKER: Any person other than an owner who provides food,
water, or shelter to a community cat or community cat colony.
COMMUNITY CAT COLONY: A group of cats that congregate together. Although not
every cat in a colony may be a community cat, any cats owned by individuals
that congregate with a colony are considered part of it.
COMMUNITY CAT PROGRAM: A program pursuant to which feral cats are sterilized,
vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped, and returned to the location where they
congregate.
DOG: Any Canis familiaris over four (4) months of age. Any Canis familiaris
under four (4) months of age is a puppy.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Animals or fowl domesticated by man and accustomed to living
in or about the habitation of man, such as dogs, cats, horses, and sheep.
EAR-TIPPING: Removing approximately a quarter-inch off the tip of a cat's left
ear while the cat is anesthetized for sterilization.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of sufficient height and construction to
enclose and confine an animal.
FERAL: An animal that is normally domesticated but has reverted to the wild.
GROOMERY: An establishment for the grooming, bathing, clipping, and nonmedical
care of household pets. Such uses may also include the sale of grooming and
care items, as well as accessory items for the keeping of household pets. Such
uses shall not include the sale, breeding, training, or boarding of animals.
GUARD DOG: A working dog which must be kept in a fenced run or other suitable
enclosure during business hours, or on a leash or under absolute control while
working, so it cannot come into contact with the public.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake County Health Department.
IMPOUNDED: The taking of an animal into the custody of the Animal Control
Division or other law enforcement agency.
KENNEL: An establishment having three (3) or more dogs, of any age, for the
purpose of boarding, letting for hire, or training for profit.
LEASH OR LEAD: Any chain, rope or device used to restrain an animal.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
trust, or other legal entity however designated.
PET SALES: Any establishment wherein dogs, cats, small household pets such as
birds, fish, reptiles, or other household pets of any age are kept or displayed
for the purpose of retail sales. This definition does not include kennel;
cattery; animals for sale by an animal breeder; or the sale of small household
pets that may be associated with another allowed use. Pet sales does not
include animal adoptions from a city or county animal shelter, animal control
agency, or a non- profit animal welfare organization incorporated within the
State of Utah for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals, or by any
properly authorized establishment used for the care and custody of seized,
stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small
domestic animals.
PROVOKED: Any deliberate act by a person toward any animal done with the intent
to tease, torment, abuse, assault or otherwise cause a reaction by the animal.
Any act by a person toward an animal done with the intent to discourage or
prevent an animal from attacking shall not be considered to be a provocation.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the
animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
SPONSOR: Any person or organization that traps feral cats, sterilizes,
vaccinates against rabies, and ear-tips them before returning them to the
location where they were trapped. A sponsor may be any animal humane society,
non-profit organization, animal rescue, adoption organization, or a designated
community cat caretaker that also maintains written records on community cats.
STRAY: Any "animal at large," as defined herein.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal of a species that in its natural life is wild,
including nonhuman primates, European ferrets, wild animal hybrids, alligators,
crocodiles, venomous snakes, lizards, or any animal that creates an immediate
threat or danger to a human being or public health, or any animal which cannot
be vaccinated effectively for rabies, such as bears, porcupines, raccoons,
skunks and weasels. (Ord. 1397, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1653, 5-20-2025)
7-5-020: ANIMAL CONTROL DIVISION:
There is hereby established a Division of Animal Control within the Community
Development Department of Draper City, which division shall be referred to as
the "Animal Control Division". (1994 Code)
7-5-030: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
A.   Creation: There is hereby created the position of animal control officer
which position shall be filled by a qualified person hired by the City Manager
with the advice and consent of the City Council.
B.   Oath Of Office: The animal control officer shall take the oath of office
prior to performing his or her duties.
C.   Duties: The animal control officer shall perform all the duties prescribed
by the City Council, including, but not limited to, the following:
1.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and perform other responsibilities
pursuant thereto;
2.   Supervise the Municipal animal shelter(s) under his or her jurisdiction;
3.   Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies collected;
4.   See that all animals and animal holding facilities in his or her
jurisdiction are licensed, controlled and permitted in accordance with any
applicable ordinance and/or regulations; and
5.   Establish adequate measures for rabies immunization and control in
cooperation with the Health Department and other interested governmental
agencies.
D.   Powers: The animal control officer is hereby vested with the power and
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to this
authority, the animal control officer may:
1.   Apprehend and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter; and
2.   Enter on to the open premises of any person to take possession of any
animal in violation of this chapter. (1994 Code)
7-5-040: ADDITIONAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
Any number of employees may be hired by the city manager, with the advice and
consent of the city council, to assist the animal control officer in the
performance of his or her duties, which employees shall have such powers and
duties as designated by the city council. Additional animal control officers
may be hired by the city manager, with the advice and consent of the city
council, as deemed necessary for the enforcement of the provisions herein.
(1994 Code)
7-5-050: ANIMAL SHELTER:
The city shall provide, or cause to be provided, suitable premises and
facilities to be used as an animal shelter where impounded animals can be
adequately kept. The city shall further provide, or cause to be provided,
humane care, food, supplies, and necessary medical treatment for any animal
maintained within such animal shelter, and provide for the painless and humane
destruction of any animal required to be destroyed by this chapter or the laws
of the state of Utah. (1994 Code)
7-5-060: DOG LICENSING:
A.   Required: All dogs must be licensed each year, except as otherwise
provided herein, to a person of the age of eighteen (18) years or older. Any
person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall obtain a license for such
animal within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches the age of four (4)
months, or within ten (10) days of the acquisition of the dog. (Ord. 211, 10-1-
1996)
B.   Procedure: License applications shall be submitted annually to the animal
control division, utilizing a standard form requesting the name, address and
telephone number of the applicant, and the breed, sex, color, age and rabies
information of the animal. The application shall be accompanied by the
prescribed license fee, a current rabies vaccination certificate, and proof of
spay or neuter, if applicable.
C.   Fees: The fees charged for licenses shall be those set forth in the
consolidated fee schedule as adopted by the city council. No refunds shall be
made on any lawfully collected dog license fee.
D.   Tags: Upon submission of a complete application and payment of the
required fees, the animal control division shall issue to the owner a
certificate and a tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon
the license number corresponding with the tag number on the certificate. The
owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal and see that
the collar and tag are constantly worn. Failure to attach the tag as provided
shall be in violation of this chapter, except that dogs which are kept for show
purposes are exempt from wearing the collar and tag. Any person removing or
causing to be removed the collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog without
the consent of the owner or keeper thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or
animal control officer who removes such for good cause, shall be in violation
of this chapter. Dog tags are not transferable from one dog to another.
Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon payment of the
proper fee as set forth in the consolidated fee schedule as adopted by the city
council.
E.   Term And Renewal: The license shall be effective for twelve (12) months
from the date of purchase through the end of the same month of the following
year, and may be renewed within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date.
F.   Revocation: If the owner of any dog(s) is found to be in violation of this
chapter on three (3) or more different occasions during any twelve (12) month
period, the animal control officer may seek a court order revoking for a period
of one year any dog license(s) such person may possess and providing for the
animal control division to pick up and impound any dog(s) kept by the person
under such order.
G.   Exemptions:
1.   The license provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: a) individual
dogs within a properly licensed dog kennel or other such establishment when
such dogs are held for resale; and b) licensed dogs whose owners are
nonresidents temporarily (up to 30 days) within the jurisdiction. Such owners
who remain within the jurisdiction longer than thirty (30) days may obtain a
local license upon payment of the proper fees and proof of current rabies
vaccination.
2.   The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
a.   Seeing eye dogs properly trained and actually being used by blind persons
to assist them;
b.   Hearing dogs properly trained and actually being used by deaf persons to
assist them;
c.   Dogs properly trained and actually being used by disabled persons to
assist them; and
d.   Dogs especially trained and actually being used to assist officials of
governmental agencies in the performance of their duties.
3.   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog from
having a current rabies vaccination. (1994 Code)
7-5-070: RABIES VACCINATION:
A.   Required: Rabies vaccination is required for all dogs and cats, except
community cats as defined in Section
7-5-010. The owner or person having the charge, care, custody or control of a
cat or dog which is four (4) months of age or over, or any person permitting a
cat or dog which is four (4) months of age or over to habitually be on or
remain, or lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises, shall
have said animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days after it reaches such age.
Unvaccinated dogs or cats over four (4) months of age acquired by the owner or
moved into the jurisdiction must be vaccinated within ten (10) days of
acquisition or arrival.
B.   Procedure: Rabies vaccination shall be performed by a licensed
veterinarian using a modified virus rabies vaccine approved by the health
department. All vaccines shall be conducted in accordance with the standards
contained in the "Compendium Of Animal Rabies Control", as amended, published
by the National Association Of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. It shall
be the duty of each veterinarian vaccinating any animal for rabies to complete
a standardized duplicate certificate of rabies vaccination requesting the name,
address and telephone number of the owner; the breed, sex, color, age and name
of the animal; and the date, type, tag number and a manufacturer's serial
number of the vaccine administered. It shall be the duty of each veterinarian
to specify on the certificate the date of vaccination, the type of vaccine
used, and the date when revaccination is required. A copy of the certificate
shall be distributed to the owner and the original retained by the issuing
veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies of the
certificate of the interval between vaccinations specified in this section.
C.   Tag: Upon vaccination and certification, the veterinarian shall provide
the owner with a metal or durable plastic serially numbered rabies vaccination
tag. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal and
see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. Failure to attach the tag as
provided shall be in violation of this chapter, except that dogs which are kept
for show purposes are exempt from wearing the collar and tag.
D.   Revaccination: Every dog and cat, excluding community cats, shall be
revaccinated prior to the expiration of the previous vaccination and prior to
licensing or renewal of license if the previous vaccination will expire within
the term of the new license.
E.   Community Cat Exemption: Community cats are exempt from additional rabies
vaccination requirements once initially vaccinated as part of a community cat
program. Records of such vaccinations must be maintained for at least three (3)
years and be available upon request.
F.   Exceptions: This provision shall not apply to veterinarian or kennel
operators temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others,
municipal shelters or animal welfare agencies incorporated in the state of
Utah, or to any animal owned by a person temporarily remaining within the
jurisdiction for less than thirty (30) days; provided, that such animal is kept
under strict supervision of the owner. It shall be unlawful to bring any animal
into the jurisdiction which does not comply with city, state and federal animal
health and import laws.
G.   Impoundment: An animal without a valid rabies vaccination tag may be
impounded by the animal control officer. The owner of a vaccinated animal
impounded hereunder may reclaim its animal by paying all impound fees and
furnishing proof of rabies vaccination. The owner of an unvaccinated animal may
reclaim its animal by paying all impound fees and furnishing proof of rabies
vaccination within seventy two (72) hours of release from impoundment. Any
animal not reclaimed within the minimum holding period under section
7-5-230 of this chapter may be disposed of pursuant to provisions provided
therein. (Ord. 211, 10-1-1996; amd. Ord. 1653, 5-20-2025)
7-5-080: RABID ANIMALS:
A.   Reporting: The owner or any person having knowledge of an animal with
rabies or which shows signs of rabies, or of an animal or person which has been
bitten by an animal with rabies or which shows signs of rabies, shall
immediately notify the animal control division, the health department, or the
state department of health of such animal.
B.   Seizing:
1.   Rabies Or Signs Of Rabies: The owner of an animal with rabies or which
shows signs of rabies, or an animal which has been bitten by an animal with
rabies or which shows signs of rabies, shall immediately confine the animal to
a secure place and shall cooperate to transfer control of the animal to the
animal control division upon demand.
2.   Species Subject To Rabies: The owner of any animal of a species subject to
rabies that bites a person or animal shall immediately confine the animal to a
secure place and shall surrender the animal to the animal control division upon
demand. Any person authorized to enforce this chapter may enter upon private
property to seize the animal, and if the owner refuses to surrender the animal,
the officer may immediately obtain a search warrant authorizing seizure and
impoundment of the animal.
C.   Quarantining:
1.   Generally: Any animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a person
or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined for
observation for a period of not less than ten (10) days by the animal control
division at the owner's expense.
2.   Location: The animal shelter shall be the normal place for quarantine, but
other arrangements, including confinement by the owner, may be made by the
animal control division if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the
time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special circumstances
justifying an exception.
3.   Notice: A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall
immediately notify the animal control division if the animal shows any signs of
sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall
be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or
refuse to allow an animal control officer to make an inspection or examination
during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies within ten (10) days from
the date of the bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the
animal control division of the death. The animal control division or the person
having custody of the animal shall thereafter deliver the animal's head to the
state health laboratory to be examined for rabies.
4.   Removal: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any such animal
from the place of quarantine without written permission of the animal control
division.
5.   Release Or Disposition: If, at the end of the ten (10) day period, the
animal control officer examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the
animal may be released to the owner or, in the case of a stray, it shall be
disposed of as provided herein.
D.   Bitten Animals:
1.   Unvaccinated Bitten Animals: In the case of an unvaccinated animal species
subject to rabies which is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal or
a species at high risk for rabies, such as bats and rats, said bitten or
exposed animal should be immediately destroyed. If the owner is unwilling to
destroy the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated
and quarantined for six (6) months under veterinary supervision, the cost of
such confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal shall be
destroyed if the owner does not comply herewith.
2.   Vaccinated Bitten Animals: If the bitten or exposed animal has been
vaccinated, the animal shall be revaccinated immediately within twenty four
(24) hours and subject to home confinement for ninety (90) days following
revaccination. (1994 Code)
7-5-090: BITES:
A.   Report Of Bite: The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person
bitten by an animal shall report the bite to the animal control division or the
health department within twenty four (24) hours of the bite, regardless of
whether or not the biting animal is of a species subject to rabies.
B.   Report Of Medical Treatment: A physician or other medical personnel who
renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report the
fact that he or she has rendered professional treatment to the animal control
division or the health department within twenty four (24) hours of his or her
first professional attendance. The report shall include the name, sex and
address of the person bitten, as well as the type and location of the bite. If
known, the report shall include the name and address of the owner of the animal
that inflicted the bite and any other facts that may assist the animal control
division or health department in ascertaining the immunization status of the
animal.
C.   Report Of Animal Treatment: Any person treating an animal bitten, injured
or mauled by another animal shall report the incident to the animal control
division. The report shall contain the name and address of the owner of the
wounded, injured or bitten animal, the name and address of the owner and
description of the animal which caused the injury, and the location of the
incident.
D.   Numerous Offenses: If any animal bites or attacks a person or animal two
(2) or more times in a twelve (12) month period, such animal may be immediately
impounded by the animal control division without court order and held at
owner's expense pending court action. Any such animal shall be deemed to be a
vicious animal and the animal control division may seek a court order for
destruction of the animal. Parties owning such animals shall, if possible, be
notified immediately of the animal's location by the animal control division.
(1994 Code)
7-5-100: ATTACKING ANIMALS:
A.   Attacking Animals: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having
charge, care, custody or control of any animal to allow such animal to attack,
chase or worry any person, any domestic animal having a commercial value, or
any species of hoofed protected wildlife, or to attack domestic fowl. "Worry",
as used in this section, shall mean to harass by tearing, biting or shaking
with the teeth.
B.   Owner Liability: The owner or person charged with responsibility for an
animal which attacks, chases or worries any person or animal as provided in
subsection A of this section shall be strictly liable for a violation of this
section, and shall be subject to prosecution and liable in damages to any
person injured or to the owner of any animal(s) injured or destroyed thereby.
C.   Defenses: The following shall be considered in mitigating the penalties or
damages or dismissing any charge hereunder:
1.   The animal was properly confined on the premises; or
2.   The animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
D.   Animals May Be Killed: Any person may kill an animal while it is
committing any of the acts specified in subsection A of this section or while
such animal is being pursued thereafter. (1994 Code)
7-5-110: FIERCE OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A.   Restraint, Muzzle Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person
having the charge, care, custody or control of any fierce, dangerous or vicious
animal to permit such animal to go or to be off the premises of the owner,
unless such animal is under restraint and properly muzzled so as to prevent it
from injuring any person or property.
B.   Enforcement: Every animal so vicious and dangerous that it cannot be
controlled by reasonable restraints or that is not effectively controlled by
its owner or person having charge, care or control of such animal is a hazard
to public safety and the animal control officer may seek a court order for the
muzzling or destruction of the animal. (1994 Code)
7-5-120: NUISANCE ANIMAL:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of an animal or
animals causing a nuisance, as defined below, shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein. Any animal which does any
of the following shall be deemed a nuisance:
A.   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
B.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
C.   Barks, whines or howls or makes other disturbing noises in an excessive,
continuous or untimely fashion;
D.   Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles;
E.   Attacks other domestic animals;
F.   Is a vicious animal not properly restrained as required herein;
G.   Is determined by the Animal Control Division or Health Department to be a
public nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health,
welfare or safety; or
H.   Otherwise acts so as to constitute a nuisance under Utah Code Annotated
title 76, chapter 10. (1994 Code)
7-5-130: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge, care, custody or
control of any animal to allow such animal at any time to run at large, except
for community cats participating in a recognized community cat program. The
owner or person charged with responsibility for an animal found running at
large shall be strictly liable for a violation of this section regardless of
the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of
whether or not he knows that the animal is running at large.(amd. Ord. 1653, 5-
20-2025)
7-5-140: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any female dog
in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog from running at large, cause
such dog to be constantly confined in a building or a secure enclosure so as to
prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other dogs and
creating a nuisance, except for planned breeding. (1994 Code)
7-5-150: ANIMALS PER HOUSEHOLD:
A.   No more than three (3) dogs and/or three (3) cats may be maintained at any
one residence within the City.
B.   Adult dogs, four (4) months of age or older, must be licensed through
Draper City within thirty (30) days of acquisition or thirty (30) days from the
date the dog attains four (4) months of age.
C.   One litter per licensed adult dog may be allowed per household. Litters
must be rehomed, sold, or adopted, by the age of four (4) months. At no time
may there be more than three (3) adult dogs per household.
D.   One litter per adult cat may be allowed per household. Litters must be
rehomed, sold, adopted, by the age of four (4) months. At no time may there be
more than three (3) adult cats per household. (Ord. 1397, 6-18-2019)
7-5-160: HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an animal shelter, sponsor or
community cat caretaker, to harbor or keep any lost or strayed animal. Whenever
any animal other than a community cat shall be found which appears to be lost
or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the Animal Control
Division within twenty-four (24) hours, and the division shall impound the
animal as herein provided. A community cat may be released by an animal shelter
to a sponsor operating a community cat program prior to the five (5) day
holding period required under Utah Code Section 11-46-103. (amd. Ord. 1653, 5-
20-2025)
7-5-170: ANIMALS ON NONENCLOSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal on
any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the
property line unless such person has permission of the owner of the affected
property. (1994 Code)
7-5-180: PLACES PROHIBITED TO ANIMALS:
A.   Food Establishments: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit
any animal, whether loose, on a leash, or in arms, in or about any
establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or
displayed, including, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat
markets and fruit or vegetable stores. This subsection shall not apply to dogs
specially trained for and actually assisting a person with a disability or dogs
used in law enforcement work.
B.   Watershed Area: It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, harboring or
having charge or control of any dog to allow said dog to be within any
watershed area so designated by ordinance or otherwise legally appointed,
either now existing or to be defined in the future. Dogs shall be allowed in a
designated watershed area on and downhill from the Bonneville Shoreline Trail
from Hidden Valley Park in Sandy to the junction of Potato Hill Trail and on
and downhill from the Potato Hill Trail to the junction of Ann's Trail. This
subsection shall not apply to dogs specially trained for and actually assisting
a person with a disability, or dogs used in law enforcement or search and
rescue work. (Ord. 1204, 5-17-2016)
7-5-190: REMOVAL OF CANINE WASTE:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person having the charge, care, custody or
control of any dog to permit such dog to defecate on any public or private
property without the consent of the owner of such property, unless the person
having charge, care, custody or control of the dog immediately removes and
properly disposes of such feces left by said dog. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to dogs specially trained for and actually assisting a
deaf, blind or disabled person.
B.   Any dog owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any dog
shall remove any feces left by said dog on any public or private property
within the City, unless expressly permitted to do otherwise by the property
owner. (1994 Code)
7-5-200: WILD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, own, harbor, purchase, sell, offer
for sale, barter, or give away any "wild animal", as defined in this chapter,
as protected under title 50 of the Code of Federal Regulations or Utah Code
Annotated title 23, or which is fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally
inclined to do harm; provided, however, that an animal shelter, zoological
park, veterinary hospital, Humane Society shelter, public laboratory, circus,
sideshow, amusement show or facility for education or scientific purposes, may
keep such an animal if protective devices are provided which are adequate to
prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public. (Ord. 211, 10-1-1996)
7-5-210: SALE OF ANIMALS:
A.   Rabbits Or Fowl: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, barter or give away any baby rabbits or fowl under two (2) months of age
in any quantity less than six (6). Such animals shall not be artificially dyed
or colored. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit the
raising of such rabbits and fowl by a private individual for his or her
personal use and consumption; provided, that he or she maintains proper
brooders and other facilities for the care and containment of such animals
while they are in his or her possession.
B.   Premiums And Novelties: It shall be unlawful for any person to offer as a
premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any live
animal.
C.   Pet Turtles: It shall be unlawful for any pet shop to raise or sell any
Pseudemys scripta elegans, or P. troostii family Testudinidae, otherwise
defined as "pet turtles". (1994 Code)
7-5-220: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A.   Care And Maintenance: It shall be unlawful for any person to withhold
adequate food, drink, care and shelter from any animal in his or her charge or
custody, as owner or otherwise.
B.   Physical Abuse: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously
kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or other object,
mutilate, burn, scald, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal. Each
offense shall constitute a separate violation.
C.   Animals In Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or
confine any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner,
including, but not limited to, carrying or confining such animal without
adequate ventilation or for an unusual length of time.
D.   Abandonment Of Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any
animal within the jurisdiction.
E.   Animal Poisoning: Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person by any means to make accessible to any animal, with
intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been
treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous substance. This provision
shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for
the control of vermin in furtherance of the public health when applied in such
a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other animals.
F.   Injury To Animals By Motorists:
1.   Render Aid: Every operator of a motor or other self-propelled vehicle upon
the streets of the city shall immediately, upon injuring, striking, maiming or
running down any domestic animal, stop and give such aid to the animal as can
reasonably be rendered or take the animal to an appropriate facility.
2.   Notify Owner Or Authorities: Every operator of a motor or other self-
propelled vehicle upon the streets of the city shall immediately upon injuring,
striking, maiming or running down any domestic animal, notify the animal's
owner, if known, and the animal control division or the other appropriate law
enforcement agency. The operator shall remain at or near the scene of the
accident until the owner or appropriate authorities arrive and shall
immediately identify himself or herself to such owner or authorities.
3.   Custody By Animal Control Division: In the absence of the owner, the
animal control division may take custody of the injured animal and deal with it
as is deemed appropriate under the circumstances.
4.   Exemption: Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of this
provision when responding to an emergency.
G.   Animals For Fighting:
1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to raise, keep or use
any animal, fowl or bird for the purpose of fighting or baiting; and for any
person to be a party to or be present as a spectator at any such fighting or
baiting of any animal or fowl; and for any person, firm or corporation to
knowingly rent any building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises for any such
purposes as aforesaid, or to knowingly suffer or permit the use of his
buildings, sheds, rooms, yards, grounds or premises for the purposes aforesaid.
2.   Law enforcement officers or the animal control officer may enter any
building or place where there is an exhibition of the fighting or baiting of a
live animal, or where preparations are being made for such an exhibition, and
may arrest persons there present and take possession of all animals engaged in
fighting, or there found for the purposes of fighting, along with all
implements or applications used in such exhibition. This provisions shall not
be interpreted to authorize a search or arrest without a warrant when such is
required by law.
H.   Killing Of Birds: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or kill any
bird(s), or to rob or destroy any nest, egg or young of any bird in violation
of the laws of the state of Utah.
I.   Malicious Impounding: It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously
secret or impound the animal of another.
J.   Diseased Or Painfully Crippled Animals:
1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large any
sick, diseased or disabled animal. Such animal, when rendered worthless by
reason of sickness or other disability, shall be killed in a humane manner by
the owner thereof and disposed of as instructed after contacting the animal
control division.
2.   It shall further be unlawful for the owner or person having the charge,
care, or custody of an animal with a dangerous or incurable and/or painfully
crippling condition to have, keep or harbor such animal without placing the
same under veterinary care or to dispose of the same. The failure to take such
care is a violation of this chapter and the animal control division may take
custody of such animals and deal with them as deemed appropriate under the
circumstances.
K.   Defense: It is a defense to the prosecution under this section that the
conduct of the actor toward the animal was by a licensed veterinarian using
accepted veterinary practice or directly related to a bona fide experimentation
for scientific research; provided, that if the animal is to be destroyed, the
manner employed will not be unnecessarily cruel unless directly necessary to
the veterinary purpose or scientific research involved. (1994 Code)
7-5-230: IMPOUNDING:
A.   Animals Subject To Impoundment: The animal control officer shall place all
animals which he or she takes into custody in the designated city animal
shelter. The following animals may be taken into custody and impounded without
the filing of a complaint:
1.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter;
2.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter;
3.   Any animal which is required to be licensed under the provisions of this
chapter and is not so licensed; an animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed
to be unlicensed for purposes of this section;
4.   Any sick or injured animal whose owner cannot be located;
5.   Any abandoned animal;
6.   Any animal which is not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
7.   Any animal to be held for quarantine; or
8.   Any vicious animal not properly confined in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
B.   Records: The animal shelter shall keep a record of each animal impounded,
which includes the following information:
1.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers;
2.   The manner and date of impound;
3.   The location of the pick up and name of the official picking up the
animal;
4.   The manner and date of disposal;
5.   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser;
6.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the animal
shelter;
7.   All fees received; and
8.   All expenses accruing during impoundment.
C.   Term And Notice Of Impound: Animals shall be impounded for a minimum
holding period of seventy two (72) hours before further disposition, unless
otherwise provided. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of any
animal wearing a license or other identification during that time. Notice shall
be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed owner. Any
animal voluntarily relinquished to the animal shelter by the owner thereof for
destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding
period before release or other disposition.
D.   Disposition: Animals held longer than the minimum holding period, except
for those quarantined or confined by court order, and animals voluntarily
relinquished to the animal shelter by the owner thereof, may be destroyed or
sold as the animal control division shall direct. Unless prohibited or
restricted by law, any healthy animal may be sold to any person or to any
institution engaged in scientific research and desiring to purchase said animal
for a price to be determined by the animal shelter, not to exceed thirty
dollars ($30.00) per animal, plus license and rabies vaccination if required.
E.   Release For Medical Attention: Any licensed animal impounded and having or
suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring
medical attention may, in the discretion of the animal control officer, be
released to the care of a veterinarian with the consent of the owner.
F.   Emergency Destruction: When, in the judgment of the animal control
officer, it is determined that an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons
or to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such
animal may be destroyed under such emergency conditions without regard to any
time limitations otherwise established herein.
G.   Redemption By Owner: The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized
representative may redeem such animal before disposition, provided he pays the
following fees and charges in the amounts stated in the city consolidated fee
schedule:
1.   The impound fee;
2.   The daily board charge;
3.   License fee, if required; and
4.   Any costs incurred during the impound period, including rabies
vaccination. (1994 Code)
7-5-240: PERMITS:
A.   Purpose: In order to control undesirable environmental conditions, reduce
the incidence of stray animals, and prevent endangerment to the health, safety
and welfare of the public, Draper City shall regulate the maintenance of
animals and animal businesses within the city by requiring permits for certain
activities.
B.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any animal or
operate any animal business within Draper City for which a permit is required
without first procuring such permit. Unless otherwise provided, any permit
issued hereunder shall be in addition to any and all other licenses or permits
required by law.
C.   Application: Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be
made in writing to the animal control division on a form provided by the city,
which form shall require the following information:
1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person desiring the permit;
2.   The type of permit desired;
3.   A brief description of the animals to be maintained or the animal business
to be operated;
4.   The location where the animals are to be maintained or the animal business
is to be operated;
5.   Plans and specifications describing the runs and fences required to be
provided and maintained for the permit; and
6.   A brief description of the steps taken or to be taken to ensure that the
animals or the animal business to be operated shall comply with the
requirements set forth herein.
D.   Fees: Each application for permit filed hereunder shall be accompanied by
the required permit fees as set forth by resolution by the city council. No
permit shall be issued until the proper fees have been paid to the city. Unless
otherwise provided, the fees required herein shall be in addition to any and
all other license or permit fees imposed by any other law. (Ord. 211, 10-1-
1996)
E.   Issuance: The animal control division shall review all applications filed
hereunder. Upon determining that the application is in conformity with all
applicable ordinances and that appropriate measures have been taken to ensure
adequate runs, fencing and compliance with other requirements set forth herein,
and that all required fees have been paid, the animal control division shall
issue the requested permit. The permit shall be signed by the animal control
officer. (Ord. 962, 2-1-2011)
F.   Denial: If the proper fees have not been paid, or the animal control
division determines that the application does not conform with applicable laws
or that appropriate measures have not been taken to ensure adequate runs,
fencing and compliance with other requirements set forth herein, the animal
control division shall deny the permit and notify the applicant in writing of
such denial. The notice shall state the reasons for denial and inform the
applicant that he or she may file a written appeal of such denial with the city
manager within ten (10) days from the date of the denial. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the city manager shall thoroughly and objectively investigate the
matter and promptly issue a written decision stating the reasons for the
decision and informing the protestor of any right to judicial review provided
by law.
G.   Term And Renewal: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
automatically expire on December 31 immediately following the permit's date of
issue. The permit holder shall, within two (2) months prior to the expiration
of the permit, apply for a renewal of the permit with the animal control
division and pay all required fees.
H.   Limitation: Except as provided herein, each permit issued hereunder shall
be valid only for the person to whom it was issued and only for the location
for which it was issued. A permit holder may apply for the transfer of his or
her permit for the sole purpose of maintaining the same animals or the same
animal business at a different location, but in no event shall any permit
issued hereunder be assignable or transferable to another person.
I.   Records: The animal control officer shall keep a record of all permits
issued hereunder, including the name of the person to whom the permit was
issued, the type of permit issued, and the fees collected.
J.   Inspections: All permit holders and their establishments shall be subject
to periodic inspections by the animal control division to ensure that the
permitted animals or animal business complies with the requirements herein.
K.   Revocation: Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the
city for the permit holder's failure to comply with the provisions herein or
other applicable law. Prior to revocation of any permit, proper notice and an
opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the permit holder.
L.   Exemptions: Any animal establishment operated by the state, a local
government, a nonprofit society incorporated in Utah for the primary purpose of
preventing the cruelty to animals, a research facility wherein bona fide
medical or related research is conducted, or any other establishment which is
licensed by federal law, is excluded from the permit requirements of this
chapter.
M.   Noise: All permit holders shall be under the duty to enclose all dogs in a
shelter between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M., and shall take such steps as may be necessary to assure that noise
generated by the dogs does not exceed those noise levels or limits established
by the Draper City ordinances. (Ord. 211, 10-1-1996)
7-5-250: SPORTSMAN'S PERMITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 211, 10-1-1999)
7-5-260: COMMERCIAL PERMIT:
A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
maintain a kennel, cattery, pet shop, groomery, riding school, stable or any
similar establishment for profit unless such person first obtains a "commercial
permit" from the animal control division, in addition to any other licenses
required by ordinances, rules or regulations of the city. This section shall
not apply to establishments maintaining large animals for agricultural and/or
commercial purposes, such as dairy or meat farming.
B.   Application: In addition to the information required by section
7-5-240 of this chapter, an application for a commercial permit shall include
the following:
1.   The name, address and telephone number of owner of the establishment and
the person responsible for the operation of the establishment;
2.   The plans and specifications for the building structure and design
including shelters, cages, runs, isolation facilities, storage areas for food
and supplies, ventilation, heating, lighting, drainage, sewage disposal and
fencing.
C.   Requirements: The following requirements must be complied with in order to
obtain and maintain a "commercial permit":
1.   Approval: Prior approval for the construction or operation of kennels,
catteries, and similar establishments must be obtained from the health
department, the zoning department, and any other interested governmental
agency.
2.   Building: All buildings shall be built in a manner as to prevent the
escape of any animal being housed therein and shall provide adequate
ventilation, air exchange, and lighting in areas where animals are housed or
kept;
3.   Fencing: Adequate fencing shall be provided and properly maintained to
prevent the escape or injury to any animal housed or boarded within the
facility, and to protect such animals from unwanted persons or animals outside
the facility;
4.   Runs And Cages: Adequate runs and cages shall be provided and properly
maintained for each animal housed within the facility. Such runs and cages
shall be constructed of smooth, impervious material at least four feet (4') in
height which prevents the escape of and provides proper shelter and protection
for the animals;
5.   Size Of Runs And Cages: All runs and cages shall have as a minimum size
the following: a) no less than thirty two (32) square feet in size when the dog
restrained is over fifty (50) pounds in weight; b) no less than eighteen (18)
square feet in size when the dog restrained is more than fifteen (15) pounds
but less than fifty (50) pounds in weight; and c) no less than sixteen (16)
square feet when the dog restrained is fifteen (15) pounds or less in weight.
If the permit holder desires to construct runs which are "communal" in nature,
said runs shall be proportionally larger for each additional dog therein;
6.   Outdoor Runs And Cages: All outdoor runs and cages shall provide adequate
protection from foul weather or excessive exposure to the sun, and shall be at
least thirty feet (30') from any property boundary line, at least fifty feet
(50') from the nearest portion of any building used as a dwelling, and in such
a position so as not to constitute a nuisance to any neighbor;
7.   Bedding: Adequate bedding or a resting board shall be provided and
properly maintained for each animal housed or boarded. All bedding must be of
material that is disposable, and such bedding shall be disposed of daily to
maintain a healthy and sanitary condition;
8.   Cleaning: All areas used to house or board animals shall be thoroughly
cleaned, disinfected and washed daily to ensure a sanitary and healthy
condition;
9.   Waste Control: Adequate waste control measures shall be followed to
effectively collect, treat and dispose of solid and liquid waste. Floor
surfaces where animals are kept shall be constructed of impervious material
which is readily cleanable by flushing and shall be equipped with floor drains
connected to a sanitary sewer. Any surface drainage shall be designed to be
diverted around and away from where the animals are kept, and drain gutters
shall be located outside the runs and sloped to prevent standing pools of
water;
10.   Feed: All feed shall be wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity
and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition,
size, and age of the animal. Adult animals shall be fed at least once each day,
and juvenile animals shall be fed adequately several times each day depending
upon age and size;
11.   Feed Storage: All feed shall be stored on racks or shelves at least
twelve inches (12") off the floor and in a manner so as to prevent
contamination from any source. All feed shall be stored in its original
container, or if opened, in a sealable plastic or metal container, and all wet,
uncooked feed shall be refrigerated at a temperature of forty degrees
Fahrenheit (40°F) or less;
12.   Water: All animals shall have fresh drinking water available at all
times, and the water containers shall be anchored to prevent tipping and shall
be removable for cleaning purposes;
13.   Insects And Rodents: Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure the
control of flies, insects, rodents and other vermin within the building,
storage areas, and surrounding areas;
14.   Garbage: The animal facility shall be free of litter, and accumulations
of waste material or garbage in or around the facility shall be cleaned and
properly disposed of at least daily;
15.   Isolation, Illness Or Injury: Any animal with a communicable disease or
which is otherwise ill or injured shall be properly isolated from other animals
or the public to prevent further exposure of the disease, illness or injury,
and to protect the animal and the public health and welfare. Any animal housed
or boarded which is ill or injured shall receive immediate attention and shall
be cared for as may be directed by the animal control division;
16.   Cleaning: All cages and runs shall be thoroughly cleaned, disinfected and
washed daily and shall be monitored;
17.   Water: Running water shall be available for use at all times. (Ord. 211,
10-1-1999)
7-5-270: VIOLATIONS:
A.   Violation Of Chapter: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
of the provisions of this chapter.
B.   Failure To Comply With Order: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail
to comply with a lawful order or directive of the animal control officer, or to
knowingly interfere with the animal control officer in the lawful discharge of
his or her duties.
C.   Penalty: Unless otherwise provided, any person violating the provisions
contained herein shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Any person
subsequently violating the provisions contained herein within two (2) years
from the date of the previous conviction shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (1994 Code)
7-5-280: HORSE OWNERSHIP:
A.   Zones Permitted; Minimum Square Footage: Horses may be allowed on
properties having a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in
RA1, RA2, A5 and A2 zones, unless otherwise approved by development agreement
or by the city council.
B.   Number Permitted: Two (2) horses may be allowed on the first twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of property, with one additional horse allowed
for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of property.
C.   Fencing And Shelter: Property owners shall provide a fenced area for
horses with a minimum twenty four foot by twenty four foot (24' x 24') area for
each horse and a minimum eight foot by eight foot (8' x 8') covered shelter
area for each horse. Shelter areas may be shared by more than one horse, but
shall consist of sixty four (64) square feet per horse.
1.   The fenced area shall have access to feed, water and shelter and shall be
drained on site.
2.   Fences shall be sturdy and constructed out of poles, pipes, horse PVC, or
minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") thick wood planks without dangerous
protrusions. Barbed wire, large mesh, and electrified materials shall not be
used, except electrified materials may be attached to the top of approved
fencing materials. Fences shall be a minimum of four and one-half feet (41/2')
in height and a maximum of six feet (6') in height. Setbacks from property
lines and dwellings for fences shall be:
a.   Side property line: Ten feet (10').
b.   Rear property line: Ten feet (10').
c.   From neighbor's livable dwelling: Seventy feet (70').
3.   There should be sufficient clearance on one side of the property to allow
a horse to be mechanically removed from the property.
D.   Property Maintenance:
1.   Property owners shall remove manure weekly from the date temperatures
reach fifty five degrees (55°) until the first killing frost in the fall.
However, when each horse has a dedicated area equal to or greater than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, manure may instead be spread on
site.
2.   When refuse and manure are spread on site, it shall not be permitted to
accumulate in piles that are not able to dry out. Manure shall be spread three
(3) times a week, except for when the ground is frozen.
3.   Dust and fly control shall be required. Fly control may include, but is
not limited to, insecticides, fly strips and/or electric fly zappers.
Sprinklers should be used to control dust.
E.   Vaccination: Annual vaccinations for each horse are encouraged. However,
annual vaccination for West Nile Virus shall be required. (Ord. 848, 9-2-2008)
7-5-290: VIOLATION:
If the owner of any horse is found to be in violation of this chapter on three
(3) or more different occasions during any twelve (12) month period, the animal
control officer may seek an order from the City Council revoking the owner's
horse privileges for a period of one year. A fine will be assessed to the horse
owner for the cost of the Animal Control Division to pick up and impound any
horse kept by the person under such court order as provided in section
7-5-230 of this chapter. (Ord. 848, 9-2-2008)
7-5-300: INTENTIONAL FEEDING OF WILD DEER, ELK OR MOOSE:
A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it is unlawful for any
person to intentionally feed deer, elk, or moose or make food available for
consumption by deer, elk, or moose on private or public property. Food includes
any fruit, grain, mineral, salt, vegetable, or other material placed outdoors
for consumption by deer, elk, or moose.
B.   It shall be presumed that the placement of fruit, grain, hay, vegetable,
minerals, salt, or other food or material in aggregate volume of more than one-
half (1/2) gallon and at height of less than six feet (6') off the ground, or
in any drop feeder, automatic feed, or similar device regardless of height, is
for the purpose of feeding deer, elk, or moose in violation of this section.
This presumption may be overcome through the presentation of reasonable
evidence that the placement of such materials is for a purpose other than the
feeding of deer, elk, or moose. Naturally growing plants, gardens, residue
maintained as a mulch pile, and bird feeders designed or placed to limit access
to deer, elk, or moose are not prohibited under this section.
C.   Subsection A of this section does not apply to:
1.   Public employees or authorized agents acting within the scope of their
employment for public safety or wildlife management purposes;
2.   Normal agricultural or livestock operation practices; or
3.   Recreational feeding of wild song birds, hummingbirds, or passerine birds
in a manner that does not attract deer, elk, or moose in such numbers or
circumstances to cause property damage, endanger any person, or create public
health concerns. (Ord. 1348, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 6
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
7-6-010: Prohibited Noise
7-6-020: Regulated Noise
7-6-030: Factors
7-6-040: Exceptions
7-6-050: Special Permit
7-6-060: Violations
7-6-010: PROHIBITED NOISE:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or with reckless disregard create the
following noise disturbances within the city:
A.   Disruption Of Dwelling: To make, cause or permit any excessive noise which
annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of any
neighborhood or person residing therein which, under the circumstances, would
disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities.
B.   Disruption Of Meeting: To make, cause or permit any excessive noise which
prevents or disrupts a lawful meeting, gathering, business or other lawful
activity, which under the circumstances would disturb a person of average and
reasonable sensitivities.
C.   Disruption At Draper City Park: To make, cause or permit any excessive
noise which annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety
or peaceful enjoyment of the park facilities by other members of the public or
neighboring residents of the park, which under the circumstances would disturb
a person of average and reasonable sensitivities. For purposes of this
subsection, it is expressly prohibited for any person to play or cause to be
played any amplified sound or music within the park without first obtaining a
noise permit in accordance with section
7-6-050 of this chapter.
D.   Automobiles: To operate or permit the operation of a motor vehicle which
causes excessive noise levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust
system, or as a result of any unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration,
engine revving or tire squealing.
E.   Street Performances: To use or permit the use of bells, whistles, sirens,
music horns or any other noisemaking device for the purpose of business,
amusement or otherwise which tends to collect persons on the streets or
sidewalks of the city.
F.   Emergency Signals: To make, cause or permit the sounding of any fire,
burglar, automobile or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar
emergency signaling device other than for emergency or testing purposes. Any
testing permitted herein shall be conducted between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and shall be conducted for the minimum
test cycle time not to exceed three (3) minutes. (Ord. 183, 7-11-1995)
7-6-020: REGULATED NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to cause, permit or perform the following acts between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. within the city
when such acts create a noise disturbance within a residential area:
A.   Loading Operation: To load, unload, open, close, or otherwise handle
boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage containers or similar
objects.
B.   Construction Work: To operate any tools or equipment used in construction,
drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures or
streets.
C.   Power Equipment: To operate any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander,
grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawn mower or other similar device, other than
powered snow removal equipment.
D.   Garbage Collection: To collect garbage, waste or refuse.
E.   Loudspeakers: To operate or use any loudspeaker, public address system, or
mobile sound vehicle amplifying sound therefrom.
F.   Radios: To operate or play any radio, television, musical instrument or
similar audio device. (Ord. 183, 7-11-1995)
7-6-030: FACTORS:
The factors to be considered in determining whether a violation of the
provisions of this chapter exists include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
A.   The level of the noise;
B.   The nature of the noise; i.e., usual or unusual;
C.   The origin of the noise; i.e., natural or unnatural;
D.   The level and intensity of any background noise;
E.   The proximity of the noise to residential areas;
F.   The nature and zoning of the surrounding area;
G.   The density of inhabitants in the surrounding area;
H.   The time of day of the noise; and
I.   The recurrence or consistency of the noise. (Ord. 183, 7-11-1995)
7-6-040: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergency situations, the
lawful exercise of free speech, and conduct permitted by license or permit of
the city or otherwise authorized by law. In addition, this chapter shall not
apply to agricultural equipment or operation, unless such equipment or
operation is determined by the city to constitute a nuisance from the negligent
or improper operation of any such equipment or operation. (Ord. 183, 7-11-1995)
7-6-050: SPECIAL PERMIT:
Persons may file an application with the city for a special temporary noise
permit authorizing the applicant to take certain action or conduct certain
activities not otherwise permitted herein. Any permit issued hereunder shall be
in addition to any and all other licenses or permits required by law, and shall
be subject to all other state and county laws regarding noise emissions.
A.   Application: Applications for a special temporary noise permit shall be
made in writing to the city community development department and shall include
the following items:
1.   Name and address of the applicant;
2.   Activity or purpose for which the permit is desired;
3.   Reasons why the permit is necessary, including an explanation of undue
hardship and lack of reasonable alternatives;
4.   The specific date, time and location to be covered by the permit;
5.   Any other relevant information requested by the city.
B.   Fees: Each application for the special temporary noise permit filed
hereunder shall be accompanied by any required permit fees set forth by
resolution of the city council. No permit shall be issued until the proper fees
have been paid to the city. Unless otherwise provided, the fees required herein
shall be in addition to any and all other license or permit fees imposed by any
other law.
C.   Issuance: The community development director shall review all applications
filed hereunder and may issue or deny a permit, in whole or in part, based upon
consideration for public health and safety; provided, that the Draper City Park
coordinator may process all applications for noise permits within the park as
required in subsection
7-6-010C of this chapter. Any permit issued hereunder shall contain any
conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including the effective
dates, time restrictions, location and other reasonable requirements necessary
to minimize adverse effects upon surrounding areas and any persons therein.
D.   Denial: If the proper fees have not been paid, or the community
development director or park coordinator determines that the application does
not conform with applicable law or it is not in the public's best interest to
issue the permit, the community development director or park coordinator shall
deny the permit and notify the applicant in writing of such denial. The notice
shall state the reasons for denial and inform the applicant that he or she may
file a written appeal of such denial pursuant to subsection I of this section.
E.   Term: Any permit issued hereunder shall specifically state the term and
purpose for which it was issued, not to exceed thirty (30) days.
F.   Limitation: Except as provided herein, each permit issued hereunder shall
be valid only for the person to whom it is issued and only for the purpose and
location for which it is issued. Permit holders shall ensure that the permit is
available for inspection by city officials at the place and time for which it
is issued.
G.   Records: The community development director and park coordinator shall
keep a record of all permits issued hereunder, including the name of the person
to whom the permit was issued, the type of permit issued, and the fees
collected.
H.   Revocation: Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the
community development director or park coordinator due to the permit holder's
failure to comply with the provisions hereof or other applicable law. Prior to
revocation of any permit, proper notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be
provided to the permit holder.
I.   Appeal: Any determination made by the community development director or
park coordinator relative to the issuance, denial or revocation of a permit
hereunder may be appealed to the city manager by filing within ten (10) days
from the date of said determination, a written notice of appeal setting forth
the grounds for the appeal and any other pertinent information. Such notice of
appeal shall be filed by delivering an original and three (3) copies to the
city manager during regular business hours. Upon receipt of the appeal, the
city manager shall thoroughly and objectively investigate the matter and issue
a written decision stating the reasons for the decision and informing the
appellant of any right to judicial review provided by law. (Ord. 183, 7-11-
1995)
7-6-060: VIOLATIONS:
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment and/or fines as provided by law.
Violations of this chapter shall also constitute a public nuisance and may be
enjoined and abated as such by the city. (Ord. 183, 7-11-1995)
CHAPTER 7
CORNER CANYON PRESERVATION DISTRICT
(Rep. by Ord. 749, 7-17-2007)
CHAPTER 8
SUBSURFACE DRAINS
SECTION:
7-8-010: Subsurface Drains In New Subdivisions
7-8-020: Subsurface Drains In Existing Subdivisions
7-8-010: SUBSURFACE DRAINS IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
A.   Plans, Specifications Submitted: In all subdivisions approved by the city
after May 18, 1993, in which subdrains are utilized for any reason, the
subdivider shall submit plans and specifications of all proposed subdrains for
review and approval by the city engineer prior to commencement of actual
construction of any improvements within the subdivision. The plans and
specifications shall meet the minimum requirements for design and construction
of such drains, as specified by the city.
B.   Construction; Inspection: Upon approval of any proposed subdrain plans by
the city engineer, the subdivider shall construct the subdrain system in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications. The city shall inspect
such construction periodically during the course thereof to determine
compliance with the plans, specifications and any applicable laws, rules and
regulations of the city.
C.   Maintenance: Upon final inspection and approval by the city engineer of
the subdrain system, the owner (which may be a duly organized homeowners'
association) shall thereafter maintain the subdivision subdrain system. The
owner or homeowners' association shall provide for assessment of an annual fee
on all property located within the subdivision in an amount sufficient to cover
on site and off site maintenance of the subdrain system and related parts
thereof serving the subdivision. The subdivider shall cause to be recorded
protective covenants requiring owners to pay the assessment fees for each lot
or parcel located within the subdivision, which covenants shall be deemed to
run with the land and shall be binding upon all successors in interest and
assigns of the subdivider. The maintenance assessments shall constitute a lien
on each lot or parcel located within the subdivision and may be enforced in
accordance with the terms of the protective covenants referred to hereinabove.
(1994 Code)
7-8-020: SUBSURFACE DRAINS IN EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS:
Any subdrain system(s) which has been installed in any subdivision or other
development prior to May 18, 1993, shall be maintained by the owner or owners
of the property in which such system(s) is located. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 9
SECONDARY WATER
SECTION:
7-9-010: Findings
7-9-020: Definitions
7-9-030: Master Plan
7-9-040: New Subdivisions
7-9-050: Approval
7-9-060: Operation
7-9-070: Existing Subdivisions Without Secondary Water
7-9-080: Maintenance
7-9-090: Unauthorized Connections
7-9-100: Tampering With Secondary Water System
7-9-110: Appeal
7-9-010: FINDINGS:
The city council of Draper City hereby finds and determines that the health,
safety, welfare, and convenience of the citizens of Draper City, requires the
operation of a secondary water system within the city at economical rates for
the purpose of providing outside watering and irrigation for properties located
within the boundaries of Draper City. The demand for culinary water to serve
the growing population and business demands within Draper City is steadily
increasing and current sources of culinary water will not be able to meet the
requirements from such growth over time, resulting in increased expenses and
costs for water for the general population. As water treatment costs increase
and water sources become more scarce, the cost of culinary water will increase.
As the city expands, current culinary water sources will become more stressed
and limited during peak periods of use. The city intends to acquire, operate,
and maintain a culinary water distribution system throughout the city and the
ability of the city to accomplish this will be negatively impacted if savings
cannot be obtained through use of secondary water for outside watering instead
of treated water. Usage of secondary water will, over time, enable the culinary
water distribution system planned by the city to meet expected demands for
extended periods of time and before system replacement will be necessary. The
city council further finds that utilizing treated culinary water for outside
watering and irrigation purposes is not economical. A piped, pressurized
secondary water system will inure to the benefit of the citizens of Draper City
by reducing water loss through seepage, reducing disturbance to property by
reason of loss through seepage, reducing disturbance to property by reason of
flooding, promoting the welfare and safety of the residents of the city,
including children by eventually eliminating open irrigation ditches which will
also conserve water resources and enhance the beauty of the city. At the
present time, the Draper Irrigation Company owns and operates a secondary water
system within the city. The city reserves the right to hereafter acquire and/or
operate a secondary system within the city. The city council further finds that
it is reasonable and desirable that new subdivisions constructed in Draper City
be required to install secondary water system facilities within the boundaries
of the subdivision in order to ensure that future secondary water service will
be available to the residents of such subdivision. (1994 Code)
7-9-020: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: Draper City.
COMPANY: Draper Irrigation Company.
LOCAL SYSTEM: Refers to any pipes or system of pipes installed for the purpose
of serving any subdivision or parcels of property located within the city which
are under private ownership.
MASTER PLAN: The master plan of any secondary water system operating within
Draper City for the purpose of providing secondary water service to all or a
portion of the properties located within the city.
SECONDARY WATER: Water which is suitable for irrigation and other nonculinary
purposes not in violation of any applicable statutes, ordinances, or other
laws, rules and regulations.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person or entity who divides a tract of land into two (2) or
more parcels for sale or use as residential property.
SUBDIVISION: A tract of land divided by a subdivider into any lot or lots or
tract or real property on which any building is or will be built.
USER: Any person or entity who utilizes secondary water for any purpose within
the city. (1994 Code)
7-9-030: MASTER PLAN:
The master plan and related maps and specifications for any secondary water
system operating with the city shall be filed with the city engineer, and
updated not less than annually to outline any secondary water distribution
system and local systems within the city. (1994 Code)
7-9-040: NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
All new subdivisions which have not received preliminary plat approval prior to
the effective date hereof shall install piping and related facilities within
the subdivision required to provide a secondary water local system for the
subdivision. (1994 Code)
7-9-050: APPROVAL:
No subdivision shall be approved or considered for final approval and no
building permits shall be issued and no other approval or permit shall be
issued by the city for any subdivision or development unless the subdivision or
development includes a satisfactory local system of secondary water and the
related facilities required within the subdivision or development to deliver
such water to each lot or parcel. (1994 Code)
7-9-060: OPERATION:
The city shall have no obligation to operate and maintain any secondary water
facilities located upon private parcels of real property or within subdivisions
within the city unless city assumes such obligation by ordinance. Any secondary
water systems operated within the city by the company or others shall be
operated in such a manner so as to provide secondary water to the users at
economical rates and in a reasonable manner. (1994 Code)
7-9-070: EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS WITHOUT SECONDARY WATER:
In cases where a local system has not been installed within an existing
subdivision, a majority of the property owners within such subdivision may
request the company to install a local system within the subdivision on terms
and conditions agreeable to the property owners and the company. (1994 Code)
7-9-080: MAINTENANCE:
Any distribution system for secondary water within the city shall be maintained
by the owner of that system in a safe and efficient manner. The lot owner shall
maintain all secondary water facilities located on the owner's lot within each
subdivision. Any fees charged for secondary water shall be reasonable. (1994
Code)
7-9-090: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to directly or indirectly connect
to or alter any secondary water system or any part thereof without the prior
authorization first obtained from the owner of the secondary water system.
(1994 Code)
7-9-100: TAMPERING WITH SECONDARY WATER SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, modify or alter any
secondary water distribution system located within the city without the prior
consent of the owner thereof. Violations of this section shall be a class B
misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both as prescribed by the
applicable statutes of the state of Utah. (1994 Code)
7-9-110: APPEAL:
Any person or entity purporting to be unfairly dealt with, suffering any
hardship, or otherwise aggrieved by the provisions of this chapter shall be
entitled to appeal to the city council, which shall have the power to resolve
any hardships or grievances under any of the provisions hereof. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 10
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
7-10-010: Fire Department Established
7-10-020: Fire Code
7-10-030: Fire Chief
7-10-040: Fire Marshal
7-10-045: Recordkeeping
7-10-050: Fire Prevention Bureau
7-10-055: Lockboxes And Similar Devices
7-10-060: Liability For Damages
7-10-070: Appeals
7-10-080: Fire Board Of Appeals
7-10-010: FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created the Draper City Fire Department, within the Public
Safety Department of the City administration, which department shall consist of
a Fire Chief and such other firefighters, emergency medical personnel and other
employees as shall be employed from time to time by the City. The Fire
Department shall be entrusted with the duty of enforcing all ordinances of the
City regarding the prevention, suppression, and investigation of fires,
providing emergency medical services, and protecting the lives and property
within Draper City. (Ord. 185, 8-8-1995)
7-10-020: FIRE CODE:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 1682,
adopted 11-18-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
A.   The most recent version of the International Fire Code published by the
International Conference of Building Officials and adopted by the State of
Utah, including all appendices thereto, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of
Draper City.
B.   The most recent version of the Utah Wildland Urban Interface Code, issued
by the International Code Council and adopted by the State of Utah, with the
alternatives or amendment approved by the Utah Division of Forestry, is hereby
adopted as the Wildland Urban Interface Code of Draper City. (Ord. 1369, 11-13-
2018)
7-10-030: FIRE CHIEF:
A Fire Chief shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of title 3 of
this Code. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the administration of the
Fire Department and Ambulance Department and shall perform all the duties set
forth in the Draper City Fire Code and any other duties as the City Council may
from time to time provide, including, but not limited to, the following:
A.   Administration: The Fire Chief shall administer the provisions of the Fire
Code and relevant provisions of this title.
B.   Enforcement: The Fire Chief shall enforce the provisions of the Fire Code
and this title. For such purposes, the Chief shall have the powers of a law
enforcement officer.
C.   Interpretation: The Fire Chief shall interpret the provisions of the Fire
Code and may recommend the adoption and undertake enforcement of rules and
regulations for the prevention and control of fires and fire hazards as may be
necessary from time to time to carry out the intent of the Fire Code.
D.   Permits: The Fire Chief shall receive and review all applications for
permits required by the provisions of the Fire Code and shall determine whether
such applications conform with the Fire Code, and shall issue permits
accordingly.
E.   Inspections: The Fire Chief shall inspect all buildings and structures as
required by the provisions of the Fire Code to ensure that the construction,
alteration, or repair conforms to the approved plans, specifications and
provision of the Fire Code.
F.   Certificates: The Fire Chief shall issue all certificates required by the
provisions of the Fire Code.
G.   Assistants: The Fire Chief may recommend to the City Manager the hiring of
or contracting for fire protection employees.
H.   Right Of Entry: The Fire Chief may enter a building or structure at any
reasonable time to make an inspection, to enforce any of the provisions of the
Fire Code, or when the Fire Chief has reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or
in violation of such codes which makes the building or premises unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous. If such building or premises is occupied, the Fire
Chief shall present his or her credentials to the occupant and request entry.
If such building or premises is unoccupied, the Fire Chief shall make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the building or premises and request entry. In any case where entry is
refused, the Fire Chief shall have recourse through remedies provided by law to
secure entry. (Ord. 185, 8-8-1995)
7-10-040: FIRE MARSHAL:
There is hereby established the position of Fire Marshal to exercise the powers
and perform the duties of fire prevention engineer as set forth in the Fire
Code. The Fire Marshal shall be under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief
and shall have the authority to perform those duties delegated to the Fire
Marshal by the Fire Chief and such other powers and duties as designated by the
City Council. (Ord. 185, 8-8-1995)
7-10-045: RECORDKEEPING:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish certain requirements
to comply with the criteria of the recordkeeping standards as regulated by
adopted Fire Code.
B.   Recordkeeping Standards: A record of each periodic inspection, test,
servicing, and other operations and maintenance shall be maintained on the
commercial facilities premises or other approved location for a minimum of
three (3) years, unless a different period of time is specified in the Fire
Code. Records shall be made available to the Fire Marshal, and if requested, a
copy provided to him.
C.   Submission Of Records By Others:
1.   All certified contractors providing services, testing, installations,
repair and/or maintenance of fire prevention systems to commercial facilities
within the City are required to enroll and utilize the City approved single-
point repository service company for reporting the rendered service
information. This reporting information must be filed with the single-point
repository service within five (5) working days of these services being
completed.
2.   The single-point repository service company shall be a third party records
repository which shall organize, maintain and monitor the received records,
providing information to the City and the commercial facilities pertaining to
the records status and timely notifications on required inspection timetables.
Fees for this provided service shall be paid directly from the certified
contractors to the City approved single-point repository service company.
3.   Third party records will be maintained with the same standards stated in
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 1299, 12-19-2017)
7-10-050: FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU:
There is hereby established within the Fire Department a Fire Prevention
Bureau, which bureau shall be under the direction of the Fire Chief and shall
consist of such Fire Department personnel as may be assigned thereto by the
Fire Chief. The function of the bureau shall be to assist the Fire Chief in the
administration and enforcement of the fire prevention provisions of the Fire
Code and other relevant City ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 185, 8-8-
1995)
7-10-055: LOCKBOXES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
A.   Applicability:
1.   References in this section to a lockbox, security padlock or fire/
standpipe security connection cap and plug refer to the Knox Box brand, which
is a universal brand that offers a high level of security, enables rapid entry
into structures in emergency situations, and is approved for use by the Draper
City Fire Marshal.
2.   The following structures shall be equipped with a lockbox within twelve
(12) months of the effective date of this section:
a.   Any commercial or industrial structure protected by an automatic
suppression system (sprinkler or standpipe).
b.   Any commercial or industrial structure protected by an automatic fire
alarm system having a connection to a central monitoring station facility.
c.   Any multi-family residential structure possessing a common corridor for
access to living units that also restricts building access by locking building
entryway doors and/or has a common utility room for sprinkler or fire alarm
appliances.
d.   Any facility that is required to prepare and have readily available
material safety data sheets and/or hazardous chemical inventory as per Federal
and State Codes.
e.   Other properties or structures where Fire Department or Police Department
emergency access would be delayed as determined by the Fire Marshal.
3.   All commercial structures under construction must provide a temporary
lockbox for emergency access before construction begins.
4.   All newly constructed structures described in subsection A2 of this
section shall be equipped with a lockbox prior to the issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy.
5.   Any commercial or industrial structure with an external audible fire alarm
and/or complex with perimeter fencing which limits emergency vehicle access is
required to provide a lockbox key or security padlock that meets the
requirements of this section.
6.   Public safety first responders will primarily look to access a structure
using the lockbox when responding to an emergency but reserve the right to use
whatever means to access a structure which in the first responders'
professional judgement will minimize the emergency's impact to human life and
property.
B.   Installation; Accountability:
1.   Applications for a lockbox shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal.
2.   The owner or designee of a structure required to have a lockbox is
responsible for proper installation of the lockbox.
3.   The Fire Marshal, after consultation with the structure owner or designee,
shall approve the size and location of all lockboxes.
4.   The size of the lockbox that is required to be installed will be
determined by the number of keys or units that the box will support at the
structure location.
5.   More than one lockbox may be required to be installed based on the size of
the structure per the recommendation of the Fire Marshal.
6.   A lockbox tamper switch connected to the structure's fire alarm system may
be required.
7.   The Fire Marshal is responsible for ensuring that each key to each lockbox
is properly accounted for and secure.
C.   Contents Of Lockbox:
1.   The contents of the lockbox shall be labelled for easy identification and
shall include the following:
a.   Keys to locked points of ingress or egress, whether on the interior or
exterior of such buildings.
b.   Keys to all mechanical rooms.
c.   Keys to all locked electrical rooms.
d.   Keys to elevators and their control rooms.
e.   Keys to fire alarm panels.
f.   Keys (special) to re-set pull stations or other fire protective devices.
g.   Keys to any other areas as requested by the Fire Marshal.
h.   A card containing the names and telephone numbers of emergency contact
people for such buildings or any code numbers associated with their fire
protection systems. These contact persons must be available on a 24-hour basis.
2.   In lieu of having the interior keys in the exterior lockbox, a second
lockbox may be located at an approved location within the main lobby of the
structure to hold interior keys.
D.   Maintenance:
1.   The operator or owner of the structure shall immediately notify the Draper
City Fire or Police Department and provide the new keys when a lock which
limits rapid access to areas of the interior of the structure is changed or re-
keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the lockbox.
2.   The operator or owner of the structure shall ensure all lockboxes are in
proper working condition and shall replace or make repairs to a lockbox as may
be necessary.
E.   Temporary Key Lockbox During Times Of Construction:
1.   Before any work is started on any regulated structure or property complex
that would require the installation of a lockbox, the owner or operator of the
structure or property complex shall apply for a temporary lockbox or security
padlock.
2.   Application for this temporary lockbox or security padlock shall be made
through the Fire Marshal.
3.   This temporary lockbox or security padlock will be supplied by the Fire
Marshal and must be returned prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy.
4.   The temporary lockbox or security padlock must be mounted and keys
installed in a location approved by the Fire Marshal prior to securing the site
or structure.
5.   The fee for the temporary lockbox or security padlock shall be set by the
City Council.
F.   Security Caps: When a structure is protected by an automatic sprinkler
system or standpipe system, the Fire Marshal shall require the Fire Department
connection to have a Fire Department connection security cap installed. The
Fire Department connection security cap shall be of a type approved by the Fire
Marshal.
G.   Penalties For Violation Of Section:
1.   Failure to install any device or equipment required under this section
within thirty (30) days of written notification of non- compliance by the Fire
Marshal shall enable the City to install said device or equipment at the
owner's expense.
2.   Any violation of this section by any structure owner or operator is a
Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) or by a term of imprisonment of ninety (90) days, or both.
Each day that such violation shall continue after written notification shall be
considered a separate violation. (Ord. 1306, 2-20-2018)
7-10-060: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
Except as otherwise provided by law, this chapter shall not be construed to
hold the City or any officer or employee responsible for any damage to persons
or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein
provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment or
process authorized herein, or for any action in connection with the control or
extinguishment of any fire or in connection with any other official duties.
(Ord. 185, 8-8-1995)
7-10-070: APPEALS:
Orders, decisions or determinations made by the Fire Chief relative to the
application and interpretation of the Fire Code may be appealed to the Draper
City Fire Board of Appeals, as provided herein, by filing within fifteen (15)
days from the date of said decision an original and three (3) copies of a
written statement of the grounds for the appeal and a request for hearing, if
desired, with the City Recorder during regular business hours. (Ord. 185, 8-8-
1995)
7-10-080: FIRE BOARD OF APPEALS:
A.   Created: There is hereby created a Fire Board of Appeals in Draper City to
determine the suitability of alternate materials and type of construction and
to hear and decide appealable orders, decisions and determinations made by the
Fire Chief relative to the application and interpretation of the Draper City
Fire Code.
B.   Members:
1.   Number And Qualification: The Fire Board of Appeals shall each consist of
five (5) members who may not be employees of Draper City and who shall be
qualified by experience and training to pass upon pertinent matters regarding
the application and interpretation of the Draper City Fire Code.
2.   Alternates: At least two (2) alternate members shall be appointed to the
Board of Appeals. All alternate members shall meet the qualification
requirements for regular members.
3.   Appointment And Term: Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council to staggered terms
of four (4) years; provided, that members may be appointed to terms shorter
than four (4) years when necessary to provide for staggered terms.
4.   Compensation: Members of the Board of Appeals shall receive a per diem
allowance for each day or portion of a day spent performing Board duties, and
all necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred in the discharge of
such duties, as the City Council may by resolution approve.
5.   Removal: Members of the Board of Appeals may be removed with or without
cause upon recommendation of the Mayor by a majority vote of the City Council;
provided, that such member is given: a) written notice of the removal; and b)
an opportunity to be heard by the City Council.
C.   Organization And Procedure:
1.   Chairperson: The Board of Appeals shall elect a Chairperson who shall
administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses, and oversee the
proceedings of the Board. In the event the Chairperson is absent from any
proceeding, a Chairperson Pro Tempore may be appointed by a majority vote of
the members present.
2.   Fire Chief: The Fire Chief of Draper City shall be ex officio member of
the Fire Board of Appeals. As such, the Fire Chief shall attend all proceedings
of the Fire Board of Appeals and act as Secretary to the Board, but shall not
vote upon any matter before the Board.
3.   Rules Of Procedure: The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its business.
4.   Meetings: The Board of Appeals shall hold meetings at such times as the
Board determines is necessary and as called by the Chairperson or the City
Manager. Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings of the Board of
Appeals shall be open to the public.
5.   Records: The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of proceedings, including
the vote of each member on each question, or the member's absence or failure to
vote, and records of its examinations or other official actions. Such records
shall be filed with the City Recorder and shall be open to the public pursuant
to the Draper City government records access and management ordinance.
6.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute
a quorum and may act in behalf of the Board.
D.   Notice And Hearing: The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing of the appeal, give any required public notice thereof as well as due
notice to the parties in interest. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the relevant Construction Codes. Any party may appear in
person or by attorney at the hearing.
E.   Decision: After the hearing, the Board of Appeals shall make a decision on
the matter. Except as provided in subsection F of this section, the respective
Board may, by majority vote, affirm, reverse, or modify the appealed order,
decision or determination of the Fire Chief; provided, that any decision
granting an appeal shall require votes from at least three (3) members of the
Board in support of such decision. The Fire Board of Appeals shall render its
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with duplicate copies to the
City Manager and the Fire Chief.
F.   Limitation: The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of the Fire Code, nor shall the
Board of Appeals be empowered to waive any requirements of the Fire Code.
G.   Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal: An appeal stays all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Fire Chief certifies to the
relevant Board of Appeals after the request for hearing has been filed, that by
reason of the facts stated, the stay would in his or her opinion cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a
court of competent jurisdiction on application, notice and good cause showing.
H.   Judicial Review Of Board's Decision: The City, or any person aggrieved by
any decision of the Board of Appeals, may have and maintain a plenary action
for relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, provided, the
petition for such relief is presented to the court within thirty (30) days
after the date such decision is rendered. (Ord. 185, 8-8-1995)
CHAPTER 11
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
SECTION:
7-11-010: Definitions
7-11-020: County Health Department Rules Adopted
7-11-030: City Collection Services
7-11-040: Service Charge
7-11-050: Method of Payment of Service Charges
7-11-060: No Littering
7-11-070: Vehicles; Approval by County Health Department
7-11-080: Vehicles: Covering of Contents
7-11-090: Containers
7-11-100: Time and Place of Pick Up
7-11-110: Allowable Materials for Refuse and Recyclable Item Collection by
Service Provider
7-11-120: Special Waste Materials Requiring Special Preparation
7-11-130: Materials Not Collected by Service Provider
7-11-140: Compliance With And Enforcement Of Refuse And Recycling Collection
Service Laws
7-11-150: Burning Prohibited
7-11-160: Dumping Prohibited
7-11-170: Establishment of Rules and Regulations
7-11-180: Penalties
7-11-010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings given in this section:
AGRICULTURAL WASTE: The manure or crop residues from various agricultural
pursuits, including, but not limited to, dairies and the raising of livestock
and poultry.
AUTOMATED RECYCLING CONTAINERS: Containers provided by the service provider for
removal of recyclable items, other than recyclable glass.
AUTOMATED REFUSE CONTAINERS: Containers provided by the service provider to
residences for removal of refuse.
BULKY WASTE: Items of refuse or recyclable items that are too large to fit
entirely within the appropriate automated refuse or automated recycling
container.
COLLECTION: The removal by the service provider of refuse or recyclable items
contained in approved containers for disposal of refuse or recyclable items.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE: Refuse resulting from the normal activities of commercial
users, institutions or industries.
COUNTY: Salt Lake County or Utah County
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Solid waste resulting from the construction,
remodeling, repair, or demolition of structures, from road building, and from
land clearing.
ELECTRONIC WASTE: Consumer or business electronic equipment that is near or at
the end of its useful life.
HAULER: A person engaged in the off-site collection and transportation of solid
waste or recyclable items by vehicle. This definition shall not apply to a
person engaged in transporting his or her own personally generated solid waste
and recyclable items.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: The definition for hazardous waste in Utah Administrative Code
section R315-301-2 is hereby incorporated by reference.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE: Solid waste generated and discarded from any single
or multiple dwelling unit or other residential source that contains hazardous
substances but is exempt from hazardous waste regulation under Utah
Administrative Code.
INFECTIOUS WASTE: A solid waste that contains pathogens of sufficient virulence
and quantity that exposure to the waste of a susceptible host could result in
an infectious disease. Infectious waste includes sharps.
LIQUID WASTE: A solid waste that contains free liquids as defined by method
9095 (paint filter liquids test), as described in Test Methods for Evaluating
Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods (EPA pub. no. SW-846, latest edition).
OWNER: Any person who alone or jointly or severally with others:
A.   Has legal title to any premises, property, dwelling, or dwelling unit as
legal or equitable owner; or
B.   Is an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of a
person described above.
PERSON: Any individual or any other entity recognized by law.
PHARMACEUTICAL WASTE: Unused or expired medicines or drugs, whether obtained
with a prescription or over the counter.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place in Draper City for which the principal or
exclusive purpose is any pursuit or occupation by any person or persons for the
purpose of gaining a livelihood.
RECYCLABLE GLASS: Transparent bottle glass and plate glass. Plate glass is flat
in configuration, typically used for windows or picture frames. Plate glass
does not include automobile windows, mirrored glass, ovenware or ceramics.
RECYCLABLE ITEM: An item, excluding recyclable glass, that typically would be
abandoned or discarded, but that can be utilized in the secondary material
market. A detailed list of recyclable items will be published on the city's
website.
RECYCLING: The series of activities, including separation and processing, by
which recyclable items are recovered or diverted from the solid waste stream.
RECYCLING FACILITY: A recycling, material recovery, or reuse facility that
receives, processes, and transfers to market recyclable items.
REFUSE: Wastes commonly discarded by households, institutions, and commercial
entities. Refuse does not include any other waste defined by this section.
RESIDENCE: A building or dwelling with the primary purpose of providing
permanent or temporary shelter. A residence shall include single family
dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes.
RESIDENT: A person who occupies a residence.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE: Refuse generated by the normal activities of a residence.
SERVICE PROVIDER: The city, its employees, or a county-licensed waste disposal
contractor working for the city engaged in providing solid waste, refuse, or
recycling collection service within Draper City.
SEWAGE: Human or animal wastes carried by water or other liquid from a
dwelling, business building, institution, industrial establishment, or
agricultural, recreational, or other location and any groundwater, surface
water, or storm water that may be mixed with these wastes.
SHARPS: Any discarded or contaminated article or instrument that may cause
punctures or cuts.
SLUDGE: Any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste, including grit and screenings,
generated from:
A.   A municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant;
B.   A water supply treatment plant;
C.   A car wash facility;
D.   An air pollution control facility; or
E.   Any other such waste having similar characteristics.
SOLID WASTE: Any waste defined by this section. Solid waste does not include
recyclable items.
SPECIAL WASTES: Discarded nonhazardous wastes that may require special handling
or other solid waste that may pose a threat to public safety, human health, or
the environment. Special wastes include:
A.   Ash;
B.   Infectious waste except for sharps;
C.   Small animal wastes; and
D.   Pharmaceutical waste.
WASTE TIRE: Any tire that has been discarded.
YARD WASTE: Vegetative matter resulting from landscaping, land maintenance, or
land clearing operations. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019; amd. Ord. 1680, 10-7-2025)
7-11-020: COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT RULES ADOPTED:
Utah County and Salt Lake County have adopted rules and regulations that apply
to the city regarding solid waste and recycling management. These rules preempt
any conflict with city code and are hereby adopted by reference. In the event
of a conflict between Salt Lake County rules or regulations and Utah County
rules or regulations, the more restrictive rule shall apply. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-
2019)
7-11-030: CITY COLLECTION SERVICES:
A.   Requirements:
1.   Refuse Collection Services: Except as provided in 7-11-030(B), a service
provider shall collect, remove, and dispose of refuse by providing weekly
collection at all residences within the city on a schedule and route determined
by the city.
2.   Recycling Collection Services: Except as provided in 7-11-030(B), a
service provider shall collect, remove and dispose of recyclable items by
providing collection every two (2) weeks at all residences within the city on a
schedule and route determined by the city.
B.   Subdivisions Accessible by Private Streets(Private Subdivisions):
Effective November 1, 2025, Draper City will not directly provide collection
services to Private Subdivisions. The city may arrange collection services for
Private Subdivisions currently serviced directly by the city through a
qualified third-party provider. Collection charges for these subdivisions will
be subject to the applicable service charge, as outlined in the city's
consolidated fee schedule, which may differ from public street rates to account
for the additional costs of private street collection. Alternatively, Private
Subdivisions or individual residents may choose to independently contract with
another service provider for refuse and recycling collection. To ensure
uninterrupted service, those opting for independent contracts must notify the
city in writing.
C.   Authorized Collection: Except as otherwise provided in this code, only
city approved service providers may haul solid waste within city limits.
D.   Commercial Waste: Commercial entities generating solid waste may manage
their own solid waste or employ service providers to collect and transport it.
Removal and transportation of commercial solid waste must comply with
regulations in this code. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019; amd. Ord. 1680, 10-7-2025)
7-11-040: SERVICE CHARGE:
A.   Imposed: The owner or owners of each residence in the city shall pay a
service charge for solid waste collection, which typically includes basic
refuse and recycling services.
B.   Late Charges: The city may impose late charges, interest, and costs of
collection, including attorney fees, on any past due service charges or unpaid
part thereof. Collection of said late charges may be effected through such
action as the city may deem necessary, including, but not limited to,
termination and disconnection of refuse and recycling and/or other service to
delinquent residences, litigation in a court of competent jurisdiction for
collection of penalties and charges provided for, and/or other methods as the
city may deem appropriate from time to time.
C.   Payment By Owner: The owner of the residence serviced is responsible for
payment of the service charge and any other charges levied and imposed
hereunder. An occupant or person in possession or control of a residence may
pay the service charge and thereby cause a credit on the corresponding
property. Payments made by occupants shall not relieve the property owner from
responsibility for payment of any unpaid charges imposed hereunder.
D.   Amount: The amount of the basic refuse and recycling service charge and
all associated additional container charges, late charges and interest may be
set and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-050: METHOD OF PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGES:
The refuse and recycling service charges imposed pursuant to this chapter may
be added to the charge made for other services and may be billed and collected
in the same manner as other service charges that are billed and collected by
the city. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-060: NO LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump solid waste or
recyclable items upon any street or alley, or upon any property or premise in
the city without proper authorization. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-070: VEHICLES; APPROVAL BY COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to convey, transport, or haul through or upon any
of the public streets any refuse or recyclable items except as permitted by the
appropriate county authority. Haulers shall comply with all permitting,
vehicle, and operational requirements established by the appropriate county
authority. Private citizens are permitted to transport only their own
personally generated bulky waste to appropriate licensed and permitted disposal
and recycling facilities under the condition that they follow all rules
regarding securing and covering loads, and prevent all spills or other releases
of the material during transport. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-080: VEHICLES; COVERING OF CONTENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to haul, convey, or transport through or upon any
of the public streets any solid waste in open trucks, open trailers, or other
open conveyances, unless such waste is covered completely with a heavy tarp or
canvas. Each vehicle shall be so covered at all times when the vehicle is being
used for the collection of, or carrying, transporting, or hauling of solid
waste and is being driven for a distance of five (5) blocks or more. (Ord.
1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-090: CONTAINERS:
A.   Placement In Containers Required: All residential refuse and recyclable
items to be collected by the city from each residential user shall be placed
only in the appropriate automated refuse container or automated recycling
container issued to such residential user. Use of containers issued to other
residents for waste disposal is prohibited.
B.   Title To Containers: Title to the automated refuse and recycling
containers furnished by the city shall be retained by the city.
C.   Maintenance: Residents shall not add destructive or decorative markings to
or alter the original color of automated refuse or recycling containers.
D.   Damages: Residents shall be liable for damage to automated refuse or
recycling containers caused by placing any of the following in the automated
refuse or recycling container:
1.   More than three hundred (300) pounds of material;
2.   Hot materials;
3.   Corrosive materials; or
4.   Any other solid waste, material, or substance that cuts, melts, or ignites
the container.
E.   Report Of Damage, Malfunction: Residents shall promptly report to the city
any damage to or malfunctioning of an automated refuse or recycling container
that limits its usefulness for receipt of refuse/recyclable items so that it
may be repaired or replaced.
F.   Replacement Of Lost Containers: Automated refuse or recycling containers
lost or missing through no fault of the resident shall be replaced without
charge. Residents shall exercise due care to protect the automated refuse and
recycling containers against loss through theft or misappropriation.
G.   Nontransferable: Automated refuse or recycling containers furnished by the
city are issued to specific residential addresses and are nontransferable. Upon
discontinuance of use by a resident, the automated refuse and recycling
container(s) assigned to that address shall remain at the property unless
collected by the city.
H.   Overfilling; Rainproof, Flyproof: Automated refuse or recycling containers
shall not be overfilled to the extent that the contents may be spilled during
collection. All commercial solid waste shall be placed in rainproof and
flyproof receptacles and the receptacles shall be tightly closed. (Ord. 1401,
9-24-2019)
7-11-100: TIME AND PLACE OF PICK UP:
A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all automated refuse
or recycling containers subject to residential collection shall be placed on
the edge of the street at least ten feet (10') from any mailbox. The
container's wheels shall be as close to the curb as reasonably possible, with
the hinge thereof to curbside and the lid opening facing toward the street.
When snow or street construction prevents placing of the automated refuse or
recycling containers against the curb, the container shall be placed within two
feet (2') from the edge of said snow or construction and in a manner that will
not obstruct traffic or unduly impede the snowplowing activities of the city.
B.   For residences located in a cul-de-sac, containers shall be placed in a
straight line within the center of the cul-de-sac with the hinge facing
opposite the direction of vehicle traffic entering the cul-de-sac and placed no
less than one foot (1') apart.
C.   Automated refuse or recycling containers shall not be placed or permitted
to block driveways or through traffic.
D.   Automated refuse and recycling containers must not be set out upon the
street for collection prior to the day before collection and must be set out
prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the day of collection.
E.   All empty automated refuse and recycling containers must be removed from
the street as soon as practicable after being emptied but in no case later than
the same day they are emptied.
F.   Residents who are physically unable to wheel automated refuse or recycling
containers to curbside may contact the city to arrange for pick up assistance
from the city.
G.   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon a public street during the
hours of refuse/recycling pick up in a manner that interferes with a service
provider's access to automated refuse or recycling containers. (Ord. 1401, 9-
24-2019)
7-11-110: ALLOWABLE MATERIALS FOR REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE ITEM COLLECTION BY
SERVICE PROVIDER:
A.   The following wastes are the only wastes that may be placed in an
automated refuse container:
1.   Refuse as defined in section
7-11-010 of this chapter;
2.   Construction and demolition waste if:
a.   The quantity in each container does not exceed the weight limits allowed
in this chapter;
b.   Less than one-third (1/3) of the container contains sod, dirt, concrete,
bricks, or rocks; and
c.   The waste can be placed in the container without causing damage to the
container
3.   Liquid wastes if:
a.   The quantity is limited to less than one gallon;
b.   The liquid is sealed in a leakproof container; and
c.   The liquid is not considered a household hazardous waste, a hazardous
waste, sewage, or any other type of waste that is not permitted in the
automated refuse container; and
4.   Special wastes that have been prepared according to the special waste
handling instructions included in section
7-11-120 of this chapter.
B.   Only recyclable items as defined in section
7-11-010 items may be placed in automated recycling containers. If materials
other than the allowable materials are placed in an automated recycling
container, the service provider may refuse to empty the container until the
unallowable material has been removed, and the city may take enforcement action
as described in this chapter. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-120: SPECIAL WASTE MATERIALS REQUIRING SPECIAL PREPARATION:
This section shall apply to the disposal and collection of all special wastes
collected in the city. The following special wastes may be placed in an
automated refuse container for refuse collection only if they are properly
handled by following the instructions below:
A.   Ash may be placed in the automated refuse container or other permitted
refuse container if it is completely cool to the touch and does not contain any
hot or burning coals or cinders. Before being placed in the automated refuse
container or other permitted refuse container, the ash shall be sealed in a bag
or other container to prevent it from being released to the atmosphere during
collection or transport.
B.   Infectious waste, excluding sharps, may be placed in the automated refuse
container or other permitted refuse container if:
1.   All infectious wastes are contained in disposable plastic bags that are
impervious to moisture and that have a minimum thickness of 3.0 millimeters,
and that are tightly sealed to ensure that the contents are not spilled;
2.   All bags and containers used for containment and disposal of infectious
waste shall be red in color and conspicuously labeled with the words
"Infectious Waste", "Biohazard", or with the international infectious waste
symbol.
C.   Pharmaceutical waste may transported and deposited at a registered
medication drop box or be placed in the automated refuse container or other
permitted refuse container if it is first rendered unrecoverable and is sealed
inside a bag or other container that will prevent it from being spilled or
scavenged from the refuse container. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-130: MATERIALS NOT COLLECTED BY SERVICE PROVIDER:
This section shall apply only to collections made by a service provider. The
following materials require special handling and disposal, and shall not be set
out for collection by a service provider, whether placed in a container or
otherwise:
A.   Flammable, corrosive, or explosive materials;
B.   Hazardous or radioactive waste;
C.   Hot or burning materials;
D.   Dead animals;
E.   Sewage;
F.   Hazardous waste;
G.   Agricultural waste;
H.   Household hazardous waste;
I.   Sharps;
J.   Electronic waste;
K.   Sludge;
L.   Waste tires. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-140: COMPLIANCE WITH AND ENFORCEMENT OF REFUSE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
SERVICE LAWS:
A.   In evaluating whether a violation of this chapter has occurred, city staff
or the service provider may inspect any automated refuse or recycling container
placed for collection on any public street or any private property open to the
public to determine its contents and capacity.
B.   The city reserves the right to discontinue recycling collection service
for any resident that fails to comply with this code and rules promulgated
thereunder governing the refuse or recycling collection service. The property
owner will be charged a service fee shown on the Draper City consolidated fee
schedule for each automated container removed from service.
C.   For a period of six (6) months after the recycling collection service has
been discontinued due to a violation, the owner shall not be allowed to
subscribe to the or recycling collection service. After the six (6) month
period, the owner may request or recycling collection service. (Ord. 1401, 9-
24-2019)
7-11-150: BURNING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste or recyclable items in
the open air or in any furnace or stove within the city. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-160: DUMPING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump solid waste or
recyclable items upon any lot within the city. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-170: ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council may establish and amend rules and regulations governing the
disposal and collection of refuse and recyclable items and fixing rates for the
collection of the same. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
7-11-180: PENALTIES:
This chapter may be enforced through the provisions of this code or by filing
civil or criminal actions in the district court as provided by law. The city
has sole discretion to decide whether to file a civil or criminal case for a
violation. The city may file both, or one or the other. The possibility of an
administrative remedy pursuant to this chapter shall in no way interfere with
the city's right to prosecute violations of this chapter as criminal offenses.
The city may use any of the remedies available under the law in both civil and
criminal prosecution. If the city chooses to file both civil and criminal
charges for the same violation, no civil penalties may be assessed, but all
other remedies shall be available. (Ord. 1401, 9-24-2019)
CHAPTER 12
ALARM SERVICES
SECTION:
7-12-010: Definitions
7-12-020: Registration Required To Operate An Intrusion Or Physical Duress
Alarm System Business
7-12-030: Certification Required To Operate A Central Station Supervised Fire
Alarm System
7-12-040: User Instructions
7-12-050: City Liability Limitations
7-12-060: False Alarms
7-12-070: Interagency Communications
7-12-080: Deliberate False Alarms
7-12-090: Business License Revocation
7-12-010: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this chapter:
ALARM BUSINESS: Means the business of any individual, partnership, corporation
or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, monitoring, repairing,
altering, replacing, removing, moving, installing, planning the installation,
or assisting in planning the installation of any alarm system or causing any of
the above to occur, whether in or on any building, structure, facility or
premises.
ALARM SYSTEM: Means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry, fire or medical
emergency, or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which public
safety officers, and/or the Fire Department, are expected to respond.
ALARM USER: Means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization thereof of any kind in control of a building,
structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: Means a device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit
by voice message or code signal any emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
CENTRAL STATION FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: Means a system or group of systems in which
the operations of circuits and devices are transmitted automatically to,
recorded in, maintained by, and supervised from a listed central station having
competent and experienced servers and operators who, upon receipt of signal,
take such actions as required by NFPA 72 (National Fire Alarm Code). Such
service is to be controlled and operated by a person, firm, or corporation
whose business is the furnishing, maintaining, or monitoring of supervised fire
alarm systems.
COORDINATOR: Means the individual designated by the Police Department to
enforce the intrusion alarm provisions of this chapter.
FALSE ALARM: Means an alarm signal eliciting a response by peace officers, or
the Fire Department, when a situation requiring a response by them or other
emergency response units in fact does not exist. It includes an alarm signal
caused by conditions of nature which are normal for that area and subject to
control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. "False alarm" does not
include an alarm signal caused by extraordinarily violent conditions of nature
not reasonably subject to control.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: Means a manual or automatic fire alarm system signaling a
fire emergency at a given location, building or facility.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: Means the Draper City Fire Department, or their designated
representative.
INTERCONNECT: Means to connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing
device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device
that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: Means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted
entry into the area protected by the system.
LOCAL ALARM: Means any noise-making or visual alarm device.
PHYSICAL DURESS SYSTEM: Means an alarm system signaling a robbery or other
physical endangerment.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: Means the Draper City Police Department, or their designated
representative.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: Means a telephone line serving the VECC system or Sheriff/
fire dispatch that is designated to receive emergency calls.
VALLEY EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER (VECC) AND POLICE/FIRE DISPATCH: Are the
governmental facilities used to receive emergency and general information from
the public to be dispatched to the Police Department, or the Fire Department.
(Ord. 1329, 6-5-2018)
7-12-020: REGISTRATION REQUIRED TO OPERATE AN INTRUSION OR PHYSICAL DURESS
ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS:
It is unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or association to own,
manage, conduct or carry on the business of selling, leasing, installing,
servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or removing, or causing to
be sold, leased, installed, serviced, maintained, repaired, replaced, moved or
removed in or on any building, residence or other property within the City any
device known as an intrusion or physical duress alarm system, or automatic
dialing device connected to an answering service, unless such person,
partnership, corporation or association has obtained a license from the Utah
State Department of Commerce, Division of Occupational and Professional
Licensing, granted in compliance with the provisions of the Utah Construction
Trades Licensing Act, Utah Code Annotated section 58-55-101 et seq., 1953.
(Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
7-12-030: CERTIFICATION REQUIRED TO OPERATE A CENTRAL STATION SUPERVISED FIRE
ALARM SYSTEM:
A.   Compliance: Central station fire alarm systems providing service must
comply with NFPA 72 (the National Fire Alarm Code). Only listed and approved
equipment may be used. Fire alarm plans must be submitted to the Draper City
Fire Marshal for review and approval, and final testing must be performed
before the fire alarm system can be certified for initial use.
B.   Information Required On Panel: Approved central station service providers
must assure that their company name, the client's account number, and a twenty
four (24) hour toll free telephone number to their dispatch center is clearly
marked on the master fire alarm control panel for the building, or where no
control unit exists, on or near a primary fire alarm system component by the
main entrance to the structure.
C.   State License Required: Any person who installs a fire alarm system must
be licensed as a contractor by the Utah State Department of Public Licensing.
The installing contractor(s) must be legally eligible per State law to install,
service and/or maintain the fire alarm system, and all appurtenances for that
system. (Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
7-12-040: USER INSTRUCTIONS:
A.   Required: Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user
an alarm system which is installed on premises located within Draper City shall
furnish the alarm user with written instructions that provide information to
enable the user to operate the alarm system properly.
B.   Notice Required: Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to
any user an alarm system which is installed on premises located within Draper
City shall notify the alarm user in writing of this chapter's alarm user
requirement within five (5) business days of sale or installation. The notice
shall be addressed to the alarm user, or if the user is a business entity, to
its manager or designated person in charge, and shall contain the user's
telephone number (if known) and the street location of the premises on which
the alarm system is installed. A copy of such notice shall be mailed or
delivered to the Draper City Police Department, Attention: Alarm Systems
Coordinator, 1020 East Pioneer Road, Draper, UT 84111, at the same time the
original notice is sent. For fire alarms systems only, the copy of such notice
should be mailed to the Draper City Fire Marshal at Draper City Hall, 1020 East
Pioneer Road, Draper, UT 84020. (Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
7-12-050: CITY LIABILITY LIMITATIONS:
The City shall not be liable for any defects in operation of burglar, robbery
or fire alarm systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon
the receipt of notice of a tripped alarm nor for the failure or neglect of any
persons registered or issued a permit pursuant to this chapter in connection
with the installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment necessary to
or incident to the operation of such systems. In the event the City finds it
necessary to order the system disconnected, the City shall inure no liability
for such action. (Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
7-12-060: FALSE ALARMS:
A.   A service fee is hereby imposed for the fourth and any subsequent false
alarms on a physical duress or intrusion alarm system during a rolling twelve-
month period to which peace officers, including the Fire Department, respond.
The fee is assessed to the user of the alarm system. The amount of the fee
shall be as set forth in the consolidated fee schedule.
B.   Fees assessed are based on the user type as defined below:
1.   Residential (one or two family homes), multi-family dwellings.
2.   Business.
C.   All service fees assessed under this chapter are due and payable on the
date written notice of any fee due is issued by the Finance Department.
Penalties for delinquent fees shall be as set forth in the consolidated fee
schedule. If any service fee is not paid within one hundred twenty (120) days
of the due date, together with all applicable penalties, the City may use such
lawful means as are available to collect such fee, including all penalties,
costs and attorney's fees. (Ord. 1329, 6-5-2018)
7-12-070: INTERAGENCY COMMUNICATIONS:
A central station or other alarm dispatch center must provide the police/fire
dispatch a toll free telephone number for the conducting of business and
contacting the central station dispatchers at the time of filing the alarm
report. (Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
7-12-080: DELIBERATE FALSE ALARMS:
No person shall cause to be transmitted any notice of an intrusion, physical
duress or fire alarm trip, knowing the same to be false or without basis in
fact. Central stations shall not request law enforcement officers or the Fire
Department to respond to alarm scenes when monitoring equipment indicates an
alarm system malfunction signal. (Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
7-12-090: BUSINESS LICENSE REVOCATION:
Failure to timely pay any service fees imposed in this chapter may result in
the Coordinator initiating action to revoke the business license of the alarm
business. (Ord. 1179, 12-1-2015)
CHAPTER 13
CLEANING OF REAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-13-010: Purpose Of Provisions
7-13-020: Definitions
7-13-030: Real Property To Be Kept Clean And Secured
7-13-040: Weed Control Specifications
7-13-050: Notice Of Violation And Corrective Measures
7-13-060: City To Clean Or Secure Property When; Costs
7-13-070: Costs; Collection Methods Authorized
7-13-080: Costs; Collection By Lawsuit
7-13-090: Costs; Collection Through Taxes
7-13-100: Tax Notice; Removal Costs To Be Shown
7-13-110: Property Examination; Enforcement Authority
7-13-120: Violation; Penalty
7-13-130: Duty Of Owners, Occupants Or Agents
7-13-140: Examination Of Streets
7-13-150: Notice To Remove
7-13-010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
It shall be the purpose of this chapter to provide for the cleaning of real
property and the control of weeds in a way that will:
A.   Prevent fire hazards;
B.   Prevent insect and rodent harborages;
C.   Prevent the induction of hazardous pollens in the air;
D.   Prevent further spreading of vegetation that threatens the public health,
safety or welfare;
E.   Abate the existence of objects, structures or solid waste that threaten
the public health, safety and welfare; and
F.   Protect and promote the public health and safety of the community by
preventing or abating conditions of real property or the structures thereon
which create or maintain public nuisances. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings herein:
DEPARTMENT: The Draper City community development department or the city-county
health department.
ERADICATION: The complete destruction of weeds by chemicals, removal by root,
or any other method approved by the department.
INSPECTOR: Authorized inspectors and peace officers of Draper City and the
city-county health department director of health, or their authorized
representatives. The director of health and designated representatives are
hereby appointed city inspectors authorized by Utah Code Annotated section 10-
11-1, or its successor.
OWNER: Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others:
A.   Shall have the legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
B.   Shall have charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling
unit, as legal or equitable owner or agent of such owner, or an executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish, hazardous waste, dead animals,
sludge, liquid or semiliquid waste, and other discarded materials, or materials
stored or accumulated for the purpose of discarding or salvage, or materials
that have served their original intended purpose, or waste material resulting
from construction, industrial, manufacturing, mining, commercial, agricultural,
residential, institutional, recreational or community activities.
WEEDS: Vegetation growing upon any real property within Draper City which will
attain such a growth as to become a fire hazard when dry, or which is otherwise
noxious, a nuisance or dangerous, as determined by the department. Weeds shall
also include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:
A.   Dry grasses, stubble, brush, tumbleweeds and clippings which endanger the
public health and safety by creating a fire hazard, insect or rodent harborage,
or any other nuisance;
B.   Poison ivy, when the public health and safety in residential or other
developed and populated areas are affected; and
C.   Those plants named in the Utah noxious weed act, Utah Code Annotated title
4, chapter 17, and its subsequent regulations and successor sections. (Ord.
1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-030: REAL PROPERTY TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND SECURED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
owning or occupying real property in the city:
A.   To fail to maintain the height of weeds on such property as provided in
section 7-13-040 of this chapter;
B.   To fail to remove from such property any cuttings from such weeds;
C.   To fail to maintain all park strip landscaping abutting such property
including but not limited to keeping trees trimmed as provided in section 9-27-
080D;
D.   To fail to keep the park strip free from trash, debris, or noxious weeds;
E.   To fail to remove any junk, garbage, trash, debris, or inoperable,
abandoned or unused equipment, appliances, furniture or other tangible personal
property from such property;
F.   To fail to effectively secure or remove any vacant structure after having
been given written notice from any authorized inspector;
G.   To fail to remove all hail, snow or sleet from the entire length and
breadth of the sidewalk abutting such property within twenty four (24) hours
after it has ceased falling;
H.   To place or deposit snow, ice, or any other material on any city street
that interferes with the proper use of the street, obstructs travel, or
endangers property or persons;
I.   To fail to maintain a minimum clear space of three feet (3') around the
circumference of fire hydrants, including the removal of trees, shrubs, trash
or snow; or
J.   To fail to remove any dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees from the
property, or park strip abutting such property, that pose a hazard to property
or persons. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013; amd. Ord. 1642, 4-1-2025)
7-13-040: WEED CONTROL SPECIFICATIONS:
A.   Weeds shall be maintained at a height of not more than six inches (6") at
all times, and the cuttings shall be promptly cleared and removed from the
premises.
B.   Weeds which are eradicated by chemicals must be done so before their
height exceeds six inches (6") or they must be cut at a level not exceeding six
inches (6") in height.
C.   Weeds which are rototilled or removed by the root must be buried under the
soil or removed from the property.
D.   When, in the opinion of the inspector, the large size of property makes
the cutting of all weeds impractical, the inspector may, by written order,
allow and limit the required cutting of weeds to a firebreak of not less than
fifteen feet (15') in width cut around the complete perimeter of the property
and around any structures existing upon the property. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-050: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND CORRECTIVE MEASURES:
A.   Written Notice: Owners or occupants of the property upon which a violation
exists shall be served a written notice stating the violation, location of
violation, date of notice, corrective measures to be taken, a reasonable time
period to comply, which shall be not less than ten (10) days from the date of
the service of the order, and the department's power to cause, at the property
owner's expense, the cutting or eradicating of weeds, the cleaning and removing
of weeds, junk, garbage, trash, debris, or inoperable, abandoned or unused
equipment, appliances, furniture or other tangible personal property or
structures, or flammable material, or the securing of any vacant structures.
B.   Appeal; No Further Notice Required: Any administrative appeal to such
notice must be filed with the issuing department within ten (10) days of
service of the notice, and is subject to review by the city community
development director or the director of health. Once notice has been served
during any calendar year directing the cutting and removing of weeds, no
further notice need be served upon the same owner or occupant to compel such
weed cutting and removing during such calendar year.
C.   Service Of Notice: Such written notice issued by the inspector shall be
deemed sufficient and complete when served upon the owner or occupant:
1.   Personally by the inspector; or
2.   Mailing, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or occupant at the last
known post office address appearing on the records of the county assessor.
D.   Proof Of Service: The inspector shall make proof of service of such notice
under oath, and file the same in the office of the county treasurer. (Ord.
1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-060: CITY TO CLEAN OR SECURE PROPERTY WHEN; COSTS:
A.   Upon the owner's or occupant's failure to cut or eradicate the weeds,
remove the cuttings, solid waste, unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures or flammable material, junk, garbage, trash, debris, or inoperable,
abandoned or unused equipment, appliances, furniture or other tangible personal
property, or failure to secure any vacant structure in accordance with the
notice issued, the department shall have the authority to cause such cutting,
removing or securing, including the power to enter on the property in violation
for such cutting, removing or securing, or to authorize others to enter on such
property and cause such cutting, removing or securing.
B.   The inspector, upon approved completion of the work, shall prepare an
itemized statement of all costs, including administrative expenses incurred by
the department, which shall be a minimum of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00), plus the cost of cutting, eradicating, removing or securing the
property. The inspector shall mail a copy of such statement to the owner or
occupant demanding reimbursement to the department of such costs by payment to
the city treasurer within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing. Such notice
shall be deemed delivered when mailed by registered mail addressed to the last
known address of the property owner or occupant according to the records of the
county assessor. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-070: COSTS; COLLECTION METHODS AUTHORIZED:
If within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing the owner fails to make
payment of the amount set forth in such statement to the city treasurer, the
inspector may either cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law,
or refer the matter to the county treasurer, as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-080: COSTS; COLLECTION BY LAWSUIT:
In the event collection of expenses of cutting, eradicating, removing of solid
waste, unsightly or deleterious objects or structures or flammable material,
weeds, junk, garbage, trash, debris, or inoperable, abandoned or unused
equipment, appliances, furniture or other tangible personal property, or the
securing of any vacant structure is pursued through the court, the city shall
sue for and receive judgment for all expenses of cutting, eradicating,
removing, or securing of any structure, together with reasonable attorney fees,
interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner
provided by law. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-090: COSTS; COLLECTION THROUGH TAXES:
In the event that the inspector elects to refer the expenses of cutting,
eradicating, removing of solid waste, unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures, flammable material, weeds, junk, garbage, trash, debris, or
inoperable, abandoned or unused equipment, appliances, furniture or other
tangible personal property, or the securing of any structure to the county
treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, the inspector
shall make in triplicate an itemized statement of all expenses, including such
administrative expenses incurred, and shall deliver three (3) copies of the
statement to the county treasurer within ten (10) days after the completion of
the work. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-100: TAX NOTICE; REMOVAL COSTS TO BE SHOWN:
A.   Upon receipt of the itemized statement of the costs of cutting or
eradicating, removing of solid waste, unsightly or deleterious objects,
flammable material, weeds, junk, garbage, trash, debris, or inoperable,
abandoned or unused equipment, appliances, furniture or other tangible personal
property, or the securing of any structure, the county treasurer shall
forthwith mail one copy to the owner of the land from which the same were cut,
eradicated, removed or secured, together with a notice that objection in
writing to the board of county commissioners may be made within thirty (30)
days to the whole or any part of the statement so filed. The county treasurer
shall, at the same time, deliver a copy of the statement to the clerk of the
board of county commissioners.
B.   If objections to any statement are filed with the board, the board shall
set a date for hearing, giving notice thereof, to the party objecting, the
inspector, the department and the city attorney's office and, upon the hearing
of the matter, determine and fix the actual cost of cutting, eradicating,
removing or securing, including administrative expenses, reporting the findings
to the county treasurer.
C.   If no objections to the items of the account are made within thirty (30)
days of the date of mailing such statement, the county treasurer shall certify
and enter the amount of such statement on the assessment rolls of the county in
the column prepared for that purpose. Otherwise, the treasurer shall, within
ten (10) days of the date of the action of the board of county commissioners,
upon any objections filed, enter in the prepared column upon the tax rolls the
amount found and certified by the board to be the cost of cutting, eradicating,
removing or securing.
D.   If current tax notices have been mailed, the taxes so incurred may be
carried over the rolls to the following year. After the entry by the county
treasurer of the certified costs of such work, the amount so entered shall have
the force and effect of a valid judgment of the district court, and shall be a
lien upon the lands upon which the work was performed, and shall be collected
by the county treasurer at the time of and in the manner provided for the
payment of general taxes. The county treasurer shall send a copy of the
certification to the city treasurer's office. Thereafter, upon payment, a
receipt shall be acknowledged upon the general tax receipt issued by the county
treasurer and the collected funds shall be reimbursed to the applicable
abatement fund. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-110: PROPERTY EXAMINATION; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The inspector is hereby authorized to make examinations and investigations of
all real property in the city to determine whether the owners of such property
are complying with the provisions of this chapter, and to enforce the
provisions thereof. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-120: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any party who shall fail to do those acts required in this chapter, and any
party who shall do or cause those acts prohibited by this chapter to be done
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. If the violator is a corporation,
partnership or entity other than an individual, such violator may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-
2013)
7-13-130: DUTY OF OWNERS, OCCUPANTS OR AGENTS:
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant, or the agent of the owner or
occupant, of land abutting and bordering on any public street in the city, for
the distance such land abuts and borders, to remove from alongside the street
in front of such land all weeds and noxious vegetation, from the property line
to the curb line of the street. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-140: EXAMINATION OF STREETS:
It shall be the duty of any authorized city inspector, appointed under the
provisions of the city municipal code or otherwise authorized assistants, to
make examinations and investigations of the areas of streets referred to in
section
7-13-130 of this chapter, or its successor, to determine whether the persons
referred to in that section are complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
7-13-150: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Upon a determination by the inspector that the provisions of section
7-13-130 of this chapter, or its successor, are not being complied with, the
inspector shall ascertain the name of the owner or occupant, or the agent of
the owner or occupant, of the land abutting and bordering a public street
failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall serve notice
in writing upon such owner or occupant, or agent of the owner or occupant,
either personally or by mail, addressed to the last known address as disclosed
by the records of the county assessor, requiring such owner or occupant, or
agent of the owner or occupant, to remove the weeds and noxious vegetation,
junk, garbage, trash, debris, or inoperable, abandoned or unused equipment,
appliances, furniture or other tangible personal property within such time as
the inspector shall designate, which shall be not less than ten (10) days from
the date of service of such notice. It shall be the duty of the person so
served with notice to comply therewith. (Ord. 1041, 1-22-2013)
CHAPTER 14
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
7-14-010: Title
7-14-020: Purpose
7-14-030: Definitions
7-14-040: Supervision
7-14-050: Burial Restrictions
7-14-060: Disinterment
7-14-070: Perpetual Care Fund
7-14-080: Cemetery Property
7-14-090: Reservation Of Graves
7-14-010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the DRAPER CITY CEMETERY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 728,
11-21-2006)
7-14-020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the efficient operation,
maintenance, and appearance of the Draper City Cemetery. The city finds that
cemetery grounds should be maintained and treated with respect and decorum. The
privacy of mourners should be protected against disruption. (Ord. 728, 11-21-
2006; amd. Ord. 1627, 12-3-2024)
7-14-030: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings unless the
context otherwise clearly requires:
BURIAL LOT: One or more places for burial as determined by the city.
CEMETERY COMMITTEE: One or more city employees as designated by the city
manager who have the responsibility of supervising all city cemetery
activities.
FUNERAL: The ceremonies, rituals, processions, and memorial services held in
connection with the burial, cremation, or memorial of a deceased person,
including the assembly and dispersal of the mourners.
GRAVE: A space within a burial lot for which one right of burial may be sold.
MARKER: A headstone flush with the surface of the ground made of granite,
marble, or metal substances.
MONUMENT: A tombstone or headstone of granite, marble, or metal substances
which extends above the surface of the ground at least twelve inches (12") in
height or higher, but not exceeding thirty-six inches (36") in height.
PERPETUAL CARE: The maintenance care that the city agrees to give to the
cemetery generally, not including the repair or replacement of markers or
monument structures, unless damage is caused by the city.
RIGHT OF BURIAL AND/OR BURIAL RIGHT: The right for the holder of a right of
burial certificate, or heir, to be buried in the city cemetery. (Ord. 728, 11-
21-2006; amd. Ord. 1627, 12-3-2024)
7-14-040: SUPERVISION:
The cemetery committee shall be appointed by the city manager for the general
supervision of the city cemetery. The city recorder shall chair the cemetery
committee and administer the rules.
A.   The cemetery committee shall:
1.   Direct and control all improvements, planting, placement of markers,
monuments and all other work done within the cemetery of any kind, nature, or
description;
2.   Direct and control all burials in the city cemetery;
3.   Sell burial rights in any unsold lots in the city cemetery and issue any
payment to the city treasurer; and
4.   Provide for the regulation of all funeral corteges while in the cemetery.
B.   Before issuing a written permit to inter remains in the cemetery, the
cemetery committee shall require proof of right of burial certificate and the
payment of all fees.
C.   A certificate of burial right shall comply with such rules, regulations
and terms adopted by the city council pertaining to the sale, transfer, and
usage of burial rights, as well as the size of grave and location in the
cemetery.
D.   A right to burial certificate does not convey to or entitle the holder
thereof any other privilege other than the right to bury remains of a deceased
person in an available grave as determined by the city. A right to burial
certificate does not convey any title to the land or any part thereof.
E.   The cemetery committee shall keep record of all certificates conveyed,
burials and removals, plats and locations. The city recorder shall submit all
information required to Salt Lake County, as provided under Utah Code Annotated
Title 8, Chapter 3, as amended. (Ord. 728, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 1627, 12-3-
2024)
7-14-050: BURIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Unless a burial complies with the provisions in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to:
A.   Bury remains of a deceased person within the limits of the city
B.   Bury remains of a non-cremated deceased person in any cemetery without
first placing the remains in a casket or other suitable container encased in a
vault of concrete, metal, fiberglass, or other materials of equivalent strength
(not wood), approved by the city and so constructed as to prevent collapse and
the resulting settlement of the soil above the same. (Ord. 728, 11-21-2006;
amd. Ord. 1627, 12-3-2024)
7-14-060: DISINTERMENT:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to disinter any remains in the city
cemetery except in accordance with state law. Before disinterment the requester
shall provide a fee as determined by the city council by resolution and a
written order from the estate of the deceased authorizing such removal, which
order shall be filed and preserved by the city recorder.
B.   No remains shall be removed where the person has died of a contagious
disease within two (2) years of the date of burial, unless the remains were
cremated or buried in a hermetically sealed coffin, which is still intact.
(Ord. 728, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 1627, 12-3-2024)
7-14-070: PERPETUAL CARE FUND:
There is hereby established a perpetual care fund for the purpose of providing
perpetual care funding for the maintenance, care and operation of the city
cemetery. The creation, funding and maintenance of such perpetual care shall
comply with applicable provisions of the laws of the state of Utah, including,
but not limited to, the uniform fiscal procedures act as set forth in Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 6, as amended. The city council shall establish, by
resolution, a perpetual care fee to be assessed and deposited in the perpetual
care fund for each grave and/or interment. All perpetual care fees collected by
the city shall be deposited in the perpetual care fund and invested according
to applicable state law. (Ord. 728, 11-21-2006)
7-14-080: CEMETERY PROPERTY:
A.   Removal Of Property; Injury: It is unlawful for any person to remove any
headstone, tombstone, monument, grave decoration, tree, shrub, or any other
property in any cemetery, except with permission of the city. It is unlawful
for any person to injure, deface, break or destroy property in the city
cemetery.
B.   Markers, Monuments: All markers and monuments shall be placed in any
cemetery in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations adopted from
time to time by the city council. No person shall install any marker or
monument without permit from the city.
C.   Additional Rules: The city council may adopt by resolution all other rules
for the care, use, operation and maintenance of the city cemetery as are
reasonable and necessary, including, but not limited to, rules concerning
traffic, hours, and decoration.
D.   Disturbing Behavior: No person shall knowingly or intentionally engage in
behavior that is reasonably calculated to inflict severe emotional distress on
any member of a funeral within one hundred feet (100') of the funeral, or if
using amplification devices, within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the
funeral.
E.   Disruptions: No person shall knowingly or intentionally disrupt a funeral
by obstructing a mourner's entry or exit to or from funeral services, cemetery,
or grave site.
F.   Vehicle Operation: The motor vehicle speed limit within a cemetery is ten
(10) miles per hour unless otherwise posted by the cemetery owner. Motor
vehicles are permitted only within cemetery asphalt roads and parking lots and
only during daylight hours.
G.   Animals prohibited: Animals are prohibited from the city cemetery
regardless of whether the animal is leashed.
H.   Violation; Penalty: Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 728, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 1627, 12-3-2024)
7-14-090: RESERVATION OF GRAVES:
It is the policy of the city to comply with the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated title 8, chapter 5, as amended, regarding the reversion of unused
graves. What is herein defined as a grave is referred to in Utah Code Annotated
as burial lot. (Ord. 728, 11-21-2006)
TITLE 8
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-1-010: Declaration Of Finding And Intent
8-1-020: Scope Of Chapter
8-1-030: Excluded Activity
8-1-040: Definitions
8-1-050: Nonexclusive Franchise
8-1-060: Every Provider Must Obtain
8-1-070: Nature Of Grant
8-1-080: Current Providers
8-1-090: Nature Of Franchise
8-1-100: Regulatory Approval Needed
8-1-110: Term
8-1-120: Compensation
8-1-130: Timing
8-1-140: Fee Statement And Certification
8-1-150: Future Costs
8-1-160: Taxes And Assessments
8-1-170: Interest On Late Payments
8-1-180: No Accord And Satisfaction
8-1-190: Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees
8-1-200: Continuing Obligation And Holdover
8-1-210: Costs Of Publication
8-1-220: Franchise Application
8-1-230: Application Criteria
8-1-240: Franchise Determination
8-1-250: General Requirement
8-1-260: Quality
8-1-270: Licenses And Permits
8-1-280: Relocation Of The System
8-1-290: Protect Structures
8-1-300: No Obstruction
8-1-310: Safety Precautions
8-1-320: Repair
8-1-330: System Maintenance
8-1-340: Trimming Of Trees
8-1-350: Notification Of Sale
8-1-360: If PSC Approval Is No Longer Required
8-1-370: Insurance, Indemnity, And Security
8-1-380: Oversight
8-1-390: Maintain Records
8-1-400: Confidentiality
8-1-410: Provider's Expense
8-1-420: Right Of Inspection
8-1-430: Enforcement And Remedies
8-1-440: Force Majeure
8-1-450: Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services
8-1-460: Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property
8-1-470: Publicizing Work
8-1-480: Conflicts
8-1-490: Severability
8-1-500: New Developments
8-1-510: Notices
8-1-520: Exercise Of Police Power
8-1-530: Construction
8-1-540: Applicability
8-1-550: Other Applicable Ordinances
8-1-560: City Failure To Enforce
8-1-570: Construed According To Utah Law
8-1-580: Mobile Telephone Service Revenue Tax
8-1-010: DECLARATION OF FINDING AND INTENT:
A.   Findings Regarding Rights Of Way: Draper City finds that the rights of way
within the city:
1.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the
business and social life of the city;
2.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent
with that intent;
3.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public
service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for profit, to
the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well being of the
city and its citizens; and
4.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management
to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the
foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon
the public from such facilities' construction, placement, relocation, and
maintenance in the rights of way.
B.   Finding Regarding Compensation: The city finds that the right to occupy
portions of the rights of way for limited times for the business of providing
telecommunications services is a valuable use of a unique public resource that
has been acquired and is maintained at great expense to the city and its
taxpayers, and, therefore, the taxpayers of the city should receive fair and
reasonable compensation for use of the rights of way.
C.   Finding Regarding Local Concern: The city finds that while
telecommunications systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve rights of way, municipal franchising, and vital
business and community service, which are of local concern.
D.   Finding Regarding Promotion Of Telecommunications Services: The city finds
that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the
rapid development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscriminatory basis,
responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability for
municipal, educational and community services.
E.   Findings Regarding Franchise Standards:
1.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
2.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which
providers may use valuable public property to serve the public;
3.   Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm that may
flow from such commercial use of rights of way;
4.   Protects the police powers and rights of way management authority of the
city in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
5.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the
city infrastructure;
6.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of way; and
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
7.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers are
created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the telecommunications act of 1996 ("act") (Public Law 96-104).
(Ord. 403, 11-7-2000)
F.   Power To Manage Rights Of Way: The city adopts this telecommunications
ordinance pursuant to its power to manage the rights of way, pursuant to common
law, the Utah constitution and statutory authority, and to receive fair and
reasonable compensation for the use of rights of way by providers as expressly
set forth by section 253 of the act. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-020: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers of
telecommunications services and systems that require the use of the rights of
way, including providers of both the system and service, those providers of the
system only, and those providers who do not build the system but who only
provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers and to all
providers in the city prior to the effective date hereof, whether operating
with or without a franchise as set forth in section
8-1-540 of this chapter. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-030: EXCLUDED ACTIVITY:
A.   Cable TV: This chapter shall not apply to cable television operators
otherwise regulated by other state, federal or municipal franchises or
ordinances.
B.   Wireless Services: This chapter shall not apply to personal wireless
service facilities.
C.   Provisions Applicable To Excluded Providers: Providers excused by other
law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be required to
obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this chapter through
the exercise of the city's police power and not preempted by other law shall be
applicable. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-040: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a
desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or a
part, of the city. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights of way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
CITY: Draper City, Utah.
COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the city.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than thirty five percent (35%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest", as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
FCC: The federal communications commission, or any successor thereto.
FRANCHISE: The rights and obligations extended by the city to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way
within the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include: a) any other permit or authorization
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the
city required by the ordinances and laws of the city; b) any other permit,
agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on rights of
way or public property, including, without limitation, permits and agreements
for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned
by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in
or along the rights of way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to
this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be
exercised.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26,
as amended. In the case of any provider not covered within the ambit of Utah
Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26, the definition of "gross revenue" shall be
that set forth in the franchise agreement.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights of way.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights of way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to sections 651 et seq., of the
telecommunications act (47 USC title VI, part V), regardless of the system
used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the city.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This telecommunications ordinance
concerning the granting of franchises in and by the city for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
PSC: The public service commission, or any successor thereto.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the telecommunications act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes
what is commonly known as cellular and PCS services that do not install any
system or portion of a system in the rights of way.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, or system lessee.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter
existing as such within the city.
SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser
or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or digital
format.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE(S) OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications or
communications services provided by a provider within the city that the
provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and any
equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the services
provided within the city, except that these terms do not include "cable
service" as defined in the cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended
by the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 (47 USC
521 et seq.), and the telecommunications act. Telecommunications service or
services also includes an open video service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the rights of
way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or
analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications
services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video
system.
WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. 403, 11-7-2000)
8-1-050: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
The city is empowered and authorized to issue nonexclusive franchises governing
the installation, construction, operation, use and maintenance of systems in
the city's rights of way, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The franchise is granted through a franchise agreement entered into between the
city and provider. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-060: EVERY PROVIDER MUST OBTAIN:
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, every provider must
obtain a franchise from the city prior to constructing a telecommunications
system or providing telecommunications services, and every provider must obtain
a franchise before constructing an open video system or providing open video
services via an open video system and shall be subject to the customer service
and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV companies. The
fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By
way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-070: NATURE OF GRANT:
A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights of way. A
franchise is only the right to occupy rights of way on a nonexclusive basis for
the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the franchise; the
right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased except as may be expressly
provided in a franchise agreement. A franchise does not excuse a provider from
obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating
its system on the property of others, including the city's property. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to
another provider, so long as the lessee has obtained a franchise. (Ord. 403,
11-7-2000)
8-1-080: CURRENT PROVIDERS:
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any provider acting
without a franchise on the effective date hereof shall request issuance of a
franchise from the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this
chapter. If such request is made, the provider may continue providing service
during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if
negotiations cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider shall comply
with the provisions of section
8-1-460 of this chapter. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-090: NATURE OF FRANCHISE:
The franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be
a nonexclusive franchise providing the right and consent to install, operate,
repair, maintain, remove and replace its system on, over and under the rights
of way in order to provide services. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-100: REGULATORY APPROVAL NEEDED:
Before offering or providing any services pursuant to the franchise, a provider
shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or
licenses for the offering or provision of such services from the appropriate
federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the city
upon the written request of the city evidence of all such approvals, permits,
authorizations or licenses. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-110: TERM:
No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of less than
five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise shall be
granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-120: COMPENSATION:
As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, a provider shall have the following obligations:
A.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review an
application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the city, at the time of application, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee. The application
fee shall also be paid when an amendment to an application is filed with the
city.
B.   Franchise Fees: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license tax or
fee enacted by the city.
C.   Encroachment Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
encroachment permit as provided in the city's encroachment permit ordinance.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
8-1-130: TIMING:
Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all franchise fees shall
be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of the close of each
calendar month. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-140: FEE STATEMENT AND CERTIFICATION:
Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be
accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated
and shall be certified as to its accuracy. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-150: FUTURE COSTS:
A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at the direction of the
city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and expenses that the city incurs
for the services of third parties (including, but not limited to, attorneys and
other consultants) in connection with any renewal or provider initiated
renegotiation, transfer, amendment or other modification of this chapter, or a
franchise; provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a reasonable
financial cap at the outset of negotiations. Any costs associated with any work
to be done to provide space on city owned poles shall be borne by the provider.
(Ord. 403, 11-7-2000)
8-1-160: TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS:
To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities,
other than the city on the use of the city property as a result of a provider's
use or occupation of the rights of way, the provider shall be responsible for
payment of its pro rata share of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise
required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be in addition to any
other fees payable pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-170: INTEREST ON LATE PAYMENTS:
In the event that any payment is not actually received by the city on or before
the applicable date fixed in the franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from
such date until received at the rate charged for delinquent state taxes. (Ord.
247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-180: NO ACCORD AND SATISFACTION:
No acceptance by the city of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such
fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for
additional sums payable. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-190: NOT IN LIEU OF OTHER TAXES OR FEES:
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment
except as specifically provided in this chapter, or as required by applicable
law. By way of example, and not limitation, encroachment permit fees are not
waived and remain applicable. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
8-1-200: CONTINUING OBLIGATION AND HOLDOVER:
In the event a provider continues to operate all or any part of the system
after the term of the franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter and the franchise, including, without
limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period
of such continued operation; provided, that any such continued operation shall
in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as
a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such
continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and
restitution. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-210: COSTS OF PUBLICATION:
A provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its franchise
that may be required by law. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-220: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
To obtain a franchise to construct, own, operate, maintain or provide services
through any system within the city, to obtain a renewal of a franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter, or to obtain the city approval of a transfer of a
franchise, as provided in section
8-1-350 of this chapter, granted pursuant to this chapter, an application must
be filed with city on a form provided by the city. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-230: APPLICATION CRITERIA:
In making a determination as to an application filed pursuant to this chapter,
the city may, but shall not be limited to, request or consider the following:
A.   Obtaining a copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity, if any is necessary for provider's offering of
services within the state of Utah;
B.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the city
for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during the
franchise term proposed by the provider;
C.   Provider's agreements to comply with the requirements of this chapter; and
D.   Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter into a
pole attachment agreement with the city. (Ord. 403, 11-7-2000)
8-1-240: FRANCHISE DETERMINATION:
The city, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the
basis of these and other considerations relevant to the use of the rights of
way, without competitive bidding. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-250: GENERAL REQUIREMENT:
No provider shall receive a franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of
the terms set forth in this chapter governing construction and technical
requirements for its system, in addition to any other requirements or
procedures specified by the city or the franchise, including requirements
regarding collocation and cost sharing. A provider shall obtain a city
encroachment permit, pursuant to the encroachment permit ordinance, before
commencing any work in the rights of way. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. 1538,
4-19-2022)
8-1-260: QUALITY:
All work involved in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade
and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable
manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is
determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal law or
the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system, including,
without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or within the
system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or quality of
service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
promptly correct all such conditions. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-270: LICENSES AND PERMITS:
A provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its
own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or
authorization necessary to construct, operate, maintain, upgrade or repair the
system, including, but not limited to, any necessary approvals from persons
and/or the city to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A
provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization,
including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, pole attachment
agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for which the
permit, license, approval or authorization is required. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997;
amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
8-1-280: RELOCATION OF THE SYSTEM:
A.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights of way are
changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of the encroachment permit ordinance.
B.   City Authority To Move System: The city may, at any time, in case of fire,
disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or
under the rights of way of the city, in which event the city shall not be
liable therefor to a provider. The city shall notify a provider in writing
prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case
later than the next business day following any action taken under this section.
Notice shall be given as provided in section
8-1-510 of this chapter.
C.   Provider Required To Temporarily Move System: A provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to move
any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances,
temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of said structure.
A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the city for
any such movement of its systems.
D.   Rights Of Way Change; Obligation To Move System: When the city is changing
any rights of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to move
or remove its system from the rights of way, without cost to the city, to the
extent provided in the encroachment permit ordinance. This obligation exists
whether or not the provider has obtained an encroachment permit. (Ord. 247, 9-
2-1997; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
8-1-290: PROTECT STRUCTURES:
In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or
removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and expense, protect
any and all existing structures belonging to the city and all designated
landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated landmark
district. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the city to
alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other
municipal structure on, over or under the rights of way of the city required
because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be made by the
city or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees that it shall
be liable for the costs incurred by the city to replace or repair and restore
to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the city,
any municipal structure or any other rights of way of the city involved in the
construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system
that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on
behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-300: NO OBSTRUCTION:
In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, upgrade, repair or
removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the rights of
way of fixed guideway systems, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to,
from or within the city without the prior consent of the appropriate
authorities. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-310: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
A provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and
appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the
placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, security
personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements
prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply with all applicable
federal, state and local requirements, including, but not limited to, the
national electrical safety code. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-320: REPAIR:
After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the sole
determination of the city, an eminent danger exists, any rights of way within
the city which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation,
maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be repaired by
the city at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing
before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall submit to such a
provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the
rights of way intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof. (Ord. 247,
9-2-1997)
8-1-330: SYSTEM MAINTENANCE:
A provider shall:
A.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous condition
throughout the entire period of its franchise;
B.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the national
electrical safety code and all other applicable federal, state and local laws
or regulations; and
C.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the city of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-340: TRIMMING OF TREES:
A provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all
applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and
hanging over rights of way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with its system. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-350: NOTIFICATION OF SALE:
A.   PSC Approval: When a provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease,
assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or
involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it
or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the PSC,
the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the city of the
nature of the transaction and, if applicable, request a transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. A request for a transfer shall include a
certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the
terms of the original provider's franchise agreement.
B.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a request to transfer a franchise,
the city designee, as provided in section
8-1-430 of this chapter, may send notice approving the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. Such approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. If the city has reason to believe that the successor entity may not
comply with this chapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an
application for the transfer. The application shall comply with section
8-1-220 of this chapter. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-360: IF PSC APPROVAL IS NO LONGER REQUIRED:
If the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state law no longer
require approval of transactions described in section
8-1-350 of this chapter, then the following events shall be deemed to be a
sale, assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
section
8-1-350 of this chapter:
A.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
provider's assets to another person;
B.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more of its
existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create
a new controlling interest in a provider;
C.   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or
other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling interest
in such a provider; or
D.   The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the management
or operation of such provider or its system. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-370: INSURANCE, INDEMNITY, AND SECURITY:
Prior to the execution of a franchise, a provider will deposit with the city an
irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the
terms of the franchise, and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance
coverage required by the franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the city as
set forth in the franchise. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-380: OVERSIGHT:
The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the
construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the system, and any part thereof, in
accordance with the provisions of the franchise and applicable law. A provider
shall establish and maintain managerial and operational records, standards,
procedures and controls to enable a provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to
the satisfaction of the city at all times throughout the term, that a provider
is in compliance with the franchise. A provider shall retain such records for
not less than the applicable statute of limitations. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-390: MAINTAIN RECORDS:
A provider shall at all times maintain:
A.   On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records and "as
built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic
format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the city's
existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types
of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights of way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights of
way where work will be undertaken. As used herein, "as built" maps includes
"file construction prints". Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As built" maps,
including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be
submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30)
days after completion of modification and repairs. "As built" maps are not
required of the provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the
existing system to the extent they do not exist.
B.   Throughout the term, a provider shall maintain complete and accurate books
of account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of a provider
with respect to the system in a manner that allows the city at all times to
determine whether a provider is in compliance with the franchise. Should the
city reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such a
manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or records are
maintained so that a provider comes into compliance with this section. All
financial books and records which are maintained in accordance with the
regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that regulates utilities in
the state of Utah, and generally accepted accounting principles shall be deemed
to be acceptable under this section. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-400: CONFIDENTIALITY:
If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be
kept confidential by federal, state or local law, upon proper request by a
provider, such information shall be treated as a protected record within the
meaning of the Utah government records access and management act ("GRAMA"),
making it available only to those who must have access to perform their duties
on behalf of the city; provided, that a provider notifies the city of, and
clearly labels the information which a provider deems to be confidential,
proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be the sole
responsibility of the provider. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-410: PROVIDER'S EXPENSE:
All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the
sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or a
franchise. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-420: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee, the books
and records of the provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or
audit by duly authorized representatives of the city at all reasonable times,
upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books
and records. The provider agrees to reimburse the city the reasonable costs of
an audit if the audit discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent
(95%) or less of the compensation due the city for the period of such audit. In
the event the accounting rendered to the city by the provider herein is found
to be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within
thirty (30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the city may
accept any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the
city shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute
or is later found to be incorrect. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-430: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
A.   Enforcement; City Designee: The city is responsible for enforcing and
administering this chapter, and the city or its designee, as appointed by the
council, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any
franchise agreement.
B.   Enforcement Provision: Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-440: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the event a provider's performance of any of the terms, conditions or
obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is prevented by a cause or
event not within a provider's control, such inability to perform shall be
deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result
thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the
control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes,
sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of utilities,
explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods,
earthquakes, landslides, and fires. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-450: EXTENDED OPERATION AND CONTINUITY OF SERVICES:
A.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation of a
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the city shall have discretion to
permit or require a provider to continue to operate its system or provide
services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the
date of such expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its
system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter.
B.   Continuation By Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: If the provider is the
incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate
its system and provide services without regard to revocation or expiration, but
shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-460: REMOVAL OR ABANDONMENT OF FRANCHISE PROPERTY:
A.   Abandoned System: In the event that: 1) the use of any portion of the
system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the city to the last
known address of provider; 2) any system has been installed in the rights of
way without complying with the requirements of this chapter or franchise; or 3)
the provisions of section
8-1-090 of this chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider,
except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed
to have abandoned such system.
B.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The city, upon such terms as it may impose,
may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any
system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained under
a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned
system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any affected
rights of way to their former state at the time such system was installed, so
as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation
necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights of way in as good condition
as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with
any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments.
The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the
rights of way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal.
The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and any
security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by a provider with the
terms and conditions of this section.
C.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system in
place, a provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a written
instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city the
ownership of the abandoned system.
D.   Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for which a
franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided
for by this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer,
the city shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its expense,
all above ground portions of a system from the rights of way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
E.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in place
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights of way
or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-470: PUBLICIZING WORK:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance and describe the work to be
performed. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-480: CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a
franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-490: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal, state or local court
of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or
state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with
regard to the validity of the ordinance provisions in question are exhausted,
such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part
of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and
enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the
provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
such law the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and
shall again be binding on the city and the provider; provided, that the city
shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be
reasonably required for a provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision,
and written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such
provision. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-500: NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend this chapter, upon
application of a provider, when necessary to enable the provider to take
advantage of any developments in the field of telecommunications which will
afford the provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or
economically serve itself or the public. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-510: NOTICES:
All notices from a provider to the city required under this chapter or pursuant
to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be directed to the
officer as designated by the city council. A provider shall provide in any
application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to receive
notices from the city. A provider shall immediately notify the city of any
change in its name, address, or telephone number. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-520: EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER:
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the
city reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or
other directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise
of its police powers. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-530: CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal and state statutes. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-540: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall further apply, to the extent
permitted by applicable federal or state law to all existing franchises granted
prior to the effective date of this chapter and to a provider providing
services, without a franchise, prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 247,
9-2-1997)
8-1-550: OTHER APPLICABLE ORDINANCES:
A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and
enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A
provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted
by the city pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all providers shall
comply with the city zoning and other land use requirements. (Ord. 247, 9-2-
1997)
8-1-560: CITY FAILURE TO ENFORCE:
A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by
reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 247, 9-2-
1997)
8-1-570: CONSTRUED ACCORDING TO UTAH LAW:
This chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the state of
Utah. (Ord. 247, 9-2-1997)
8-1-580: MOBILE TELEPHONE SERVICE REVENUE TAX:
A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined
as follows:
CUSTOMER:
1.   The person or entity, having a place of primary use within the city, that
contracts with the home service provider for mobile telecommunications
services; or
2.   If the end user of mobile telecommunications services is not the
contracting party, the end user of the mobile telecommunications services; but
this clause applies only for the purpose of determining the place of primary
use.
3.   "Customer" does not include:
a.   A reseller of mobile telecommunications service; or
b.   A serving carrier under an arrangement to serve the customer outside the
home service provider's licensed service area.
DESIGNATED DATABASE PROVIDER: A corporation, association, or other entity
representing all the political subdivisions of a state that is:
1.   Responsible for providing an electronic database prescribed in subsection
119(a) of chapter 4, title 4 of the United States Code if the state has not
provided such electronic database; and
2.   Approved by municipal and county associations or leagues of the state
whose responsibility it would otherwise be to provide such database prescribed
by sections 116 through 126 of chapter 4, title 4 of the United States Code.
ENHANCED ZIP CODE: A United States postal zip code of nine (9) or more digits.
HOME SERVICE PROVIDER: The facilities based carrier or reseller with which the
customer contracts for the provision of mobile telecommunications services.
LICENSED SERVICE AREA: The geographic area in which the home service provider
is authorized by law or contract to provide commercial mobile radio service to
the customer.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Commercial mobile radio service, as defined
in section 20.3 of title 47 of the code of federal regulations as in effect on
June 1, 1999. For purposes of this chapter, mobile telecommunications services
shall not include:
1.   Pager services using mobile devices that do not allow for two-way voice
communication;
2.   Narrowband personal communications services; and
3.   Short message services (SMS).
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: The street address representative of where the customer's
use of the mobile telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be:
1.   The residential street address or the primary business street address of
the customer; and
2.   Within the licensed service area of the home service provider.
PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING SERVICES: The right to purchase exclusively
telecommunications services that must be paid for in advance, that enables the
origination of calls using an access number, authorization code, or both,
whether manually or electronically dialed, if the remaining amount of units of
service that have been prepaid is known by the provider of the prepaid service
on a continuous basis.
RESELLER:
1.   A provider who purchases telecommunications services from another
telecommunications service provider and then resells, uses as a component part
of, or integrates the purchased services into a mobile telecommunications
service; and
2.   Does not include a serving carrier with which a home service provider
arranges for the service to its customers outside the home service provider's
licensed service area.
SERVING CARRIER: A facilities based carrier providing mobile telecommunications
service to a customer outside a home service provider's or reseller's licensed
service area.
B.   Monthly Tax Levied: There is levied upon every home service provider a tax
of one dollar ($1.00) per month for each telephone number assigned to any
customer whose place of primary use is within the city. The home service
provider may or may not pass this tax on to its customers. If the home service
provider passes the tax on to the customer, and the tax is reflected on the
customer's bill, the tax shall be shown on the bill as a flat rate municipal
tax charge.
C.   Remittance Date:
1.   Report To Be Filed: Within thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar
month, the home service provider taxed hereunder shall file, with the city
treasurer, a report computing the tax. Coincidental with the filing of such
report, the business shall pay to the city treasurer the amount of the tax due
for the calendar month subject to the report. If the thirtieth day after the
end of each calendar month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or state or federal
holiday, the deadline for filing the monthly report and remitting payment for
that month is extended to the next subsequent business day.
2.   Delinquent Payment: Any payment not paid when due shall be subject to a
delinquency penalty charge of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid amount. Failure
to make full payment and penalty charges within sixty (60) days of the
applicable payment date shall constitute a violation of this chapter. All
overdue amounts, including penalty charges, shall bear interest until paid at
the rate of an additional ten percent (10%) per annum.
3.   Reconciliation: Within three (3) years after the filing of any report or
the making of any payment, the city treasurer may examine such report or
payment, determine the accuracy thereof, and, if the city treasurer finds any
errors, report such errors to the home service provider for correction. If any
tax, as paid, shall be found deficient, the home service provider shall within
sixty (60) days remit the difference; and if the tax as paid be found
excessive, the city shall within sixty (60) days refund the difference plus
interest at the same rate as if such amount was deficient. In the event of a
disagreement, the home services provider shall file under protest pending the
resolution of the dispute between the parties or through the courts.
4.   Record Inspection: The records of the home service provider pertaining to
the reports and payment of the tax, including, but not limited to, any records
deemed necessary by the city to calculate or confirm proper payment by the home
service provider, shall be open for inspection by the city and its duly
authorized representatives upon reasonable notice at all reasonable business
hours of the home services provider within the statute of limitations period
defined in subsection C3, "Reconciliation", of this section.
5.   Home Service Provider Duty To Cooperate On Record Inspection:
a.   In order to facilitate any record inspection, the home service provider
shall, upon thirty (30) days' prior written request:
(1)   Grant the city or its duly authorized representatives reasonable access
to those portions of the books and records of the home service provider
necessary to calculate and confirm property payment of the tax; or
(2)   Provide the city or its duly authorized representatives with reports
containing or based on information necessary to calculate and confirm proper
payment of the tax.
b.   Any requests for such books, records, reports, or portions thereof shall
specify in writing the purpose for such request. Any books, records, reports,
or portions thereof provided by the home service provider to the city under a
claim that such documents are confidential business records are hereby
designated as "protected records" and shall not be copied or disclosed by the
city to third parties without the written permission of the home service
provider, unless such documents are determined by a court of law to constitute
"public records" within the meaning of the Utah government records access and
management act.
D.   Requirement To Maintain Electronic Database Or Enhanced Zip Code Listing:
1.   Electronic Database:
a.   Provision Of Database: The state may provide an electronic database to a
home service provider; or, if the state does not provide such an electronic
database, the designated database provider may choose to provide an electronic
database to a home service provider.
b.   Format:
(1)   Such electronic database, whether provided by the state or the designated
database provider, shall be provided in a format approved by the American
National Standards Institute's accredited standards committee X12, which,
allowing for de minimis deviations, designates for each street address in the
city, including, to the extent practicable, any multiple postal street
addresses applicable to one street location, the appropriate taxing
jurisdictions, and the appropriate code identified by one nationwide standard
numeric code.
(2)   Such electronic database shall also provide the appropriate code for each
street address with respect to political subdivisions that are not taxing
jurisdictions when reasonably needed to determine the proper taxing
jurisdiction.
(3)   The nationwide standard numeric codes shall contain the same number of
numeric digits, with each digit or combination of digits referring to the same
level of taxing jurisdiction throughout the United States, using a format
similar to FIPS 55-3 or other appropriate standard approved by the Federation
Of Tax Administrators and the multistate tax commission or their successors.
Each address shall be provided in standard postal format.
2.   Notice; Updates: The state or designated database provider that provides
or maintains an electronic database described above shall provide notice of the
availability of the then current electronic database and any subsequent
revisions thereof, by publication in the manner normally employed for the
publication of informational tax, charge, or fee notices to taxpayers in such
state.
3.   User Held Harmless: A home service provider using the data contained in an
electronic database described above shall be held harmless from any tax,
charge, or fee liability that otherwise would be due solely as a result of any
error or omission in such database provided by the city or designated database
provider. The home service provider shall reflect changes made to such database
during a calendar quarter, not later than thirty (30) days after the end of
such calendar quarter the state has issued notice of the availability of an
electronic database reflecting such changes under subsection D2, "Notice;
Updates", of this section.
4.   Procedure If No Electronic Database Provided:
a.   Safe Harbor: If neither the state nor the designated database provider
provides an electronic database, a home service provider shall be held harmless
from any tax, charge, or fee liability in the city that otherwise would be due
solely as a result of an assignment of a street address to an incorrect taxing
jurisdiction, if the home service provider employs an enhanced zip code to
assign each street address to a specific taxing jurisdiction and exercises due
diligence to ensure that each such street address is assigned to the correct
taxing jurisdiction. If an enhanced zip code overlaps boundaries of taxing
jurisdictions of the same level, the home service provider must designate one
specific jurisdiction within such enhanced zip code for use in taxing the
activity for such enhanced zip code. Any enhanced zip code assignment changed
is deemed to be in compliance with this section. For purposes of this section,
there is a rebuttable presumption that a home service provider has exercised
due diligence if the home service provider demonstrates that it has:
(1)   Expended reasonable resources to implement and maintain an appropriately
detailed electronic database of street address assignments to taxing
jurisdictions;
(2)   Implemented and maintained reasonable internal controls to promptly
correct misassignments of street addresses to taxing jurisdictions; and
(3)   Used all reasonably obtainable and usable data pertaining to municipal
annexations, incorporations, reorganizations, and any other changes in
jurisdictional boundaries that materially affect the accuracy of such database.
b.   Termination Of Safe Harbor: Subsection D4a, "Safe Harbor", of this section
applies to a home service provider that is in compliance with the requirements
of subsection D4a, "Safe Harbor", of this section with respect to a state for
which an electronic database is not provided, until the later of:
(1)   Eighteen (18) months after the nationwide standard numeric code has been
approved by the Federation Of Tax Administrators and the multistate tax
commission; or
(2)   Six (6) months after the state or a designated database provider in the
state provides such database.
E.   Place Of Primary Use:
1.   A home service provider is responsible for obtaining and maintaining the
customer's place of primary use. Subject to subsection D, "Requirement To
Maintain Electronic Database Or Enhanced Zip Code Listing", of this section,
and if the home service provider's reliance on information by its customer is
in good faith, a home service provider:
a.   May rely upon the applicable residential or business street address
supplied by the home service provider's customer.
b.   Is not liable for any additional taxes, charges, or fees based on a
different determination of the place of primary use for taxes, charges, or fees
that are customarily passed on to the customer as a separate address under
existing agreements.
2.   A home service provider may treat the address used by the home service
provider for tax purposes for any customer under a service contract or
agreement in effect two (2) years after the date of this amendment to this
chapter as that customer's place of primary use for the remaining term of such
service contract or agreement, excluding any extension or renewal of such
service contract or agreement, for purposes of determining the taxing
jurisdiction to which taxes, charges, or fees on charges for mobile
telecommunication services are remitted.
F.   Tax Against Customer: Each customer shall accurately report the customer's
place of primary use. The customer shall be liable for any taxes not paid by
the home service provider as a result of the customer's failure to accurately
report the customer's place of primary use.
G.   Nonapplication: This chapter does not apply to the determination of the
taxing status of:
1.   Prepaid telephone calling services; or
2.   Air-ground radio-telephone service, as defined in section 22.99 of title
47 of the code of federal regulations as in effect on June 1, 1999.
H.   Implementation Date: If this chapter is adopted before January 1, 2001, a
home service provider shall have a minimum of thirty (30) days' notice before
being obligated to collect the tax described in this chapter. After January 1,
2001, a home service provider shall have a minimum of sixty (60) days' notice
before being obligated to collect the tax described in this chapter. After
January 1, 2001, a home service provider shall receive a minimum of sixty (60)
days' notice regarding any changes to this chapter.
I.   Monthly Tax Severability Clause: If subsection B, "Monthly Tax Levied", of
this section is for any reason determined to be, or is rendered, illegal,
invalid or superseded by other lawful authority, including any state or
federal, legislative, regulatory or administrative authority having
jurisdiction thereof, or determined to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such determination shall have
no effect on the validity of any other section; provided, however, upon such
event and in lieu of such tax, there is levied upon every home service provider
a tax equal to six percent (6%) of the annual gross revenue of the home service
provider generated from services and products to its customers. (Ord. 407, 11-
7-2000)
CHAPTER 2
UTILITY LINES
SECTION:
8-2-010: Purpose
8-2-020: Utility Lines Required To Be Underground
8-2-030: Exemptions
8-2-040: Telecommunications Lines
8-2-050: Existing Facilities (Rep. by Ord. 621, 1-18-2005)
8-2-060: Cost Of Placing Underground
8-2-070: Exceptions Allowed
8-2-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to preserve and protect the existing aesthetics, property values and
quality of life within Draper City. It is the intent of this chapter to require
that utility lines be placed underground when new utility lines are installed,
when new development is undertaken on property encumbered by existing overhead
lines, or when existing utility systems are upgraded or altered to serve a new
development. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
8-2-020: UTILITY LINES REQUIRED TO BE UNDERGROUND:
Except as provided in sections
8-2-030 and
8-2-040 of this chapter, all utility lines, including telecommunications lines,
installed within Draper City after the effective date hereof shall be installed
underground. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
8-2-030: EXEMPTIONS:
A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
8-2-020 of this chapter, utility lines installed after the effective date
hereof may be installed overhead where:
1.   The underground installation of lines is currently not feasible due to the
state of available technology or equipment; or
2.   The underground installation of lines would impair the ability of the
public utility to provide safe, reliable, and adequate service to its
customers.
B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to telecommunications lines
which shall be governed by section
8-2-040 of this chapter. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
8-2-040: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LINES:
A provider will be allowed to install utility lines for telecommunications
purposes overhead if:
A.   The lines can be placed on already existing poles;
B.   It is infeasible to place the lines underground at the time; and
C.   The provider agrees to move the lines underground when the city directs,
so long as the directive from the city does not place the provider at a
competitive disadvantage. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
8-2-050: EXISTING FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 621, 1-18-2005)
8-2-060: COST OF PLACING UNDERGROUND:
The cost of placing any utility line underground as required by this chapter
shall be borne by the development requiring the utility service, and may be
made a condition of development approval. If the frontage of the property
measured in feet is greater than one hundred feet (100'), the developer may
enter into an agreement with lien provisions to pay said amount over a period
not to exceed thirty six (36) months. (Ord. 426, 4-17-2001)
8-2-070: EXCEPTIONS ALLOWED:
In cases where unusual topographical, aesthetic, or other exceptional
conditions or circumstances exist such that the installation of an overhead
utility line would have minimal visual, health, or safety impact on the public,
exceptions to the requirements of this chapter may be approved by the city
council; provided, that the exceptions are consistent with the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
CHAPTER 3
TREE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-3-010: Short Title
8-3-020: Definitions
8-3-030: Enforcement Authority
8-3-040: Permit Required
8-3-050: Public Trees
8-3-060: Private Request
8-3-070: License Required
8-3-080: Interference With City Employees And Wilful Injury To Trees
8-3-090: Consideration Of Trees In Public Projects
8-3-100: Penalties And Other Remedies
8-3-010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the TREE ORDINANCE OF DRAPER
CITY. (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: Draper City.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
SHADE TREE OR TREE: A tree in any public place, except where otherwise
indicated.
SHRUB: A shrub in any public place, except where otherwise indicated.
TREE PLANTING STRIP: That area between the curb or place where curb should be
and the property line; or an area inside the property line where an easement is
given for the purpose of permitting the planting of shade trees; also referred
to as the "park strip". (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-030: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
A.   Specified: The city manager or his or her designee shall execute and
enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other plans, standards, and
specifications for the regulation of matters pertaining to trees that may be
officially adopted by the city council. All problems related to and requests
for action on trees and shrubs on any city property shall be referred to the
public works department. The public works department is hereby authorized to
conduct such maintenance programs on trees and shrubs on city property as it
may deem appropriate.
B.   Determination Of Obstruction:
1.   When it is determined that a tree or shrub located on private property
overhangs or projects into any way or area and appears to be dead or liable to
fall into such city property or constitutes an obstruction to vision or travel
on any city sidewalk, property or street, the city is authorized to remove the
offending trees or branches or shrubs and to assess the actual costs against
the property owner. However, except in case of manifest public danger and
immediate necessity, no such trees or shrubs standing on any private property
shall be cut down or removed unless ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the
owner or occupant of said property. If the owner or occupant of such property
shall, within seven (7) days after receiving such notice, file with the city
recorder his objections, in writing, to such removal, such tree or shrub shall
not be cut down or removed unless the tree commission shall give such owner or
occupant a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of such objection and
shall thereafter approve in writing the removal of the same, if the objection
is not sustained.
2.   Where an emergency exists with regards to a tree, the public works
department shall take such prompt and immediate action as is reasonably
necessary to remedy the emergency condition. An emergency condition is such
that renders life or property in immediate jeopardy.
3.   The public works department is hereby given authority to trim or prune or
to remove any tree or shrub which has been planted or is maintained, on or
within public property, in violation of any city ordinance, without serving
notice upon the owner of the abutting property. (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-040: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   Permit Required; Fee: Other than for minor maintenance, it shall be
unlawful to plant, move, spray, trim, prune, cut above or below ground, disturb
or alter any tree or shrub on public property or to cause such acts to be done
by others without first obtaining a permit from the city. The city may issue
such permits if, in its judgment, the work is necessary and if the proposed
methods of workmanship are satisfactory. A permit fee may be established by
resolution. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the specifications
and standards of practice adopted by the city and/or the specific conditions or
methods listed on the permit.
B.   Replacement Tree Or Shrub Required: As a condition to any permit to remove
any public tree or shrub, the city shall require that the permittee plant one
or more trees or shrubs per city standards in place of the one removed, so that
the equivalent total caliper inch diameter is replaced or exceeded. The
provisions of this subsection shall apply to all public agencies, including
Draper City, to the extent allowed by applicable law, as well as to private
parties. Whenever such tree or shrub has been removed or destroyed pursuant to
any such conditional permit, it shall be a misdemeanor for the permittee to
fail, refuse or neglect to plant another tree(s) or shrub(s) of the type, size
and at the location specified in the permit within the time specified in the
permit. (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-050: PUBLIC TREES:
A.   City Responsibility: The city shall be responsible for relieving the
following conditions caused by trees on city tree planting strips, public parks
and other public properties:
1.   Removal of dead trees or limbs, or trees or limbs that, as determined by
the city, appear to be a hazard or are liable to fall;
2.   Removal of trees or limbs from trees or shrubs that have actually fallen
across a street, sidewalk or upon city property;
3.   Removal of diseased or dying trees that are beyond reclamation;
4.   Removal of trees or roots directly in the way of street widening projects
or sidewalk and curb repairs and/or installation;
5.   Removal of trees, branches or roots that are found by the city to be a
nuisance such as by constituting obstruction to water or sewage lines,
irrigation ditches or street lighting or public signs, that impair good
visibility at street intersections or are obstructions to vision or travel on
public property;
6.   Major pruning, topping and treatment.
B.   Property Owner, Occupant Responsibility: Property owners and/or occupants
shall be responsible for watering, minor maintenance, pruning and treatment of
all trees and shrubs on the city tree planting strips adjacent to their
property except where specifically relieved by the city. This shall not include
city parks and recreation facilities and similar types of public property.
(Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-060: PRIVATE REQUEST:
In cases where an abutting property owner or occupant to city tree planting
strips or other public property requests action on trees located on city
property, said abutting property owner or occupant shall assume financial
responsibility for the following actions:
A.   Removal of trees in the way of house moving or construction projects;
B.   Removal of undesirable species as established in the master tree plan or
those not on the tree planting list;
C.   Removal of trees or roots or the pruning of branches for the improvement
of appearance where no hazard or nuisance is found by the city;
D.   Removal or pruning where a low priority hazard or nuisance is found by the
city to exist but where the abutting property owner or occupant desires more
rapid action than can, because of a backlog of higher priority work, be
furnished by the public works department;
E.   Replanting with approved species in locations approved by the city. (Ord.
305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-070: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A.   Business License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in the business or occupation of trimming, pruning, topping, treating or
removing trees or shrubs within the city without first obtaining a business
license.
B.   Insurance Required: Each person desiring such a business license shall
show proof of liability and injury insurance of at least fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), and workers' compensation insurance which is adequate under the
laws of the state and shall indemnify the city against any claim resulting from
the pursuit of such business. (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-080: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY EMPLOYEES AND WILFUL INJURY TO TREES:
A.   No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any city employee in the
execution or enforcement of this chapter.
B.   No person shall wilfully injure or destroy any tree or any city property
by any means, including, but not limited to, the following:
1.   Constructing a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk or otherwise
filling up the ground area around any tree so as to shut off air, light or
water from the roots except under written permission from the city;
2.   Piling building material, equipment or other substance around any tree so
as to cause injury;
3.   Pouring any injurious material on or around any tree or on the ground
around it or on any lawn or sidewalk;
4.   Posting any sign on any tree, tree stake or guard or fastening any
guywire, cable or rope to any tree, tree stake or guard;
5.   Injuring any tree, tree stake or guard with any vehicle or animal or in
any other manner causing injury to any tree or lawn on public property.
C.   Tree stakes or guards may be placed around trees by abutting property
owners, provided the same are placed near a tree for the purpose of protecting
or training such trees. (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-090: CONSIDERATION OF TREES IN PUBLIC PROJECTS:
Plans for all lighting, sewer, irrigation, water, street and other public works
projects shall be considered with reference to their effect upon trees on
public property prior to the beginning of work on such projects. Every effort
shall be made to preserve desirable trees and to minimize any damage to trees
and shrubs on all projects. (Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
8-3-100: PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES:
A.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
a class C misdemeanor or by imposing a civil penalty as per title 6, chapter 15
of this code.
B.   In addition to the penalties and abatement procedures outlined above, the
city may initiate any or all of the following actions: injunctions; mandamus;
proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove; or other such court actions.
(Ord. 305, 2-16-1999)
CHAPTER 4
OVERHEAD FACILITIES CONVERSION ENTERPRISE FUND
SECTION:
8-4-010: Purpose
8-4-020: Enterprise Fund Established
8-4-030: Regulations And Fees
8-4-040: Administration
8-4-050: Policies
8-4-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to enhance, preserve and protect existing aesthetics, property values and
quality of life within the city. It is the intent of this chapter to establish
an enterprise fund for the purpose of financing the conversion of existing
overhead utility facilities to underground facilities in logical segments and
in a manner which equitably allocates the burden of such. (Ord. 340, 11-16-
1999)
8-4-020: ENTERPRISE FUND ESTABLISHED:
The city council hereby establishes an overhead facilities conversion
enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial transactions
related to the conversion of overhead utility facilities to underground
facilities. All conversion fees collected shall be deposited in the conversion
enterprise fund. Monies in the conversion enterprise fund shall not be
commingled with or transferred to other city funds. However, the conversion
enterprise fund may pay other city funds for services and expenses directly
attributable to the conversion activity. The conversion enterprise fund shall
be operated according to state law and city ordinances, rules, regulations and
policies. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
8-4-030: REGULATIONS AND FEES:
A.   The conversion of overhead utility facilities to underground facilities
shall be accomplished in accordance with provisions of section
8-2-050 of this title.
B.   The owners or developers of property along rights of way with overhead
utility facilities shall be charged an overhead facilities conversion fee in
accordance with the provisions of section
8-2-050 of this title. The fee shall be based on the frontage of the property,
measured in feet, and shall assess a portion of the cost of converting the
facilities, which portion shall be determined by the city council and shall
represent an equitable allocation of the burden of conversion among all
obtaining substantial benefits therefrom. For minor subdivisions, as defined in
the Draper City subdivision ordinance, the fee shall be based on the width of
the street, private lane or right of way, which is the outlet from the
developed parcel to the existing public street providing access to the
development. (Ord. 426, 4-17-2001)
8-4-040: ADMINISTRATION:
The conversion enterprise fund established in this chapter shall be
administered by the Draper City public works department. (Ord. 503, 11-19-2002)
8-4-050: POLICIES:
The Draper City general services department director may recommend policies and
procedures for adoption by the city council to assist in the application,
administration and interpretation of this chapter. Said policies and procedures
may be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 340, 11-16-1999)
CHAPTER 5
WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
8-5-010: Declaration Of Finding And Intent
8-5-020: Purpose And Goals
8-5-030: Scope And Applicability
8-5-040: Definitions
8-5-050: License And Other Requirements For Use Of The ROW
8-5-060: Nature Of License
8-5-070: Master License Agreements
8-5-080: Site License Application
8-5-090: Standards Applicable To Wireless Facilities In Rights- Of-Way
8-5-100: License Approval Of Permitted Uses
8-5-110: License Approval Of Discretionary Uses
8-5-120: Modifications Of Wireless Facilities
8-5-130: Application Processing
8-5-140: Appeal Of Administrative Decisions
8-5-150: Interpretation And Application Of Chapter
8-5-010: DECLARATION OF FINDING AND INTENT:
A.   Findings Regarding Rights-Of-Way: The City finds that the public rights-
of-way within the City:
1.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the
business and social life of the City;
2.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent
with that intent;
3.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of wireless service providers,
to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-being of
the City and its citizens;
4.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management
to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the
foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon
the public from such facilities' construction, placement, relocation, and
maintenance in the rights-of-way.
B.   Finding Regarding Compensation: The City finds that the right to occupy
portions of the public rights-of-way for the business of providing wireless
services is a valuable use of a unique public resource that has been acquired
and is maintained at great expense to the City and its taxpayers, and,
therefore, the taxpayers of the City should receive fair and reasonable
compensation for use of the rights-of-way.
C.   Finding Regarding Local Concern: The City finds that while wireless
facilities are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations
also involve public rights-of-way, Municipal zoning, and vital business and
community service, which are of local concern. The City also finds that it has
the proprietary right to determine what persons and entities are granted
permission to use City rights-of-way, and to determine the reasonable and
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions of such use.
D.   Finding Regarding Promotion Of Wireless Services: The City finds that it
is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the
development of wireless services, on a nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to
community and public interest, and to assure availability for Municipal,
educational and community services.
E.   Findings Regarding Minimization Of Impacts: The City finds that towers and
other supporting structures present aesthetic and land use concerns that should
be dealt with by encouraging collocation, and minimizing the number of
structures in a manner that does not discourage market access or competition.
F.   Findings Regarding Master License Agreement Standards: The City finds
entering a Master License Agreement with providers:
1.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
2.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which
providers may use valuable public property to serve the public;
3.   Fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm that may
flow from such commercial use of its public rights-of- way;
4.   Protects the police powers and proprietary authority of the City with
respect to its rights-of-way, in a manner consistent with Federal and State
law;
5.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the
City infrastructure; and
6.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the public rights-of-
way. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-020: PURPOSE AND GOALS:
A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the siting
and use of wireless facilities in City-owned rights- of-way in a manner that
facilitates the delivery of wireless services within the City, while minimizing
associated adverse impacts. The goals of this chapter are to:
1.   Provide for the managed development and installation, maintenance,
modification, and removal of wireless services infrastructure in the City to
provide adequate wireless communications coverage, without unreasonably
discriminating against providers of functionally equivalent services including
all of those who install, maintain, and operate wireless facilities.
2.   Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and
specifically, protecting aesthetic values, by reducing the visibility of
wireless facilities and structures to the fullest extent possible through
techniques including but not limited to camouflage/concealment, design
techniques, and undergrounding of wireless facilities and the equipment
associated therewith, where possible.
3.   Encourage the deployment of smaller, less intrusive wireless facilities to
supplement existing telecommunications facilities.
4.   Encourage the location of structures in a manner that is least intrusive
to the community.
5.   Encourage owners and users of antennas and structures to locate them, to
the extent possible, where the adverse impact on the community is minimized.
6.   Enhance the ability of providers to provide such wireless services to the
community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
7.   Effectively manage wireless facilities in the public right-of- way. (Ord.
1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-030: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
A.   This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers of
wireless services and systems that require the use of City-owned rights-of-way,
including providers of both the system and service, and those providers of the
system only.
B.   The requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to all wireless
facilities and structures located within City-owned right-of-way, and to all
applications to locate or modify wireless facilities and structures within
City-owned right-of- way. This chapter shall apply to all future providers and
to all providers in the City prior to the effective date hereof, whether
operating with or without a license. Title 9, chapter 41 of this Code addresses
wireless telecommunications facilities in areas outside of City-owned rights-
of-way and large wireless facilities. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-040: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: Means Draper City, Utah.
COLLOCATE: Means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a
wireless facility on a wireless support structure or utility pole, or, for
ground-mounted equipment, adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility
pole.
DECORATIVE POLE: Means a City-owned utility pole that: a) is specially designed
for an aesthetic purpose, and b) on which attachments have not been placed
(other than small wireless facilities, informational or directional signs, or
temporary holiday or special event attachments), or on which attachments (other
than small wireless facilities, informational or directional signs, or
temporary holiday or special event attachments) are prohibited by rule or
ordinance.
DISCRETIONARY ROW: Means any ROW that is adjacent to a residential zone and has
a cross-section of sixty feet (60') wide or less, as depicted in the official
plat records.
DISCRETIONARY USE: Means: a) the installation of a new utility pole in
discretionary ROW, and b) any use that is not a permitted use.
LARGE WIRELESS FACILITY: Means any wireless facility that does not qualify as a
small wireless facility or a micro wireless facility.
MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENT: Means an agreement between a provider and the City
that sets forth the general terms and conditions pursuant to which the provider
may install and operate wireless facilities in City-owned ROW.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a type of small wireless facility that only
provides Wi-Fi service, that does not have exterior antenna longer than eleven
inches (11"), and that is no larger in dimension that twenty four inches (24")
in length, fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12") in height,
not including any antenna.
PERMITTED RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PERMITTED ROW: Means any ROW that is not
discretionary ROW.
PERMITTED USE: Means: a) the collocation of a small wireless facility in any
ROW, and b) the installation, operation, modification, maintenance, or
replacement of: 1) a utility pole in permitted ROW, or 2) equipment required
for a provider's collocation of a small wireless facility.
PROVIDER: Means a person that provides wireless services to customers, and/or
builds or installs wireless facilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW): Means the surface of and the space above and below any
public street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, or other way dedicated to public
pedestrian or vehicular use, now or hereafter existing as such within the City.
ROW does not include Federal interstate highways or fixed guideways for public
transit.
SITE LICENSE: Means a license approved pursuant to this chapter that authorizes
a provider to install and operate wireless facilities in ROW, subject to the
terms of this chapter and a Master License Agreement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a wireless facility on which each provider's
antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in
volume, and for which all wireless equipment associated with the wireless
facility, whether ground- mounted or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than
twenty eight (28) cubic feet in volume, not including any electric meter,
concealment element, telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment,
power transfer switch, cut-off switch, vertical cable run for the connection of
power or other service, wireless provider antenna, or coaxial or fiber-optic
cable that is immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular
collocation, unless the cable is a wireline backhaul facility (in which case
the cable should be included in calculating the total volume of the associated
equipment).
STRUCTURE: Means a utility pole or a wireless support structure.
UTILITY POLE: Means a pole or similar structure that is in a right-of-way and
is or may be used for: wireline communications, electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, signage, or the collocation of a small wireless
facility. Utility pole does not include a wireless support structure, a
structure that supports electric transmission lines, or City-owned power poles.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communication between user equipment and a communications network, including a
radio transceiver, an antenna, a coaxial or fiber-optic cable, a regular or
backup power supply, or comparable equipment. Wireless facility does not
include the structure or an improvement on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated, or a coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is: a) between
wireless support structures or utility poles, b) not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a particular antenna, or c) a wireline backhaul
facility.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Means any service using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a wireless
facility. Wireless service includes the use of Wi-Fi.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means an existing or proposed structure that is in
a right-of-way; and designed to support or capable of supporting a wireless
facility, including a monopole, tower, billboard, or building. Wireless support
structure does not include a structure designed solely for the collocation of a
small wireless facility, utility poles, or electric power poles owned by the
City or by an interlocal entity. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-050: LICENSE AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF THE ROW:
A.   Except to the extent exempted by Federal or State law, every provider must
obtain a site license for each wireless facility and structure to be
constructed or installed in the ROW. When a provider applies for a site
license, if the provider and the City have not already executed a Master
License Agreement, the City will provide the provider with a copy of the City's
standard Master License Agreement. The City will not issue any site licenses to
a provider until the provider and the City have executed a Master License
Agreement.
B.   Before offering or providing any services pursuant to the Master License
Agreement, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits,
authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of such services from
the appropriate Federal, State and local authorities, if required, and shall
submit to the City upon the written request of the City evidence of all such
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
C.   The grant of a license to a provider will not excuse the provider from
obtaining: 1) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the
ordinances and laws of the City; 2) any other permit, agreement or
authorization required in connection with the use of property or facilities
owned by third parties; or 3) any other permit or authorization required in
connection with excavating or performing other work in or along the ROW.
D.   The City will not grant licenses for the installation of large wireless
facilities in the ROW. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-060: NATURE OF LICENSE:
A.   A license granted hereunder will not convey title, equitable or legal, in
the ROW. A license is only the right to occupy ROW on a nonexclusive basis for
the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the license; the
right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased except as may be expressly
provided in a Master License Agreement.
B.   A provider's use of the ROW pursuant to a license granted hereunder, shall
be subject to the prior and continuing right of the City to use any and all
parts of the ROW exclusively or concurrently with any other person or entity,
and shall be further subject to all deeds, easements, dedications, conditions,
covenants, restrictions, encumbrances, and claims of title of record which may
affect the ROW. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-070: MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENTS:
A.   Authority: The City is empowered and authorized to issue nonexclusive
licenses governing the installation, construction, operation, use and
maintenance of wireless facilities and structures in ROW, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Any such licenses will be granted through a
Master License Agreement entered into between the City and provider, and
subsequent site licenses that apply and extend the terms of the Master License
Agreement to specific locations in the ROW.
B.   Non-Discrimination: The City shall enter into Master License Agreements
with providers on a non-discriminatory basis. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the City may negotiate additional or different terms with different providers,
in the exercise of the City's reasonable discretion and pursuant to the City's
reserved police powers and the City's proprietary rights in the ROW.
C.   Term: Master License Agreements will be for an initial term of ten (10)
years (the "term"). At the end of the term, the Master License Agreement will
continue to apply to site licenses granted during the term. The term of a
Master License Agreement may be renewed if the provider is in compliance with
the Master License Agreement and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations,
including this chapter. At the expiration of the term of the Master License
Agreement, the provider shall remove its wireless facilities from the ROW
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the expiration of the Master License
Agreement or within one hundred eighty (180) days of the expiration of the site
license if the site license term expires after the term of the Master License
Agreement unless otherwise agreed to by the City. The City will not renew site
licenses or grant new site licenses after the term, until the City and the
provider have executed a new Master License Agreement with terms and conditions
acceptable to both the City and the provider. Site licenses will be for a term
of ten (10) years, and will be subject to all the terms and conditions of the
Master License Agreement in effect when the site license is granted.
D.   Compensation: The Master License Agreement will require the provider to
pay fair and reasonable compensation to the City, as determined by the City
Council, for: 1) the administrative expenses associated with entry into the
Master License Agreement and individual site licenses, 2) the provider's use of
ROW, including the City's expenses associated with maintenance and management
of the provider's use of ROW, and 3) other applicable fees. Specifically,
providers must pay the following fees:
1.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the City to review
applications, providers shall pay a non-refundable application fee for each
application for a site license or modification to a site license, as set forth
on the City's consolidated fee schedule as the same may be amended from time to
time. The application fee for collocating a small wireless facility on an
existing or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure shall be not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per collocation. The application fee
for installing, modifying, or replacing a utility pole in connection with a
permitted use shall be not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
utility pole. The application fee for installing, modifying, or replacing a
utility pole in connection with a discretionary use shall be not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per utility pole. The application fee must be paid
at the time the application is submitted to the City.
2.   Site License Fee: In order to offset the cost to the City of inspecting
and managing licensed wireless facilities, and to compensate the City for the
use of the ROW, the Master License Agreement will require providers to pay an
annual fee for each site license. The site license fee shall not be more than
the greater of: a) 3.5 percent of all gross revenue related to the provider's
use of ROW for small wireless facilities, or b) two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) annually for each small wireless facility. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no site license fee will be charged to a provider that is subject to
the Municipal Telecommunications License Tax, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
section 10-1-401 et seq. For small wireless facilities collocated on City-owned
utility poles, the provider shall pay an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per pole in addition to the site license fee, if applicable, described above.
3.   Other Fees: Providers must also pay all other applicable fees established
in this Code, specifically including but not limited to fees for encroachment
permits and business licensing.
E.   Insurance, Indemnity, And Security: Prior to the execution of Master
License Agreement, a provider must deposit with the City an irrevocable,
unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the
Master License Agreement, and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance
coverage required by the Master License Agreement. A provider shall also
indemnify the City as set forth in the Master License Agreement.
F.   Ordinance Amendments: The City reserves the right to amend its ordinances
affecting this chapter at any time. The City shall give provider notice and an
opportunity to be heard concerning any proposed amendment. If there is any
inconsistency between provider's rights and obligations under applicable
ordinances as amended and the Master License Agreement, the provisions of the
Master License Agreement shall govern during its term. Otherwise, provider
agrees to comply with any such amendments. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-
2018; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
8-5-080: SITE LICENSE APPLICATION:
A.   Application Requirements: To be considered for a site license, a provider
must submit an application to the Public Works Department, on a form provided
by the City. In addition to any information required on that form, the
application must include the following information:
1.   The type of site license sought, e.g., collocation of small wireless
facility, collocation of large wireless facility, installation of new utility
pole, or installation of new wireless support structure. If the site license is
for a collocation, the application must designate the type of structure on
which the wireless facility will be mounted, e.g., existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, an existing City-owned utility pole, etc.
2.   The location of the proposed wireless facility or structure, including the
designation of the proposed ROW as permitted or discretionary.
3.   A scaled site plan, rendering or photo simulation, scaled elevation view
and other supporting drawings and calculations, showing the location and
dimension of all improvements. The submittal must include sufficient
information to determine compliance with the standards and requirements of this
chapter, specifically including information concerning structure height and
location within the ROW, compliance with the City's intersection and driveway
sight distance standards, and compliance with the Americans With Disabilities
Act.
4.   An industry-standard pole load analysis indicating that the structure on
which the wireless facilities will be mounted will safely support the load.
B.   Avoiding Redundant Submittals: The Public Works Department may allow a
provider to maintain on file with the Public Works Department any documentation
that would otherwise be required for each individual application, such as basic
wireless facility design documents and pole load analyses. The provider must
update any such information as necessary to keep it current.
C.   Exemption: If a provider desires to be exempted from the site license fee,
the provider must submit evidence that the provider is subject to the Municipal
Telecommunications License Tax pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-401
et seq.
D.   Additional Information: The City may require the applicant to submit
additional information for any application for a site license for a
discretionary use. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-090: STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO WIRELESS FACILITIES IN RIGHTS- OF-WAY:
The following standards, requirements, and prohibitions apply to all wireless
facilities licensed pursuant to this chapter.
A.   Height: The maximum height of new or modified structures, including the
antenna and any part of the small wireless facility mounted on the structure,
is fifty feet (50') above ground level at the point of installation. The
antenna of a wireless facility may not extend more than ten feet (10') above
the top of an existing structure. All equipment permitted to be mounted on the
exterior of new or existing structures must be mounted at least eight feet (8')
above ground level.
B.   Placement: Wireless facilities and new structures must be placed in
locations that will not: 1) obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public
safety on the ROW; 2) create a public health or safety hazard, 3) obstruct,
damage, or interfere with another utility facility in the ROW, or the use of
such other utility facilities, 4) materially interfere with the safe operation
of traffic control equipment, 5) materially interfere with a sight line or a
clear zone for transportation or pedestrians, 6) materially interfere with
compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, and 7) violate applicable
laws or legal obligations.
C.   Design Requirements: Wireless facilities and new structures must be
architecturally integrated with existing buildings, structures and landscaping,
including considerations of height, color, style, placement, design and shape.
Exposed cabling is prohibited, except for collocations on existing structures
where internal cable routing is not feasible (e.g., on a wooden pole).
Horizontal protrusions from the structure must not exceed two feet (2'). New
structures must be of monopole design; lattice structures will not be
permitted. New structures must not be made of wood. To the extent feasible,
equipment shall be installed on the interior of new structures.
D.   Additional Design Requirements In Town Center Zone: In order to maintain
the historic character of the Town Center Zoning District, all wireless
facilities and new structures in the Town Center Zone must employ screening,
concealment, camouflage, or other stealth techniques to minimize visual
impacts.
E.   Electrical Service: Providers will be solely responsible for establishing
electrical power services for their wireless facilities and for the payment of
all electrical utility charges to the applicable electric service provider
based upon applicable tariffs.
F.   Undergrounding Of Lines: All fiber backhaul lines and electrical
distribution lines serving wireless facilities must be located underground,
unless the wireless facility is collocated on an existing structure that
already features above-ground lines, and the owner of the existing structure
agrees to provide communication or power service to the wireless facility
through those existing lines. The City may require that the new electrical
power line be overlashed on the existing electrical power line. Providers may
seek a waiver from this requirement in accordance with chapter 2 of this title.
G.   Compliance With Law: All wireless facilities must at all times comply with
all applicable Federal, State, and local Building Codes and Safety Codes and
regulations.
H.   Additional Requirements: Wireless facilities will be subject to any
additional requirements set forth in the applicable Master License Agreement
and site license.
I.   Decorative Poles: New or replacement utility poles must be designed to
reasonably conform to the design aesthetic of decorative poles in the vicinity,
if any. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-100: LICENSE APPROVAL OF PERMITTED USES:
A.   The Public Works Director has authority to approve applications for
permitted uses. The Public Works Director may deny an application for a
permitted use that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter,
specifically including but not limited to section
8-5-090 of this chapter. The Public Works Director shall forward any
applications for discretionary uses to the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 1340, 8-
7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-110: LICENSE APPROVAL OF DISCRETIONARY USES:
A.   The Zoning Administrator has authority to approve applications for
discretionary uses.
B.   An application for a discretionary use will not be approved without prior
approval by the Zoning Administrator, following a public meeting.
C.   The Zoning Administrator is not required to approve an application for a
site license for a discretionary use unless the applicant establishes, by clear
and convincing evidence, that denial of the application would effectively
prohibit the applicant from providing wireless service.
D.   If the applicant fails to establish, by clear and convincing evidence,
that denial of the application would effectively prohibit the applicant from
providing wireless service, the Zoning Administrator may still approve an
application for a site license for discretionary use, if the Zoning
Administrator finds that it is in the best interests of the City to do so,
based on considerations of health, safety, or welfare. In making that
determination, the Zoning Administrator may consider comment from the general
public, specifically including members of the public that reside in the
vicinity of the proposed utility pole.
E.   The Zoning Administrator may approve an application for a site license
with conditions that further the goals of this chapter, specifically including
conditions that minimize any adverse effect of the wireless facility or
structure on adjacent properties. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-120: MODIFICATIONS OF WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A.   A provider may not alter, modify, or enlarge a licensed small wireless
facility or utility pole without prior written consent from the City. To obtain
such consent, the provider must submit an application in accordance with
section
8-5-080 of this chapter.
B.   Applications for modifications to wireless facilities and structures will
be subject to the same standards, requirements, and processing deadlines as
applications for collocations.
C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a provider is not required to submit an
application or obtain consent from the City for the following activities: 1)
routine maintenance on a small wireless facility or utility pole, 2)
replacement of a small wireless facility with a small wireless facility that is
substantially similar or smaller in size, and 3) the installation, placement,
maintenance, operation, or replacement of a micro wireless facility that is
strung on a cable between existing utility poles in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code. A provider must provide the City with advance
written notice of any such activity.
D.   A provider must apply for an encroachment permit in accordance with title
11, chapter 6 of this Code for any work that requires excavation or the closure
of sidewalks or vehicular lanes. The requirement to obtain an encroachment
permit applies even for work that is exempted from the application process
pursuant to subsection C of this section.
E.   Any approved modifications will be documented in a new or amended site
license. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
8-5-130: APPLICATION PROCESSING:
A.   Consolidated Applications: A provider may submit a consolidated
application for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) wireless facilities,
so long as the wireless facilities are of substantially the same type, and
proposed for collocation on substantially the same types of structures. A
provider may submit a consolidated application for the installation,
modification, or replacement of up to twenty five (25) structures. In any
thirty (30) day period, a provider may not file more than: 1) one consolidated
application, or 2) multiple applications that collectively seek site licenses
for a combined total of more than twenty five (25) wireless facilities and
structures.
B.   Completeness: Within thirty (30) days after the date when an application
is submitted to the City, the City shall determine whether the application is
complete, and shall notify the provider of that determination in writing. If
the City determines that an application is incomplete, the City shall
specifically identify the missing information in the written notification. The
processing deadline will be tolled from the date when the City sends the
written notification until the date when the provider submits the missing
information. If the provider does not submit the missing information within
ninety (90) days after the date of the written notification, the application
will expire.
C.   Processing Deadlines: The City shall approve or deny applications in
accordance with the following deadlines:
1.   Applications for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
approved or denied within sixty (60) days after the day when the City receives
a complete application. The City may extend the deadline by a single additional
period of ten (10) business days by sending the applicant written notice of the
extension before the applicable deadline.
2.   Applications for new, modified, or replacement utility poles shall be
approved or denied within one hundred five (105) days after the day when the
City receives a complete application. The City may extend the deadline by a
single additional period of ten (10) business days by sending the applicant
written notice of the extension before the applicable deadline.
D.   Denial: If the City denies an application, the City shall provide the
applicant with a written decision that documents the basis for the denial, and
shall send that decision to the applicant on or before the day that the City
denies the application. If the City denies an application for one or more
utility poles, or one or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated
application, the City shall not use that denial as a basis to delay the
application process for any other utility pole or small wireless facility in
the same consolidated application.
E.   Resubmittal: Within thirty (30) days after the day on which the City
denies an application, the applicant may cure the deficiencies noted in the
denial and resubmit the application without paying an application fee. The City
shall approve or deny the resubmitted application within thirty (30) days of
receipt, and shall limit its review to the deficiencies noted in the original
denial unless the applicant has changed another portion of the application.
F.   Installation Deadline: A site license will expire two hundred seventy
(270) days after approval if the licensed small wireless facility or utility
pole is not installed and operational. The foregoing deadline will be tolled
for any period of time during which the lack of commercial power or
communications facilities delays completion. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-
2018)
8-5-140: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
A.   The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer, appointed pursuant to section
9-4-050 of this Code, shall hear and decide appeals from administrative
decisions applying the provisions of this chapter, specifically including
appeals from the denial of a site license application by the Public Works
Director or the Zoning Administrator.
B.   An applicant for a site license may appeal the denial of the application
to the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer or City Council, as applicable, as
provided in subsection C1 of this section. A complete notice of appeal shall be
filed within fourteen (14) days of the decision which is appealed.
C.   An appeal of an administrative decision shall be considered and processed
as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete notice of appeal shall be submitted to the Office of the Zoning
Administrator on a form established by the Administrator along with the fee
established by the City in its consolidated fee schedule. The notice of appeal
shall include at least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any;
b.   The decision appealed;
c.   Grounds for the appeal; and
d.   A description of the action claimed by the applicant to be incorrect.
2.   After the notice of appeal is determined to be complete and timely filed,
the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a hearing before the Appeals and
Variance Hearing Officer within thirty (30) days of the date the notice of
appeal is filed, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City and the
appellant. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the Appeals and
Variance Hearing Officer shall give public notice of the hearing and shall
notify the parties in interest. Prior to the hearing the Zoning Administrator
shall transmit to the appellate body all papers constituting the record of the
action which is appealed.
3.   An appeal to the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall not stay
proceedings taken in furtherance of the action appealed from unless such
proceedings are specifically stayed by order of the Zoning Administrator. An
appellant may request a stay by submitting to the Zoning Administrator, in
writing, a request for a stay setting forth the reasons why a stay is necessary
to protect against imminent harm. In determining whether or not to grant a
stay, the Zoning Administrator shall assure that all potentially affected
parties are given the opportunity to comment on the request. A ruling on the
request for a stay shall be given within five (5) days from the date the
request is received by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator, in
granting a stay, may impose additional conditions to mitigate any potential
harm that may be caused by the stay, including requiring the appellant to post
a bond.
4.   The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing based
upon the record only, taking no new testimony or new information but relying
solely upon the information and final decision of the officer or body from whom
the appeal was taken. The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall determine
the correctness of the lower decision and thereafter affirm or reverse, wholly
or in part, the lower decision, modify that decision, or impose any conditions
needed to conform the matter appealed to applicable approval standards. The
Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall have all the powers of the officer
or body from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of
a site license.
5.   After the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer makes a decision, the
Zoning Administrator shall give the applicant written notice of the decision.
The decision takes effect on the date when the Appeal Authority issues a
written decision.
6.   A record of all appeals shall be maintained in the Office of the Zoning
Administrator. (Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
8-5-150: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
A.   Notwithstanding subsection
8-1-030B of this title, the provisions of chapter 1, "Telecommunications
Systems", of this title, apply to wireless facilities licensed under this
chapter, and to applications made under this chapter. In applying chapter 1 of
this title to this chapter, the word "franchise" shall be replaced with the
word "license", as the context requires. In the event of a conflict between the
terms of this chapter and the provisions of chapter 1 of this title, the terms
of this chapter will govern.
B.   The Public Works Director is authorized to interpret the provisions of
this chapter and the application of chapter 1 of this title to this chapter, in
his or her reasonable discretion. The Public Works Director is authorized to
resolve ambiguities arising out of the application of this chapter,
specifically including the designation of ROW as permitted or discretionary.
(Ord. 1340, 8-7-2018, eff. 8-31-2018)
TITLE 9
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
SECTION:
9-1-010: Title
9-1-020: Authority
9-1-030: Purpose
9-1-040: Scope
9-1-050: Applicable Provisions Not In This Title
9-1-060: Organization Of Title
9-1-070: Licenses And Permits To Conform
9-1-080: Compliance; Prerequisite To Regulatory Approval
9-1-090: Permits Required
9-1-100: Certificate Of Occupancy
9-1-110: Construction And Use To Conform To Plans
9-1-120: Conflicting Provisions
9-1-130: Repeal Of Prior Ordinance
9-1-140: Effective Date
9-1-150: Previous Ordinances Continued
9-1-160: Transition Rules
9-1-170: Exemptions From This Title
9-1-180: Severability Of Parts Of Title
9-1-190: Improvement Completion
9-1-195: Improvement Completion Assurances
9-1-010: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT CODE
OF DRAPER CITY. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-020: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to the Utah land use development and management
act, other applicable statutory law, and the police power authority inherent in
local government as established by Utah common law. This title shall constitute
the zoning ordinance authorized by the Utah municipal land use development and
management act. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-030: PURPOSE:
This title and the regulations and restrictions contained herein are adopted
and enacted for the following purposes:
A.   To promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of present
and future inhabitants of the city;
B.   To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the
city, and to implement the goals and policies of the general plan;
C.   To provide adequate open space for light and air, to prevent overcrowding
of the land and to lessen congestion on the streets;
D.   To secure economy in municipal expenditures and to encourage adequate
provisions for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public
facilities and services;
E.   To increase the security of home life and to preserve and create a more
favorable environment for citizens and visitors to the city;
F.   To ensure safety from fire and other dangers;
G.   To stabilize and improve property values and to place compatible uses
together in the city;
H.   To enhance the economic and cultural well being of the inhabitants of the
city;
I.   To promote the development of a more wholesome, serviceable, and
attractive city resulting from an orderly, planned use of resources;
J.   To establish proper zoning regulations, ensure the suitability of the land
for particular uses, conserve the value of buildings, and encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city; and
K.   To further the purposes of this title and promote the qualities of the
respective zones. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-040: SCOPE:
This title shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the city,
except property expressly exempted therefrom by the provisions of this title or
other lawful exemption. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-050: APPLICABLE PROVISIONS NOT IN THIS TITLE:
Draper City municipal code provisions not found in this title which are
applicable to the use and development of land include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A.   Section
2-4-060, "Constitutional Taking Issues", of this code.
B.   Section
3-1-180, "Draper City Historic Preservation Commission", of this code.
C.   Section
3-1-210, "Draper City Neighborhood Associations", of this code.
D.   Title 5, chapter 5, "Development And Impact Fees", of this code.
E.   Title 6, chapter 5, "Sexually Oriented Businesses", of this code.
F.   Title 6, chapter 11, "Home Occupation", of this code.
G.   Title 6, chapter 14, "Multiple-Family And Rental Dwelling Units", of this
code.
H.   Title 6, chapter 15, "Pawnbrokers", of this code.
I.   Title 7, chapter 2, "Sewage Disposal", of this code.
J.   Title 7, chapter 7, "Corner Canyon Preservation District", of this code.
K.   Title 7, chapter 8, "Subsurface Drains", of this code.
L.   Title 7, chapter 9, "Secondary Water", of this code.
M.   Title 8, chapter 2, "Utility Lines", of this code.
N.   Title 10, "Building Regulations", of this code.
O.   Title 12, "Flood Damage Regulations", of this code.
P.   Title 17, "Land Development", of this code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-060: ORGANIZATION OF TITLE:
This section describes the basic organizational scheme used in this title and
the types of regulations found herein. It is intended to be informational only.
Failure to follow the format described in this section shall not be a basis for
invalidating any action taken pursuant to this title.
A.   Organizational Structure: This title consists of six (6) articles, as
follows:
1.   Article 1, General Provisions.
2.   Article 2, Administration And Enforcement.
3.   Article 3, Base Zones.
4.   Article 4, Special Purpose And Overlay Zones.
5.   Article 5, Regulations Of General Applicability.
6.   Article 6, Regulations For Specific Uses.
B.   General Provisions: The general provisions of article 1 of this title
establish how this title is applied, sets forth the relationship of planning
documents, such as the general plan, to this title, and provides rules and
definitions for interpreting and applying the provisions of this title.
C.   Administration And Enforcement: Administration and enforcement provisions,
in article 2 of this title, include creation and allocation of powers and
duties of decision making bodies and officials, land use application and public
hearing and application review procedures, appeals, and variances. Enforcement
provisions set forth remedies available to the city to enforce violations of
this title.
D.   Types Of Zones: This title establishes three (3) types of zones (also
called "zoning districts"): base zones, special purpose zones, and overlay
zones.
1.   Base zones are zoning districts that reflect the city's five (5) basic
land use categories: agricultural, residential, commercial, public facilities,
and industrial. Base zones establish regulations and development standards
governing land uses allowed in these zones.
2.   Special purpose zones consist of regulations that apply only in limited
instances or to special circumstances.
3.   Overlay zone regulations address specific circumstances that apply in a
variety of geographic areas, such as historic or environmentally sensitive
areas, which may traverse the boundaries of a number of base zones.
E.   Types Of Regulations: This title includes land use regulations and
development standards.
1.   Base zone regulations, found in article 3 of this title, specify land uses
allowed as of right or allowed after issuance of a conditional use permit.
These regulations may be modified by overlay zone regulations, set forth in
article 4 of this title, or augmented by regulations for specific uses found in
article 6 of this title. Base zone and overlay regulations are augmented by
regulations of general applicability found in article 5 of this title.
2.   Development standards include fixed dimensional standards and performance
standards. Development standards control the height, size, location and other
particular aspects of structures and uses on sites intended for development.
These standards also prescribe buffering requirements between zones and between
potentially incompatible uses.
a.   Fixed dimensional standards are numerical maximum or minimum conditions
which govern development on a site.
b.   Performance standards establish certain criteria which must be met, but
allow flexibility as to the method of meeting the criteria. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001)
9-1-070: LICENSES AND PERMITS TO CONFORM:
All provisions herein shall be construed as the minimum requirements necessary
to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity
and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. All departments,
officials, and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue
licenses and permits shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall
issue no permit or license for a use or building where the same would conflict
with the provisions of this title. It shall be a violation of this title for
any person to perform, or order the performance of, any act which is contrary
to the provisions of this title or to fail to perform any act which is required
by the provisions of this title. Any permit or license issued in violation of
this title shall be null and void. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-080: COMPLIANCE; PREREQUISITE TO REGULATORY APPROVAL:
No building, use, or occupancy permit may be issued to any applicant who has
previously been issued a permit and who is not in current compliance with any
regulatory requirement or order applicable to such permit; or who has failed to
pay all assessed fees, fines or penalties to the city. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-090: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A.   Permits Required: No building or structure shall be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or moved, nor shall the use or status of land be
changed, except after the issuance of valid permits which conform to the
requirements of this title, unless no permit is required by this title or by
the construction codes adopted by the city.
B.   Utility Service: No electrical, sewer, telephone, water, or other utility
line shall be installed to serve any premises if such premises is or will be in
violation of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-100: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: No building or structure shall be used
or occupied until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate of occupancy as provided in title 10, chapter 5 of this code.
B.   Unlawful To Use Or Occupy: It is unlawful to use or occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or structure unless a certificate of
occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued for such
building or premises. It is unlawful to use or occupy, or to allow to be used
or occupied, any building or structure with a use or occupancy that is
different than specifically provided for in a certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy.
C.   Failure To Obtain Certificate Of Occupancy: Failure to obtain a
certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall be a
violation of this title.
D.   Nuisance: The use or occupancy of any building for which a certificate of
occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy has not been issued is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such. It shall also be a
public nuisance for any building or structure to be used or occupied in a
manner different than authorized by a certificate of occupancy or temporary
certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-110: CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO CONFORM TO PLANS:
Building and other permits, certificates of occupancy, and temporary
certificates of occupancy issued by the city on the basis of plans and
specifications authorizes only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth
in the approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Use, arrangements, or construction at variance with that shown on
authorized plans and specifications shall be deemed a violation of this title.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-120: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
This title shall not nullify more restrictive provisions of other private
covenants and agreements or other laws or general ordinances of the city, but
shall prevail and take precedence over such provisions which are less
restrictive. In cases where provisions within this title conflict, the most
restrictive provision shall supersede the less restrictive one unless
specifically provided otherwise. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-130: REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE:
This title, as amended, is hereby superseded and amended as set forth in this
title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-140: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This title shall take effect at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on September
30, 2001. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-150: PREVIOUS ORDINANCES CONTINUED:
This title shall be deemed a continuation of title 9 and not a new enactment
insofar as the substance of revisions included herein, whether in the same or
different language. This title shall be so interpreted upon any question
concerning the tenure of an officer or board established by prior title 9, or
upon any question concerning the legal conformity of any lot, structure, or
use, except as may be otherwise provided in chapter 6, "Nonconforming Uses,
Structures And Lots", of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-160: TRANSITION RULES:
To avoid undue hardship in the application of this title, the following
transition rules shall apply:
A.   Applications Submitted Prior To Effective Date: Nothing in this title
shall require a change in any plans, construction, or designated use of any
building or structure if a complete application for the same was submitted
prior to the effective date of this title (12:00 midnight of September 30,
2001), unless such application, or a permit issued thereunder, expires. If an
application or permit expires, any new permit shall conform to the requirements
of this title.
B.   Site Plans: For a period of sixty (60) days after the effective date of
this title (through November 29, 2001), a person who submits an application for
approval of a site plan or commercial site development plan, as defined in this
title, may elect to have such application considered and approved under the
provisions of the prior title 9 as they existed on the effective date of this
title.
C.   Preliminary Subdivision Plats: The transition rules set forth in
subsections A and B of this section shall also apply to any application for a
preliminary subdivision plat to the extent the provisions of this title may
affect such plat. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-170: EXEMPTIONS FROM THIS TITLE:
A.   The following projects, approved prior to the effective date of this title
and subject to one or more development agreements with the city, are exempt
from the provisions of this title:
1.   SunCrest.
2.   Traverse Mountain planned unit development.
3.   South Mountain.
B.   Nowithstanding subsection A of this section, provisions of this title
applicable to second kitchens and accessory dwelling units, including detached
accessory dwelling units and internal accessory dwelling units, apply to all
property within Draper City.
C.   The projects listed in subsection A of this section shall be governed by:
1.   The terms of the respective development agreements to which they are
subject; and
2.   Provisions of title 9 in effect when such agreements became effective,
except as may be modified by an applicable development agreement.
D.   Copies of applicable development agreements and zoning provisions may be
obtained from the community development department. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd.
Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-1-180: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF TITLE:
The chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of
this title are hereby declared to be severable. If any chapter, part, section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, or deleted through amendment or repeal, such
invalidation or deletion shall not affect the remaining parts of this title.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-1-190: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION:
Unless an application is made and an agreement reached under section
9-1-195, a subdivider must install all public landscaping and infrastructure
improvements required under this title. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1501,
10-5-2021)
9-1-195: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCES:
A.   An applicant may provide the city with an improvement completion assurance
as defined below in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
estimated completion costs in lieu of an obligation required section
9-1-190. For purposes of this and other sections of this title, an improvement
completion assurance is defined as codified in Utah Code §10-9a-103 except that
the acceptable forms of an improvement completion assurance limited by this
code are:
1.   A business check from a FDIC insured financial institution within 50 miles
of Draper City hall with funds immediately available to the city;
2.   Cash;
3.   A cash bond;
4.   A cashier's check from a FDIC insured financial institution within 50
miles of Draper City Hall with funds immediately available to the city upon
default;
5.   An irrevocable letter of credit from a FDIC insured financial institution
within 50 miles of Draper City Hall with funds immediately available to the
city upon default; or
6.   Other method of security as agreed upon by applicant, the community
development director and the city attorney.
B.   Improvements secured by an improvement completion assurance must be
accompanied by an improvement completion assurance agreement. An improvement
completion assurance agreement may specify the manner and timeframe for the
completion of work contemplated by the agreement. (Ord. 1501, 10-5-2021)
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING DOCUMENTS
SECTION:
9-2-010: Purpose
9-2-020: General Plan
9-2-030: Master Traffic And Transportation Plan And Official Street Map
9-2-040: Capital Facilities Plan
9-2-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify planning documents which provide the
policy foundation for this title and to set forth the basis for preparing and
adopting such plans. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-2-020: GENERAL PLAN:
A.   Adoption: The planning commission has recommended and the city council has
adopted a comprehensive, long range general plan for present and future needs
of the city, and growth and development of all or any part of the land within
the city.
B.   Purpose: The purpose of the general plan is to provide the city with a
comprehensive, long range plan for its present and future needs regarding
efficient and managed growth and development of land within the city. As
outlined in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-405 et seq., as amended, the
general plan, and any amendments thereto, are intended to be an advisory guide
for land use decisions within the city excepting those public uses in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-406, as amended.
C.   Content: The general plan, at a minimum, shall include all content
mandated by Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-401 and 10-9a-403, as amended.
D.   Plan Preparation: The general plan shall be prepared in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-403, as amended.
E.   Plan Adoption Or Rejection: General plan adoption or rejection shall
follow Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-404, as amended.
F.   Plan Amendment: All plan amendments shall be in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated 10-9a-404, as amended and, unless requested by the city's legislative
body, shall follow the procedures as outlined in Draper City Municipal Code 9-
5-060(D).
G.   Official Map: If an official land use map is adopted, the map shall be
subject to the Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-407, as amended.
H.   Reporting: The city shall abide by the annual report requirements as
outlined in Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-408, as amended.
I.   Notice: The city shall abide by the general plan noticing requirements in
Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-203 and 10-9a-204, as amended.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001;amd. Ord. 675, 3-28-2006; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-2-030: MASTER TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND OFFICIAL STREET MAP:
A.   Adoption: The planning commission has recommended and the city council has
adopted a major street plan and official street map formally known as the
"master traffic and transportation plan" as part of the general plan.
B.   Amendments: Amendments to the master traffic and transportation plan may
be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
9-5-040 of this title governing amendments to the general plan.
C.   Effect Of Official Street Map: The official street map of Draper City,
previously adopted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated, as amended, shall not be
interpreted to require the city to immediately acquire property it has
designated for eventual use as a public street, or require a landowner to
dedicate and construct a street as a condition of development approval, except
under circumstances set forth in subsection C1 of this section:
1.   This subsection C shall not prohibit the city from:
a.   Requiring a landowner to take into account the proposed streets in the
planning of a development proposal;
b.   Acquiring property through purchase, gift, voluntary dedication, or
eminent domain; or
c.   Requiring the dedication and improvement of a street if the street is
found necessary by the city because of a proposed development.
2.   The official street map of the city shall not be used to
unconstitutionally prohibit the development of property designated for eventual
use as a public street. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-2-040: CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN:
In the event capital facilities are unavailable to serve a proposed development
project subject to the requirements of this title, the capital facilities plan
adopted pursuant to title 5, chapter 5 of this code shall be used as a guide to
determine when needed capital facilities may be available. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-3-010: Purpose
9-3-020: Scope
9-3-030: Rules Of Construction
9-3-040: Definitions
9-3-050: Illustrations
9-3-060: Prohibited And Prescribed Uses
9-3-070: Appendix A
9-3-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules of construction, definitions,
and illustrations so that the provisions of this title may be readily
understood and consistently administered. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
9-3-020: SCOPE:
The rules of construction, definitions, and illustrations contained in this
chapter shall apply to the entirety of this title. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
9-3-030: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
A.   General: All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish the purposes of this title.
B.   Computation Of Time: Unless stated otherwise, a period of time specified
in this title shall be calendar days. The time within which an act is to be
done shall be computed as by excluding the first day and including the last
day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then the last day shall
be the next following business day. In computing the time required for public
hearing notice, the day of the hearing shall be excluded.
C.   Conjunctions: Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1.   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events
shall apply.
2.   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
3.   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
D.   Mandatory And Discretionary Terms: The word "shall" is always mandatory.
The word "should" means the matter described ought to be accomplished if
reasonable and possible under the circumstances. The word "may" is permissive.
E.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common use and understanding of the language, but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
F.   Tense, Number, And Gender: Words used in the past or present tense include
the future as well as the past or present unless the context clearly indicates
the contrary. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular as the context and application of this title may
reasonably suggest. Words of one gender shall apply to any person, natural or
fictitious, regardless of gender, as the context and application of this title
may reasonably suggest.
G.   Fractional Numbers: In determining compliance with the numerical
requirements of this title, any computation or measurement resulting in a
fractional number, except for acres, shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
H.   Public Officials, Bodies And Agencies: All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which reference is made are those of the city of Draper, Utah,
unless otherwise indicated.
I.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the city
manager, head of a department, or some other officer or employee to do some act
or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the city manager, head
of the department, or other officer to designate, delegate, and authorize
professional level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the
terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
9-3-040: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have
the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT OR ABUTTING: Contiguous with or sharing a common property line, boundary,
border, or protection strip.
ACCESS POINT: A two-way roadway access into a subdivision or development that
provides unrestricted access to residents, the public, and emergency services.
This definition does not prohibit a gated community entrance that is designed
to service residents, guests, and the general public.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See definition of building, accessory.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): A habitable living unit added to, created
within, or detached from a primary dwelling and contained on one lot.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED (D-ADU): An accessory dwelling unit, detached
from a primary dwelling.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, INTERNAL (I-ADU): An accessory dwelling unit created:
   A.   Within a primary dwelling;
   B.   Within the footprint of the primary dwelling at the time the internal
accessory dwelling unit is created; and
   C.   For the purpose of offering a long-term rental of thirty (30)
consecutive days or longer.
ACCESSORY USE: See definition of use, accessory.
ADJACENT LANDOWNERS: A property owner of record, according to the records of
the County Recorder, whose property abuts all or part of property proposed for
development.
ADVERSELY AFFECTED PARTY: A person other than a land use applicant who:
   A.   Owns real property adjoining the property that is the subject of a land
use application or land use decision, or
   B.   Will suffer a damage different in kind than, or an injury distinct
from, that of the general community as a result of the land use decision.
AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, independent special district, local
district, school district, interlocal cooperation entity, specified public
utility, and the Utah Department of Transportation, as defined in Utah Code
section 10-9a-103, as amended.
AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS: The conduct of agricultural activity involving the
keeping, grazing and pasturing of domestic animals for commercial gain. Typical
uses include the raising of animals for food or for the production of food in
excess of that required for a household and the boarding or stabling of animals
other than those owned and used by household members.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY: An industry or business involving agricultural products
in packaging, treatment, sales, intensive feeding, or storage. Typical uses
include animal feed yards, fur farms, commercial milk production, food
packaging or processing plants, and commercial poultry or egg production.
AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING: Initial processing of agricultural products that is
reasonably required to take place in close proximity to the site where they are
produced. Typical uses include sawmills and packinghouses. Slaughterhouses are
specifically excluded from this definition.
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale
or rental of farm tools and implements, feed and grain, tack, animal care
products, anhydrous ammonia, farm supplies and the like, and including
accessory food sales and machinery repair services. This definition shall also
include greenhouses which are used for wholesale and/or retail purposes.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of soil, raising of crops, horticulture and gardening,
but not including any agricultural business or industry.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty six feet (26') wide for the use
of pedestrians and vehicles providing a secondary means of access to the rear
of abutting properties.
ALZHEIMER'S FACILITY: A nursing care facility or assisted living facility whose
primary purpose is to provide living accommodations and services to residents
who have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease or similar types of dementia.
ANIMAL BREEDER: An establishment that breeds dogs, cats, and other household
pets for sale from the premises on which they were bred and reared. Animal
breeders shall comply with all regulations within title 7, chapter 5 of this
Code.
ANIMAL SPECIALTIES: The commercial production of small animals and associated
products. Typical uses include chicken and turkey raising, egg production, and
aviaries.
ANIMAL UNIT: A method of accounting for the relative impact of domestic animals
and fowl over the age of six (6) months listed below. The offspring (under 6
months of age) of any of the animals noted below shall not be counted as part
of the animals allowed per animal unit. Animals not listed below in the chart
are not permitted within Draper City.
Animal Type Animals Allowed Per Animal Unit
Animal Type                        Animals Allowed Per Animal Unit
Alpacas                            5
Buffalo                            1
Cattalo                            1
Cow                                2
Donkey                             1
Elk                                1
Emus                               4
Fallow deer                        1
Fowl (excluding chickens)          5
Goats                              5
Llamas                             2
Mule                               1
Ostriches                          4
Rabbits or chinchillas             25
Sheep                              5
Swine (including pot-bellied pigs) 2
Zebra                              1
Note: Horses, chickens and bees are regulated by separate ordinances and have
different allowances.
 
ANIMALS AND FOWL FOR RECREATION AND FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION: The keeping of
animals on a lot for exclusive use by persons residing thereon so long as the
number of animal units maintained for food production at any one time does not
exceed that required to supply household needs for a one year period.
ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that
radiates or captures electromagnetic signals.
ANTENNA, FLUSH MOUNTED: One or more antennas mounted on a wall surface or a
structure mounted on a wall surface where the entire antenna and structure do
not extend more than one foot (1') horizontally from the wall surface.
ANTENNA, HIDDEN: An antenna mounted within an existing structure so as to not
be visible from outside the structure.
ANTENNA, MONOPOLE: See definition of monopole.
ANTENNA, NONFLUSH MOUNTED: One or more antennas mounted on a wall surface or a
structure mounted on a wall surface where the entire antenna and structure
extend more than one foot (1') but not more than six feet (6'), horizontally
from the wall surface.
ANTENNA, ROOF MOUNTED: One or more antennas mounted on a roof, mechanical room,
or penthouse of a building.
ANTENNA, STEALTH DESIGN: An antenna and/or antenna mounting system designed to
be virtually unseen as the result of color schemes, screening, or disguising.
ANTENNA, WALL MOUNTED: One or more flush mounted or nonflush mounted antennas
attached to the vertical wall of a building.
ANTENNA, WHIP: A directional or omnidirectional antenna that is cylindrical in
shape and which may vary in size depending upon the frequency and gain for
which it is designed.
APIARY: The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
ASSEMBLY AND REPAIR, LIMITED: A business where products are processed,
fabricated, assembled, repaired, or packaged within the home. Typical uses may
include computer assembly or repair, small appliance repair, packaging,
wholesale, or fabrication of items. Assembly, fabrication, and repair is
intended to be small-scale in nature where items are produced one at a time in
small quantities or on a made-to-order basis, and does not include mass
production of goods. Products brought to or from the home shall be small enough
to be carried by one individual. Auto and small engine repair is not allowed.
The business shall not create noise, odor, vibration, or other impacts
discernible outside of the home. Anything that uses a material, a mixture of
materials, or a quantity of materials that could be classified by the fire
marshal or building official as dangerous or hazardous will not be allowed.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY:
   A.   A residential facility, licensed by the State of Utah, with a homelike
setting that provides an array of coordinated supportive personal and
healthcare services, available twenty four (24) hours per day, to residents who
have been assessed under Utah Department of Health or the Utah Department of
Human Services rules to need any of these services and who have a service plan
based on the assessment, which may include:
       1.   Specified services of intermittent nursing care;
       2.   Administration of medication; and
       3.   Support services promoting resident's independence and self-
sufficiency.
   B.   An assisted living facility does not include a residential facility for
persons with a disability or an adult daycare provided in conjunction with a
residential facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons
with a disability.
AUDITORIUM, MINOR: An open, partially enclosed or fully enclosed facility with
one thousand five hundred (1,500) seats or less, used or intended to be used
primarily for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions and other
public gatherings.
AUDITORIUM OR STADIUM, MAJOR: An open, partially enclosed or fully enclosed
facility with more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) seats, used or
intended to be used primarily for spectator sports, entertainment events,
expositions and other public gatherings. Typical uses include convention and
exhibition halls, sports arenas and amphitheaters.
AUTO, TRUCK, RV AND EQUIPMENT STORAGE: Temporary outside storage of both new
and used motor vehicles and equipment awaiting distribution. Such storage may
include an impound lot, but is not to include nonserviceable or dilapidated
vehicles or equipment.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any lot, land or area used for the storage, keeping,
dismantling or salvaging of two (2) or more unlicensed automobiles or parts
thereof.
BAIL BOND SERVICE: An establishment which provides sureties to procure the
release of persons under arrest by becoming financially responsible for their
appearance at the time and place designated.
BANK OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An organization involved in deposit banking,
finance, investment, mortgages, trusts, and the like. Typical uses include
commercial banks, credit unions, finance companies, and savings institutions.
BAR ESTABLISHMENT: A license issued to an equity organization, fraternal
organization, or a bar which allows for the storage, sale, service and
consumption of on-premises alcoholic beverages where a variety of on-premises
prepared food must be available for the customer the entire time the bar is
open; but, there is no required percentage of food sales.
BASEMENT: A story located one-half (½) or more below the finished elevation of
the ground.
BASIC INDUSTRY: An establishment engaged in basic processing and manufacturing
of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials; or a
use engaged in manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or explosive
materials; or manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive conditions. Typical uses include chemical
manufacturing and warehousing, dry ice manufacturing, fat rendering plants,
fertilizer manufacturing, fireworks and explosives manufacturing and
warehousing, petroleum refineries, pulp processing and paper products
manufacturing, radioactive materials manufacture or use, slaughterhouses,
steelworks and tanneries.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A limited commercial activity where paying guests:
   A.   Obtain lodging on a day to day basis in a room or rooms without cooking
facilities;
   B.   May obtain breakfast or other meals; and
   C.   May engage in other limited related activities.
BEE: Any stage of development of the common domestic honeybee, Apis mellifera
species.
BEEKEEPER: A person owning, possessing or controlling one or more colonies of
bees.
BERM: A mound of earth, generally two feet (2') to six feet (6') high, used to
shield, screen, and buffer undesirable views and to separate land uses.
BILLBOARD: See definition of billboard in section 9-26-030 of this title.
BLOCK: Land surrounded by streets and other rights-of-way, other than an alley,
or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guestrooms, where, for
compensation, meals are provided for not more than fifteen (15) persons.
BUBBLER: An irrigation head that delivers water to the root zone by “flooding”
the planted area, usually measured in gallons per minute. Bubblers exhibit a
trickle, umbrella or short stream pattern.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of a lot or parcel defined by minimum setback and yard
areas where a main building may be constructed.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A detached subordinate building located on a lot with a
main building, the use of which is incidental to the use of the main building.
BUILDING, COMMERCIAL: Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any commercial use or occupancy.
BUILDING FACADE: Any exterior wall of a building, including windows, doors, and
mansard, but not including a pitched roof.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a
nonresidential building abutting a street, a parking area, a mall or other
circulation area open to the general public and having a main window display of
the enterprise or a public entrance to the building.
   A.   In Industrial Districts, a building side with an entrance open to
employees;
   B.   Where more than one use occupies a building, the front width of that
portion of a building occupied by a use having a public entrance or main window
display for its exclusive use.
BUILDING, HISTORIC: Any building listed in the National Register of Historic
Places, the Utah State Register of Historic Sites, the Draper City Historic
Landmarks Register, or otherwise determined by the Planning Commission to have
historic or architectural significance.
BUILDING LINE, FRONT: A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the front yard and extending across
the entire width of the lot or parcel.
BUILDING LINE, REAR: A line parallel to the rear lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the rear yard and extending across the
entire width of the lot or parcel.
BUILDING LINE, SIDE: A line parallel to the side lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the side yard and extending between
the front and rear building lines.
BUILDING, MAIN: The principal building or one of the principal buildings
located on a lot or parcel designed or used to accommodate the primary use to
which the premises is devoted. Where a permissible use involves more than one
structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of apartment
groups, each such permitted building on one lot, as defined by this title,
shall be deemed a main building.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person designated by the City Manager charged with the
principal responsibility for interpreting and applying the provision of title
10 of this Code.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE HEIGHT: The height of a building or structure shall be as
defined in the current Building Codes adopted by the City. Where the current
Building Codes do not apply, height shall be as provided in subsection 9-27-
120A of this title.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: Building shall mean any one- and two- family dwelling or
portion thereof, including townhouses, that is used, or designed or intended to
be used for human habitation, for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
or any combination thereof, and shall include accessory structures thereto.
BUSINESS DAY: A day other than Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday.
BUS TERMINAL: A building or premises for the transient housing or parking of
commercial motor vehicles and for the pick up and discharge fare paying
intercity passengers. Accessory uses may include ticket offices, luggage
checking facilities, and similar uses.
BUSINESS EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND SUPPLIES: An establishment primarily engaged in
the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office,
professional or business service establishments, or individuals. Excludes
automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office
equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops and hotel
equipment and supply firms.
BUSINESS SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the display, storage,
and sale of goods or services used by office, professional and service
establishments.
CALIPER: A trunk diameter measurement consistent with the American Standard for
Nursery Stock ANXI Z60.1 standard (as amended). Generally, for trees the
measurement is taken six inches (6") above the ground or soil line up to and
including four inch (4") caliper size interval. If the caliper measurement when
taken at six inches (6") above the ground meets or exceeds four and one-half
inches (4-1/2"), the caliper size is instead measured at twelve inches (12")
above the ground.
CANNABIS PRODUCTION ESTABLISHMENT: As defined in Section 4-41a-102 of the Utah
Code, as amended.
CAPITAL FACILITIES: Any or all of the following facilities that have a life
expectancy of ten (10) or more years: water rights and water supply, treatment,
and distribution facilities; wastewater collection and treatment facilities;
stormwater, drainage, and flood control facilities; roadway facilities; parks
and recreation facilities, open space and trails; and public safety facilities.
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: A long range plan of capital projects, with estimated
costs and proposed methods of financing.
CAR WASH: An establishment primarily engaged in cleaning or detailing motor
vehicles, including cars, passenger trucks, recreational vehicles, whether
self-service, automatic or by hand. This definition applies only to car washes
that are the primary use of land. A single bay car wash associated with a
gasoline service station is not included in this definition.
CAR WASH, COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: An establishment primarily engaged in cleaning
or detailing over the road, commercial vehicles whether self-service, automatic
or by hand.
CARPORT: A covered automobile parking space with at least two (2) sides open.
For the purposes of this title, a "carport" shall be subject to all of the
regulations prescribed for a private garage.
CARRIER: A company or business which provides wireless telecommunication
services as set forth in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as may be amended.
CASHING SERVICES: An organization involved in the providing of loans or
consideration to customers in exchange for personal property, such as property
titles or personal checks. Such services shall include check cashing businesses
licensed and/or defined by the State pursuant to the Check Cashing Registration
Act, car title loan businesses, deferred deposit loan businesses, and
businesses of a similar nature offering such services as a primary function.
The term financial service shall not include fully automated stand alone
services, such as automated teller machines, nor those used and defined herein
as "bank or financial institution". No cashing service business shall be
located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from another such business as
measured in a straight line from the property line of the property on which the
business is located, regardless of intervening structures or zoning districts.
CATTERY: An establishment having three (3) or more cats of any age for the
purpose of boarding, letting for hire, or training for profit.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, whether
human or animal, including crematoriums and mausoleums.
CHARTER SCHOOLS:
   A.   An operating charter school;
   B.   A charter school applicant that a charter school authorizer approves in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 53G, chapter 5, part 3, Charter
School Authorization; or
   C.   An entity that is working on behalf of a charter school or approved
charter applicant to develop or construct a charter school building.
CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP: Any structure or site, such as a church, synagogue,
chapel, sanctuary or cathedral, used primarily for collective or individual
involvement with a religious activity, such as rites, rituals, ceremonies,
prayers and discussions, and for church related activities.
CITY: Draper City, Utah, a municipal corporation.
CITY ENGINEER: A registered civil engineer so appointed or employed by the City
Council.
CLEAR VIEW AREA: Areas at intersecting streets and driveways where unobstructed
vision is maintained as required by this title.
CLINIC: See definition of medical service.
CLUB OR SERVICE ORGANIZATION: A nonprofit or private establishment providing
meeting, recreational, or social facilities, excluding a private club as
defined herein. Typical uses include lodges, meeting halls, recreation centers,
and facilities operated by social clubs and fraternal or service organizations.
COLD STORAGE PLANTS: A facility for freezing or refrigerated storage of goods.
COLONY: A beehive and its equipment, including one queen, bees, comb, honey,
pollen and brood.
COMMERCIAL CENTER: A commercial planned center comprised of office and/or
retail uses where landscaping, parking and other improvements are provided in a
comprehensive and integrated fashion.
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT: Equipment of machinery used generally within the
manufacturing, construction, or farming industries. Typical equipment includes
cranes, forklifts, asphalt pavers, backhoes, bulldozers, and trackers.
COMMERCIAL TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power used in commerce to
transport passengers or property which:
   A.   Is designed to be towed by another vehicle;
   B.   Has a gross weight rating or gross weight of more than ten thousand
(10,000) pounds, whichever is greater; and
   C    Is not a recreational vehicle or designed to exclusively carry or
transport one or more recreational vehicles.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used in
commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle:
   A.   Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of twenty six
thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, whichever is greater;
   B.   Is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the
driver; or
   C.   Is of any size and is used in the transportation of hazardous materials
as defined in 49 USC 5103 and is required to be placarded under subpart F of 49
CFR part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin in
42 CFR part 73.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT RENTAL OR SALE: An establishment engaged in
the retail sale, wholesale, or rental from the premises of motorized commercial
vehicles, trailers, and equipment along with incidental service or maintenance.
Typical uses include new or used commercial vehicle and truck sales, moving
trailer and truck rental, construction equipment rental yards and farm
equipment and machinery sales and rental.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT REPAIR: An establishment providing commercial
vehicle, trailer, and equipment repair or maintenance services within a
completely enclosed building which have associated storage, overnight or
otherwise, of vehicles, equipment, supplies, parts or inventory in an enclosed
area outside the building.
CONDITIONAL USE: See definition of use, conditional.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: The permission granted by City authorities to use or
access properties under special circumstances and with specific requirements
and conditions attached.
CONDOMINIUM: The ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project, together
with an undivided interest in common in the common areas and facilities of the
property created pursuant to the Utah Condominium Ownership Act.
CONDOMINIUM DECLARATION: See definition of Declaration.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A real estate condominium project; a plan or project
whereby two (2) or more units, whether contained in existing or proposed
apartments, commercial, or industrial buildings or structures or otherwise, are
separately offered or proposed to be offered for sale. "Condominium project"
shall also mean the property when the context so requires.
CONGREGATE HOUSING FACILITY: A housing development of five (5) or more dwelling
units which is planned, designed, and managed to include facilities and common
space that maximize the residents' potential for independent living. The
facility may be occupied by the elderly or persons with a disability. The
direct services that are provided or made available may be located on or off
site and shall relate to the nutritional, social, recreational, housekeeping
and personal needs of the residents, and shall be provided or made available at
a level necessary to assist the residents to function independently. "Direct
services" means meals, housekeeping services, transportation services, and
planned recreational and social activities which shall be provided to the
residents directly by the management of the congregate housing. Support
services are social services, adult daycare services, and in-home services
which the management of the congregate housing shall assist the residents in
obtaining at the request of the residents. A congregate housing facility may
only be developed as a component of a transitional care development and not as
a stand alone development.
CONSTRUCTION: The materials, architecture, assembly, and installation of a
building or structure.
CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICE: An establishment engaged in the retail or
wholesale sale of materials and services used in the construction of buildings
or other structures, as well as the outdoor storage of construction equipment
or materials on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses include
lumberyards, lawn and garden supply stores, construction equipment sales and
rental, electrical, plumbing, air conditioning and heating supply stores,
swimming pool sales, landscaping and property maintenance contractors' offices
and storage yards, construction and trade contractors' offices and storage
yards, and public utility corporation storage yards.
CONVENIENCE STORE: An establishment, not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square
feet of gross floor area, serving a limited market area and engaged in the
retail sale or rental, from the premises, of food, beverages and other
frequently or recurrently needed items for household use, excluding gasoline
sales.
CONVERTIBLE LAND: A building site which is a portion of the common areas and
facilities described by metes and bounds, within which additional units or
limited common areas and facilities may be created pursuant to the Utah
condominium ownership act.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: A facility providing housing and care for individuals
legally confined for violations of law.
COTTAGE BUSINESS: A business where products are created in the home. The
products are unique in nature, such as handicraft, art, and jewelry. Limited
food production can also be considered. Anything that uses a material, a
mixture of materials or a quantity of materials that could be classified by the
fire marshal or building official as dangerous or hazardous will not be
allowed.
CROSS ACCESS: A means of access providing internal circulation between one (1)
or more properties, usually by means of a recorded perpetual easement.
CULTURAL SERVICE: A library, museum or similar public or registered nonprofit
organizational use displaying, preserving, and exhibiting objects of community
and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
DAYCARE: An establishment that provides care, protection and supervision for
individuals on a regular basis away from their primary residences for less than
twenty four (24) hours per day. The term does not include:
   A.   Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by
public or private elementary or secondary schools or institutions of higher
learning;
   B.   Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or other
principal activity, where children are cared for temporarily while parents or
custodians of the children are occupied on the premises or are in the immediate
vicinity and readily available; or
   C.   Special activities or programs, including athletics, crafts instruction
and similar activities, conducted on a periodic basis by civic, charitable,
private, or governmental organizations.
DAYCARE, GENERAL: A daycare establishment that provides care, protection and
supervision for children, other than daycare, limited.
DAYCARE, LIMITED: A daycare establishment provided as a home occupation that
provides care, protection, and supervision for up to six (6) children per day
during customary daytime hours.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit of measure used to express intensity of noise.
DECLARATION: The legal instrument by which property is subjected to the
provisions of the Utah condominium ownership act.
DEDICATION: The setting aside of land by an owner for any general and public
uses, reserving for himself no other rights than such as are compatible with
the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property is
devoted.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units per acre within a subdivision or
other development based on the total tract area, whether developable or not.
DENSITY, NET: The number of dwelling units per acre within a subdivision or
other development, not including public streets and other public property.
DEPTH: The least horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines and
the building.
DEVELOPABLE LAND: Land under thirty percent (30%) slope which is capable of
being improved, subject to the requirements of this code.
DEVELOPER: The person, association or corporation developing or causing to be
developed the property subject to the provision of this chapter. For the
purposes of residential construction outside of a recorded subdivision, the
applicant for the building permit shall be deemed to be the developer and shall
comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A written agreement or an amendment to a written
agreement between the city and one or more parties that regulates or controls
the use or development of a specific area of land. This definition does not
include a bond agreement or an improvement completion assurance.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from the city that authorizes
the commencement of development activity.
DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any of the following:
   A.   Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   B.   Any construction, reconstruction, or expansion of a building,
structure, or use.
   C.   Any change in the use of a building or structure.
   D.   The total area of a lot or parcel of land on which a building permit is
to be issued or the total area of property being improved.
   E.   Any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need
for capital facilities.
   F.   The property being developed and/or subdivided.
   G.   The act, process or result of developing.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
"Disability" does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
federally controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the controlled
substances act, 21 USC 802, or successor law. As used in this definition:
   A.   "Physical or mental impairment" includes:
       1.   Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
       2.   Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not
limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy,
multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency
virus infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other
than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance) and
alcoholism.
   B.   "Major life activities" means functions such as caring for one's self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning and working.
   C.   "Has a record of such an impairment" means has a history of, or has
been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
   D.   "Is regarded as having an impairment" means:
       1.   Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially
limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by another person
as constituting such a limitation;
       2.   Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others
toward such impairment; or
         3.   Has none of the impairments defined in subsection A of this
definition, but is treated by another person as having such an impairment.
DRIP EMITTER: Drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly at the root
zone of the plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
DUPLEX: See definition of dwelling, two-family.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, having one or more dwelling units
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more occupants, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or other
facilities offering transient lodging facilities.
DWELLING, BASEMENT: A dwelling which is located below finished grade.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT: One or more two- or three-story multiple-family
dwellings, generally built at a gross density of ten (10) to fifteen (15)
dwelling units per acre, where each dwelling contains eight (8) to twenty (20)
dwelling units.
DWELLING, MOVE- ON: A structure designed and constructed for human habitation
and occupied as a permanent fixture to a parcel of land but which can be
relocated and still conform to applicable Building Codes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling having three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING OCCUPANT: One or more persons living in a dwelling unit.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME: A single-family dwelling located on a separate lot with
open setbacks on three (3) sides with a court.
DWELLING, PRIMARY: A single-family dwelling that is detached and is occupied as
the primary residence of the owner of record.
DWELLING, RENTAL: A dwelling that is used or designated for use as a residence
by one or more persons; and
   A.   Available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of
one month or longer; or
   B.   Arranged designed, or built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out
for a period of one month or longer.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building having only one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY WITH ACCESSORY DWELLING: A building having only one
dwelling unit and one accessory dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TEMPORARY: A trailer or structure used for temporary residential
purposes solely by the property owner or builder during the construction of a
permanent dwelling on a lot or parcel.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit in a row of at least three (3) such units
where each unit has its own front and rear exterior access, no unit is located
above or below another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by
one or more vertical common fire resistant walls.
DWELLING, TWO- FAMILY: A dwelling having only two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit consisting of one or more rooms in a dwelling
designed for or occupied for living purposes by one or more persons which
provides complete and independent facilities for living including the provision
of living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities.
DWELLING UNIT FOOTPRINT: The perimeter footing or foundation of the dwelling
unit.
EASEMENT: A present or future right of use under, on, or above the surface of
property by a person or agency other than the legal owner of the property.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years old or older who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
EMERGENCY ACCESS ENTRANCE: A roadway access into a subdivision that was not
designed or intended for regular use by the public or by the occupants of the
subdivision, but was established to provide access for emergency vehicles or
alternate access across the subdivision during emergency conditions.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Lighting which illuminates a building or structure from
a remote position or from outside of the building or structure.
FAMILY: One (1) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FENCE: A structure serving as an enclosure, barrier, or boundary, which defines
an outdoor space. A sight obscuring fence is one which permits vision through
not more than ten percent (10%) of each square foot more than four inches (4")
above the ground.
FINAL PLAT: The final drawing of a subdivision and dedication prepared for
filing with the county recorder which complies with applicable requirements set
forth in this title and other titles of this code and provisions adopted
pursuant thereto.
FLOOR AREA, TOTAL: The square foot area of a building, including an accessory
building, measured from outside wall surfaces and including basements, garages,
porches, utility rooms, stairways, recreation rooms and storage rooms, but
excluding unroofed balconies and patios.
FLYWAY BARRIER: Solid wall, fence or dense vegetation which modifies the bee
flight pattern.
FRANCHISE MUNICIPAL USE: A "municipal use", as defined herein, operated by a
franchisee of Draper City.
FREEWAY FRONTAGE ROAD: A road that parallels a freeway and serves to collect
and distribute traffic along the freeway without impeding flow along the
freeway and which also has lots located only along one side of the road with
the other side of the road typically fronting the freeway right of way.
FREEWAY FRONTAGE ROAD SIGN: A sign that is allowed in certain areas adjacent to
I-15 or freeway frontage roads, as defined, that is easily viewed by traffic
passing through on I-15.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor trucks
or rail is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck or rail.
FRONT WALL PLANE: That face, side or elevation of a structure most closely
oriented toward the street, excluding porches, window bays and similar
appendages.
FUNERAL HOME: An establishment engaged in preparation of funeral services. Uses
may include the preparation of the deceased for burial, for the display of the
deceased and/or for ceremonies or services related thereto. A funeral home may
include facilities for embalming, but not for cremation. It may also include
facilities for the storage of caskets, funeral supplies, and funeral vehicles.
A funeral home may also be known as a funeral parlor or a mortuary.
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL: A garage, accessory to a dwelling, used for
parking and storage of motor vehicles owned and operated by residents of the
dwelling that is neither a commercial enterprise nor available to the general
public.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A structure, or portion thereof, other than a private customer
and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily for parking
and storage of motor vehicles and available to the general public.
GAS AND FUEL, STORAGE AND SALES: The use of a site for bulk storage and
wholesale distribution of flammable liquid, gas or solid fuel, excluding
belowground storage that is clearly ancillary to an allowed principal use on
the site.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: An establishment engaged in the retail sales of
gasoline and petroleum products. This definition includes gasoline sales
conducted as part of a convenience store. A gasoline service station may also
include automatic and self-serve car washes which are accessory to the primary
use.
GENERAL PLAN: A document adopted by the City Council that sets forth general
guidelines for proposed future development of the land within the City as set
forth in this title.
GOLF COURSE: A facility providing private or public golf recreation services
and support facilities, excluding miniature golf facilities.
GOVERNMENT SERVICE: Any building or facility used, owned or operated by a
government entity which provides services for the public, excluding utilities
and recreational services. Typical uses include administrative offices of
government agencies and utility billing offices.
GRADE, EXISTING: The grade of a property prior to the most recent proposed
development or construction activity.
GRADE PLANE: A reference plane representing the average of the finished ground
level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished ground
level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be
established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the
lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet (6') from the building,
between the structure and a point six feet (6') from the building.
GRASS: Monocotyledonous plants from the botanical family Poaceae or Gramineae
having narrow leaves, hollow stems, and clusters of very small flowers.
GRASS, ORNAMENTAL: Varieties of grass including grass-like perennial plants
(sedges and rushes) that serve no purpose other than decoration. Characteristic
foliage includes thick reed-like blades attached to stems topped by an
inflorescence or seed head grown in bunches or clumps. As used in this title,
ornamental grass does not include grass varieties used as Turf, Lawn or Sod.
GROOMING SERVICE: An establishment for the grooming, bathing, clipping, and
nonmedical care of household pets. Such uses may also include the sale of
grooming and care items, as well as accessory items for the keeping of
household pets. Such uses shall not include the sale, breeding, training, or
boarding of animals.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The total floor area of a building designed, expressed in
square feet measured from centerline of joint partitions and exteriors of
outside walls.
GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA (GLA): The total floor area of a building designed
for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and
upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from centerline of
joint partitions and exteriors of outside walls.
GROUND COVER: Live plantings, not including lawn or turf form a continuous
cover over the ground that can be maintained at a height not exceeding twelve
inches (12") from the surface.
HABITABLE LIVING UNIT: See definition of Dwelling Unit.
HANDBILLS POSTED ON PUBLIC PLACES OR OBJECTS: Any paint, mark, writing on, or
writing posted or otherwise affixed to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb,
park strip, street, lamppost, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake, guardrail,
railroad trestle, electric light, power, or telephone pole or appurtenance
thereof, or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain,
lifesaving equipment, street sign, or traffic sign.
HARDSCAPE: Patios, decks, walls, paths and similar man-made features integrated
into a landscape design, excludingdriveways, sidewalks, parking areas, or other
paved walkways required for pedestrian access.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS STORAGE/ TREATMENT: A facility for the collection, storage,
processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste as
defined by applicable state or federal law.
HEIGHT, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: See definition of building or structure height.
HEIGHT, SIGN: See section
9-26-30 of this title, definition of height of sign.
HIGHER EDUCATION FACILITY, PRIVATE: An institution of higher education, not
part of the Utah State system of higher education, offering education in
consideration of the payment of tuition or fees for the attainment of
educational objectives leading to a degree or certificate, including:
   A.   Business schools;
   B.   Technical schools; and
   C.   Applied technology centers;
and including, but not limited to, such accessory uses as dormitories, museums,
stadiums, and theaters.
HIGHER EDUCATION FACILITY, PUBLIC:
   A.   Those institutions designated in Utah Code Annotated section 53B-1-102;
   B.   Any public institution of higher education offering education in
consideration of the payment of tuition or fees for the attainment of
educational objectives leading to a degree or certificate, including:
      1.   Business schools;
      2.   Technical schools; and
      3.   Applied technology centers;
and including, but not limited to, such accessory uses as dormitories, museums,
stadiums, and theaters.
HIVE: Artificial or natural receptacle used to house a bee colony. A hive
typically consists of a cover, honey supers, brood chambers and a bottom board.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Noncommercial displays of a primarily decorative nature,
clearly incidental and customarily and commonly associated with any national,
local, or religious holiday.
HOME OCCUPATION: A commercial or other nonresidential use conducted within a
dwelling unit that is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit
for residential purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION DAYCARE: See definition of Daycare, Home Occupation.
HOMELESS SHELTER: A place of temporary abode for persons who have no residence.
HOSPICE: A program of care for the terminally ill and their families which
occurs in a home or in a healthcare facility and which provides medical,
palliative, psychological, spiritual, and supportive care and treatment.
HOSPITAL: A facility that:
   A.   Offers services more intensive than those required for room, board,
personal services and general nursing care;
   B.   Offers facilities and beds for use beyond twenty four (24) hours by
individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment, or care for illness, injury,
deformity, infirmity, abnormality, disease or pregnancy; or
   C.   Regularly makes available at least clinical laboratory services,
diagnostic X-ray services and treatment facilities for surgery or obstetrical
care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent.
   Hospitals may include accessory uses, such as offices for medical and dental
personnel, daycare facilities for employees, patients, or patient visitors, and
central service facilities, such as pharmacies, medical laboratories, and other
related uses.
HOTEL: An establishment with or without fixed cooking facilities in individual
rooms offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public, and
which may provide additional services, such as restaurants and meeting rooms.
HOUSEHOLD: A family living together in a dwelling unit with common access to
and common use of all living, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities within
the dwelling unit.
HOUSEHOLD PET: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in a house and/or kept for
company or pleasure, not for profit, such as dogs, cats, or small pets such as
rabbits, birds, fish, hamsters and reptiles, but not including:
   A.   Chickens, ducks, geese, pigs or other domestic farm variety animals,
nor any animals which are likely to inflict harm or endanger the health, safety
or welfare of any person or property; and
   B.   A sufficient number of dogs to constitute a kennel or sufficient number
of cats to constitute a cattery.
HOUSEKEEPING: See definition of Household.
ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL: Lighting by means of a light source that is within a
sign having a translucent background, silhouetting opaque letters or designs,
or that is within letters or designs that are themselves made of translucent
material.
IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition
of development approval as provided in title 5, chapter 5 of this Code.
INTENSITY: The degree of a quantitative or qualitative measurement associated
with a use of land or building which impacts surrounding property owners.
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD: Any portion of a lot used for collection, storage,
keeping, or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discard material,
including the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other
vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof, but not including uses clearly
accessory and incidental to any permitted agricultural use.
KEEPING OF CHICKENS FOR FAMILIAL GAIN: The keeping of chickens on a lot or
parcel for the exclusive use by persons residing thereon.
KENNEL: An establishment having three (3) or more dogs of any age for the
purpose of boarding, letting for hire, or training for profit.
KIOSK: A small structure, typically located within a pedestrian walkway or
similar circulation area, intended for uses as a small shop, or for use as a
display space for posters, notices, and exhibits.
KITCHEN: An area within a dwelling unit which contains an oven and/or cooktop
stove and/or electrical wiring to accommodate such, and may include a sink and
refrigeration facilities.
LAND USE: The manner in which land is occupied or utilized.
LAND USE APPLICATION: An application required by the City's Land Use Ordinance.
LAND USE BUFFER: An area of natural or planted vegetation located on a property
in order to screen and soften the effects that property's land use may pose on
adjoining land uses.
LAND USE ORDINANCE: A Planning, Zoning, Development, or Subdivision Ordinance
of the City, but does not include the City's general plan.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a professional license to practice
landscape architecture in the state of Utah.
LANDSCAPE DESIGNER: An individual that does not hold a professional license for
landscape architecture but can otherwise demonstrate the necessary
qualifications and competency in landscape design such as possession of an
undergraduate degree in landscape architecture or horticulture from a
regionally accredited educational institutions, or certification as a Utah
Certified Nursery Professional. Also includes individuals who possess a Utah
professional license as an architect, engineer, or land surveyor and are
permitted by the State to stamp plans that fall under the practice of landscape
architecture.
LANDSCAPE EDGING: Metal, concrete, plastic, or other similar durable, weather,
and rot resistant material that is used to separate different elements of a
landscape from one another.
LANDSCAPE GRADING PLAN: Schematic, scaled drawing(s) showing finish grades,
spot elevations as necessary and existing and new contours with the developed
landscaped area.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION PLAN: Schematic, scaled drawing(s) showing the layout and
components of the system for providing water to the landscaped areas of a site.
LANDSCAPE PLANTING PLAN: Schematic, scaled drawing(s) of a site or property
showing the general layout of all landscaped areas.
LANDSCAPING OR LANDSCAPE: The area of a development consisting of natural or
introduced live vegetation together with accompanying earthwork and mulch that
provide visual enhancement to the development. Landscaping can also include
related outdoor features placed together with the vegetation such as decorative
boulders, fountains, ponds, artwork, and benches. Also includes the act of
installing the foregoing.
LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting multiple sided, open steel frame structure
used to support telecommunication equipment.
LAUNDRY OR DRY CLEANING, LIMITED: An establishment providing household laundry
and dry cleaning services with customer drop off and pick up where no
laundering or cleaning is done on the site.
LAUNDRY SERVICES: An establishment providing household laundry and dry cleaning
services with customer drop off and pick up, where laundering or cleaning is
done on the site. This use also includes an establishment providing home type
washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire or rent to be used by
customers on the premises, such as a laundromat.
LIGHT SOURCE: Neon, fluorescent or similar tube lighting, an incandescent bulb,
including the light producing elements therein, and any reflecting surface
that, by reason of its construction or placement, becomes a light source.
LIQUOR STORE: A State store, owned and operated by the State of Utah, as
defined and regulated under Utah Code Annotated title 32B, or its successor,
for the sale of alcoholic beverages for off premises consumption.
LIVING SPACE: The area calculated from the horizontal exterior dimensions of
all levels, excluding porches, garages, patios, decks and unoccupied
structures.
LOT: A tract of land, regardless of any label, that is created by and shown on
a final subdivision plat that has been recorded in the office of the county
recorder.
LOT AREA: The total land area of a lot or parcel measured on a horizontal
plane, reduced by the area of any of the following:
   A.   Public or private street rights-of-way dedicated or recorded after
December 1, 1981;
   B.   Railroad rights-of-way; and
   C.   Slopes greater than forty percent (40%).
LOT, CORNER: A lot or parcel abutting two (2) intersecting or intercepting
streets where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not
exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). Corner lots shall have two (2)
front yards and two (2) rear yards.
LOT COVERAGE: The total horizontal area of a lot or parcel covered by any
building or structure which extends above the surface of the ground level,
including any covered parking spaces.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance from a front lot line to a rear lot
line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot or parcel abutting two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
LOT, DWELLING: A lot or parcel on which one or more dwellings may be legally
established.
LOT, FLAG: A lot or parcel located to the rear of another lot or parcel, the
main body of which does not front on a street and is accessed by a narrow
corridor.
LOT FRONTAGE: The distance, measured along the front lot line, that a lot or
parcel adjoins a street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot or parcel other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot or parcel that divides one lot or
parcel from another or from a street.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of a lot line boundary between adjoining
lots or between a lot and adjoining parcels in accordance with Title 17,
whether or not the lots are located in the same subdivision, and with the
consent of the owners of record. This definition does not include new boundary
lines that would create an additional lot, constitute a subdivision or a
subdivision amendment, or a boundary line adjustment made by the Utah
Department of Transportation.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A lot line separating a lot or parcel from an existing street
right-of-way or, where a new street or street widening is proposed, the
proposed street right-of-way line as shown on the master traffic and
transportation plan. For an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street;
for a corner lot, the lot lines adjoining both streets; for a double frontage
lot, a lot line adjoining one of the streets as elected by the City; for a lot
accessed from a private right-of-way or access easement, the easement or right-
of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line generally opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. In the case of a triangular, gore, or irregular shaped lot with five
(5) or more sides at angles less than a 90-degrees per side, the rear line is a
"constructive" line ten feet (10') in length within the lot or parcel,
generally parallel to the front lot line which intercepts the side lot lines at
points most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating one lot or parcel from another is an interior side lot
line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING: A lot or parcel that:
   A.   Legally existed before its current zoning designation; and
   B.   Has been shown continuously on the records of the Salt Lake County
Recorder as an independent parcel since December 1, 1981; and
   C.   Because of subsequent zoning changes, does not conform with the lot
size or other dimensional or property development standards applicable in the
zone where the lot or parcel is located.
LOT WIDTH: For interior lots or parcels, the shorter of horizontal distance
between side lot lines, measured at the required front yard setback line or
rear setback line. For corner lots, or parcels, the distance between one of the
front lot lines and the opposite rear yard line at the required setback line.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT: Structural or natural engineered systems located close
to the source of storm water that use or mimic natural processes to encourage
infiltration, evapotranspiration, or reuse of the storm water.
LOW POWER RADIO SERVICES FACILITY: See definition of wireless telecommunication
facility.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: A plan entitled "Major Street Plan of the City" and approved
by the City Council as part of the City's general plan.
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot or parcel or contiguous lots or
parcels under one ownership designed and planned to accommodate the placement
of manufactured or mobile homes on leased or rented "pads".
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A platted and recorded subdivision
zoned and designed for mobile and manufactured home use where mobile and
manufactured homes are placed on permanent foundations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, according to the Federal Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 (HUD Code), in one or more sections, which:
   A.   In the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty
(40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is four hundred
(400) or more square feet;
   B.   Is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities;
   C.   Includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems;
and
   D.   Is identified by the manufacturer's data plate bearing the date the
unit was manufactured and a HUD label attached to the exterior of the home
certifying the home was manufactured to HUD standards.
MANUFACTURING, GENERAL: An establishment engaged in the manufacture of finished
products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging, and incidental
storage, sales and/or distribution of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing and manufacturing activities.
MANUFACTURING, LIMITED: An establishment engaged in the limited processing,
fabrication, assembly and/or packaging of products utilizing processes that:
   A.   Have no noise, odor, vibration, or other impacts discernible outside a
building; and
   B.   Do not violate any applicable noise ordinance.
MASONRY: Stone, brick, dyed block, or split faced concrete block.
MEDIA SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of
broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use
of electronic and telephonic mechanisms, including radio, television, film or
sound recording studios.
MEDICAL CANNABIS PHARMACY: As defined in Section 26-61a-102 of the Utah Code,
as amended.
MEDICAL OR DENTAL LABORATORY: An establishment that conducts basic medical or
dental research and analysis. This term does not include a facility providing
any type of in-house patient services typically provided by hospitals and
clinics.
MEDICAL SERVICE: An establishment providing therapeutic, preventive, or
corrective personal treatment services on an outpatient basis by physicians,
dentists, and other practitioners of the medical or healing arts, as well as
the provision of medical testing and analysis services.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL: An exterior building facade material made from two
(2) sheets of aluminum, or other high quality metal, bonded to a polyethylene
or polyurethane core.
MILITARY FACILITY: A premises or facility owned and operated by the federal or
state government for civil defense or military purposes. Uses include command
centers, military airfields, military bases, storage depots, and training
bases.
MINERAL EXTRACTION: Removal of sand, gravel, dirt, or other materials by
grading or excavating.
MIXED USE: See definition of Planned Center.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15,
1976, in accordance with a state mobile home code which existed prior to the
federal manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code).
MOBILE HOME PARK: See definition of Manufactured And Mobile Home Park.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING: Housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or less than eighty percent
(80%) of the median gross income of the metropolitan statistical area for
households of the same size.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING PLAN: A written document conforming to the requirements
of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-408.
MODULAR UNIT: A structure built from sections manufactured in accordance with
the construction standards adopted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 15A,
and transported to a building site, the purpose of which is for human
habitation, occupancy or use.
MONOPOLE: A single cylindrical steel or wooden pole that acts as the support
structure for one or more antennas.
MORTUARY: See definition of Funeral Home.
MOTEL OR MOTOR LODGE: Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping
rooms, with or without fixed cooking facilities, designed for temporary
occupancy by tourists or transients, with a garage attached or parking space
conveniently located to each unit.
MOTOR HOME: A motor vehicle built on a truck or bus chassis and designed to
serve as self-contained living quarters for recreational travel and use.
MULCH: Materials such as rock, bark, wood chips or similar materials left loose
and applied over the soil for the purposes of water conservation, reducing weed
growth, and enhancing the visual appeal of an area.
MUNICIPAL USE: Any use operated exclusively, or contracted for, by the city,
such use having the purpose of serving the public health, safety or general
welfare of the residents of Draper City, and including, but not limited to,
uses such as parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities, emergency,
fire and police services, administrative, service and storage facilities.
NATURAL FEATURES: Nonmanmade land characteristics, including drainage swales,
wetlands, rock outcroppings, streams, concentrated native stands of large
shrubs or trees, and slopes, particularly where thirty percent (30%) or
greater.
NATURAL STATE: Land which has not been subjected to grading, removal of
vegetation or building development.
NATURAL SURVEILLANCE: A Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
design principal and concept directed primarily at keeping intruders under
observation and limiting the opportunity for crime by increasing the perception
that people can be seen.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs, or washes which are natural drainage channels.
NONCONFORMING LOT: See definition of Lot, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: See definition of Structure, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING USE: See definition of Use, Nonconforming.
NURSERY: An establishment for the retail or wholesale sale of plants, flowers,
trees, shrubs, garden plants, bushes, landscaping materials, or similar
plantings, including materials, tools, implements, equipment, and packaged
substances for the maintenance and care of such plantings intended for
ornamental, garden, or landscaping purposes. Typical uses include greenhouses,
garden centers not in conjunction with another use, permanent tree lots, and
garden supply stores. Typical uses do not include sod farms or storage sites
for landscaping materials.
NURSING CARE FACILITY: An establishment providing bed care and inpatient
services on a twenty four (24) hour medical staff availability for no more than
one hundred (100) residents who need regular medical attention. A nursing care
facility excludes a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services
or providing care for mental illnesses or communicable disease. Such uses
include nursing homes and rest homes, which are operated to include at least
two (2) of the following patient services:
   A.   A selection of patient care services, under the direction and
supervision of a registered nurse, ranging from continuous medical, skilled
nursing, psychological, or other professional therapies to intermittent health
related or paraprofessional personal care services;
   B.   A structured, supportive social living environment based on
professionally designed and supervised treatment plan, oriented to the
individual's habilitation or rehabilitation needs; or
   C.   A supervised living environment that provides support, training, or
assistance with individual activities of daily living.
OFFICE, GENERAL: A building, room or department where executive, management,
administrative or professional services are provided, except medical services,
and excluding the sale of merchandise, except as incidental to a principal use.
Typical uses include real estate brokers, insurance agencies, credit reporting
agencies, property management firms, investment firms, employment agencies,
travel agencies, advertising agencies, secretarial services, data processing,
telephone answering, paging and beeper services and facsimile transmission
services; post offices and express mail offices as an accessory or
complementary use to a professional and business office development, but
excluding major mail processing and distribution; offices for utility bill
collection; professional or consulting services in the fields of law,
architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; interior
decorating consulting services; and business offices of private companies,
utility companies, public agencies, trade associations, unions and nonprofit
organizations.
OFFICE/ WAREHOUSE: A facility of single or multiple buildings or units where at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of each building or unit is built as office
space or showroom with the remainder of the building or unit built as storage
or warehouse space. Such facility typically has garage bays to service the
warehouse component.
OPEN SPACE: An area of land, inclusive of any wetlands or watercourses, open to
the sky and not occupied by buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways,
streets, alleys, or the like, which is set aside, dedicated, designated,
retained, or reserved for use as passive or active recreation or for resource
protection. The area is intended to remain in an undeveloped, natural, or
naturalized state by design, but this definition also extends to include other
intentionally landscaped areas of a site serving the same purposes in instances
where an undeveloped or natural state is not specified by the ordinance.
OPERATIONS CENTER: A maintenance, repair, or service facility operated by a
local, state, or federal government agency.
OTHER NONCONFORMITY: A situation other than a nonconforming lot, structure, or
use that:
   A.   Legally existed before the current zoning designation of the lot where
the nonconformity is located; and
   B.   Because of subsequent zoning changes, does not conform with applicable
requirements of this title.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY: Permanent outdoor area used for permanent display of
merchandise or goods available for purchase from the business located within a
permanent structure. Outdoor display shall be subject to the regulations set
forth in section 9-27-230 of this title. The use shall be allowable only as an
accessory to the primary use of the establishment. Typical examples include,
but are not limited to, landscaping product, retail, and outdoor play equipment
displays.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The commercial storage or keeping of building materials,
equipment, fuels, vehicles, goods, or commodities or raw materials outside of a
building or structure. Outdoor storage shall be subject to the regulations set
forth in section 9-27-230 of this title. The use shall be allowable only as an
accessory to the primary use of the establishment.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a
representative capacity, including, without limitation, an authorized agent,
executor or trustee, has legal or equitable title to any property.
OWNER OF RECORD: An individual listed as the owner of property on the records
of the county assessor.
PARCEL: Any real property that is not a lot.
PARCEL BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT: A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining
parcels adjusting the mutual boundary, either by deed or by a boundary line
agreement in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-524, as amended,
if no additional parcel is created and none of the property identified in the
agreement is a lot or if the adjustment is to the boundaries of a single
person’s parcels. This definition does not mean an adjustment that creates an
additional parcel or parcels, constitutes a subdivision, or a boundary line
adjustment made by the Utah Department of Transportation.
PARK: A playground or other area or open space providing opportunities for
active or passive recreational or leisure activities.
PARK STRIP: The area located along each side of a street between a street right
of way line and the edge of asphalt. Does not include approved and permitted
sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs, or trails. The definition is also
inclusive of the term city tree planting strips.
PARKING BAY: A parking area within a parking lot consisting of one or two (2)
rows of parking spaces and the aisle from which motor vehicles may enter and
exit parking spaces.
PARKING, COMMERCIAL: A paved area or structure, other than a street, alley, or
driveway, specifically designed and developed for the paid parking of motor
vehicles on a temporary basis, other than accessory to a principal use.
PARKING LOT: An open area other than a street, alley, or driveway, used for
parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether
free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: An area designated within a building, parking lot, or other
parking area for the parking or storage of one motor vehicle.
PARKING, TANDEM: A parking space which abuts a driveway or parking aisle and is
used to access one other parking space.
PAWNSHOP: Any person or establishment engaged in any of the following:
   A.   Lending money on deposit of personal property.
   B.   Dealing in the purchase, exchange, or possession of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor.
   C.   Lending or advancing of money on personal property by taking chattel
mortgage security thereon and taking or receiving possession of such personal
property.
   D.   Selling unredeemed pledged personal property, together with such new
merchandise, as will facilitate the sale of such property.
PERIMETER BUILDING PAD: A separate building location, usually along the street
frontage, developed or designated in connection with a larger commercial site.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity, including a trustee, receiver,
assignee or similar representative of any of the forgoing.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of
frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses
include, beauty and barber shops, massage therapy, custom tailoring and
seamstress shops, electrolysis studios, portrait studios, shoe repair shops,
tailors, tanning and nail salons, and weight loss centers. This definition
includes permanent cosmetics and cosmetic tattooing when done in association
with another permitted use such as beauty shops and nail salons, but excludes
tattoo establishment.
PERSONAL INSTRUCTION SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the
provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar
services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include art and music
schools, driving and computer instruction, gymnastic and dance studios,
handicraft or hobby instruction, health and fitness studios, martial arts
training, and swimming clubs.
PET SALES: Any establishment wherein dogs, cats, small household pets such as
birds, fish, and reptiles, or other household pets of any age are kept or
displayed for the purposes of retail sales. This definition does not include
kennel; cattery; animals for sale by an animal breeder; or the sales of small
household pets that may be associated with another allowed use. Pet sales does
not include animal adoptions from a city or county animal shelter, animal
control agency, or a non-profit animal welfare organization incorporated within
the State of Utah for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals, or by any
properly authorized establishment used for the care and custody of seized,
stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small
domestic animals.
PLANNED CENTER: A development comprised of a variety of uses where landscaping,
parking and other improvements are provided in a comprehensive and integrated
fashion.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of Draper City, Utah.
PLANT, ANNUAL: A plant species that completes its entire life cycle within a
single growing season in which all roots, stems, and leaves of the plant die at
the end of growing season.
PLANT, BIENNIAL: A plant species that requires two growing seasons to complete
its life cycle in which all roots, stems, and leaves of the plant die at the
end of the second season.
PLANT, PERENNIAL: A plant which persists for many growing seasons, usually with
new herbaceous growth from a part of the plant that survives from growing
season to growing season. As used in this title it includes ornamental grasses
but not turf, lawn, or sod.
PLANTING BED: A well-defined and physically separate area from other adjacent
landscaped areas utilized for plating annual, biennial, and perennial plants,
small shrubs, and non-turf ground covers.
PLAT: An instrument subdividing property into lots as depicted on a map or
other graphical representation of lands that a licensed professional land
surveyor makes and prepares in accordance with applicable provisions of state
law.
PLOT PLAN: A schematic scaled drawing of a building lot or a development which:
   A.   Is less detailed than a site plan; and
   B.   Indicates, as may be required by this title, the placement and location
of yards, property lines, adjacent parcels, utilities, topography, waterways,
irrigation, drainage, landscaping, parking areas, driveways, buildings, trash
containers, open storage, streets and right of way lines, sidewalks, curbs,
gutters, signs, lighting, fences and other features of existing or proposed
construction or land use.
POST OFFICE: A facility or structure owned by the U.S. postal service and used
for collecting, sorting or distributing mail within one or more zip code areas,
or providing limited retail services for the general public, such as the sale
of stamps, postcards and postal insurance.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS DEALER: A business that engages in buying or selling
gold, silver, platinum, and diamonds or other precious metals and gems. Typical
uses shall not include on site processing of precious metals or gems.
PRESCHOOL: An establishment that provides, as a principal function, educational
instruction for preelementary school aged children age three (3) to six (6) on
a regular basis away from their primary residences for less than twenty four
(24) hours per day. The term does not include:
   A.   Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by
public or private elementary or secondary schools or institutions of higher
learning;
   B.   Facilities operated as a daycare facility; or
   C.   Special activities or programs, including athletics, crafts
instruction, and similar activities, conducted on a periodic basis by civic,
charitable, private, or governmental organizations.
PRESCHOOL, GENERAL: A facility, other than preschool, limited, where, as a
principal function, educational instruction is provided for preelementary
school aged children ages three (3) to six (6) during customary schooling
hours.
PRESCHOOL, LIMITED: A home occupation facility where, as a principal function,
educational instruction is provided during not more than two (2) sessions per
day for up to sixteen (16) pre-elementary school aged children ages three (3)
to six (6) per session during customary schooling hours.
PRIMARY ENTRANCE: The entry point to a main building designed to receive the
public. For commercial, industrial and multi-family residential buildings the
primary entrance is usually located on the street bearing the main building's
formal postal address. For single family and two-family dwelling units the
primary entrance is located on the street bearing the dwelling's postal
address.
PRINTING AND COPYING, LIMITED: A business establishment engaged in retail
photocopying, reproduction, photo developing or blueprinting services.
PRINTING, GENERAL: The production of books, magazines, newspapers and other
printed matter, as well as publishing, engraving and photoengraving, but
excluding "printing and copying, limited" uses.
PRIVATE SCHOOL: A school serving at least two (2) of any of the grades K
through 12 which is not part of the public education system, and does not
exclusively include any privately owned or run preschool for children, but
which may include a privately owned or run preschool as an accessory or
secondary use to the school.
PRODUCE STAND: A booth, stall or other area where seasonal produce, cut
flowers, bedding plants, or similar items may be sold to the general public.
PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY: A facility operated, licensed or contracted by a
governmental entity, or operated by a charitable, nonprofit organization,
where, for no compensation, temporary, protective housing is provided to:
   A.   Abused or neglected children awaiting placement in foster care;
   B.   Pregnant or parenting teens;
   C.   Victims of sexual abuse; or
   D.   Victims of domestic abuse.
PROTECTIVE SERVICE: A facility for conduct of public safety and emergency
services, including fire and police protection services and emergency medical
and ambulance services.
PUBLIC: That which is under the ownership or control of the United States
government, Utah state or any subdivision thereof, Salt Lake County, or the
city, or any departments or agencies thereof.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE: An entrance to a building or premises customarily used or
intended for use by the general public but excluding fire exits, special
employee entrances, and loading dock entrances not generally used by the
public.
PUBLIC SCHOOL: Any building or group of buildings or premises approved by the
state of Utah usually consisting of elementary, middle, and high schools, but
may also include:
   A.   A public school district;
   B.   The schools for the deaf and the blind; or
   C.   Other components of the public education system authorized by the state
board of education.
PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION: Any aboveground device of a culinary water,
irrigation, sewer, natural gas, electrical, telecommunications, including, but
not limited to, radio, telephone and cellular telephone, cable television, or
other public or private utility system not owned or operated by Draper City
which is intended to regulate the function of a utility line or which receives
or transmits a signal. Excluded from this definition are:
   A.   Conventional utility poles, features or equipment to be placed on such
a pole, light poles;
   B.   Features or equipment whose primary benefit is limited to the building
or land use where the feature or equipment is located; and
   C.   Features or equipment with maximum horizontal and vertical dimensions
of three feet (3').
QUEUING SPACE: An area on a property where vehicles are arranged in a queue to
wait for a limited or short duration while waiting to advance to the next
available space in the queue. Such spaces are provided for driver convenience
in accessing on-site services such as drive-up windows, automated teller
machines, vehicle service or wash bays, fuel islands, or designated pick-up or
drop-off area for goods and/or passengers. This definition is also applicable
to use of the terms stacking spaces, stacking aisles, drive-through lanes, and
drive-through aisles, but does not include freight parking or freight
deliveries to a site by commercial vehicles.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. As used in this definition:
   Equal Opportunity: Achieving equal results as between a person with a
disability and a nondisabled person.
   Necessary: The applicant must show that, but for the accommodation, one or
more persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal opportunity to
enjoy housing of their choice.
   Reasonable: A requested accommodation will not undermine the legitimate
purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the
accommodation would provide to a person with a disability.
RECEPTION CENTER: A facility rented for private social gatherings.
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR: An establishment offering recreation,
entertainment or games of skill to the general public that is wholly enclosed
in a building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, indoor theaters, bingo
parlors, pool halls, billiard parlors, video game arcades, racquetball and
handball courts, and amusement rides.
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR: An establishment offering recreation,
entertainment or games of skill to the general public or members wherein any
portion of the activity takes place in the open. Typical uses include archery
ranges, batting cages, golf driving ranges, drive-in theaters, miniature golf
courses, tennis courts, and amusement rides.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit designed as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreation, and vacation use that is either self-propelled or is
mounted on or pulled by another vehicle, including, but not limited to, a
travel trailer, truck camper, or motor home.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE LOT: A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park
designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any site, tract, or parcel of land on which
facilities have been developed to provide temporary living quarters for two (2)
or more recreational vehicles.
RECYCLING COLLECTION STATION: One or more outdoor freestanding containers
available to the general public occupying an area not greater than four hundred
(400) square feet, exclusive of area required for vehicular access, and
designed to receive and store recyclable materials.
REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility licensed by or contracted by the
state of Utah to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of adults or
juveniles in order to provide rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or
educational services. Without limitation, such services may include
rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services
related to delinquent behavior, alcohol and drug abuse, sex offenders, sexual
abuse, or mental health.
REPAIR SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in providing repair services
to individuals and households rather than firms, but excluding automotive,
vehicular and equipment services uses. Typical uses include appliance repair
shops, computer and other electronic equipment repair, furniture repair and
upholstery shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, and musical instrument repair
shops.
RESEARCH SERVICE: An establishment engaged in industrial, medical, or
scientific inquiries.
RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit where an individual is actually living at a given
point in time and intends to remain, and not a place of temporary sojourn or
transient visit.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A single-family or multiple-family
dwelling unit that meets the requirements of state law, or its successor.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in which more
than one person with a disability resides and which is licensed or certified
by:
   A.   The Utah department of human services under Utah Code Annotated title
62A, chapter 2, licensure of programs and facilities; or
   B.   The Utah department of health under Utah Code Annotated title 26,
chapter 21, health care facility licensing and inspection act.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: An establishment that sells ready to eat food and
beverages quickly and which has one or more of the following characteristics:
   A.   Food and beverage orders are not taken at the customer's table;
   B.   Food and beverages are generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers; or
   C.   Food and beverages are offered directly to the customer in a motor
vehicle from a "drive-up" service window.
RESTAURANT, GENERAL: An establishment that derives not less than fifty percent
(50%) of its gross receipts from the sale of food and beverages for consumption
on the premises and which has one or more of the following characteristics:
   A.   Food and beverage orders are taken at the customer's table from an
individually provided menu;
   B.   Food and beverages are served in nondisposable containers by a
restaurant employee at the same table or counter where said items are consumed;
   C.   Food and beverages are generally self-served in nondisposable
containers and consumed on the premises; or
   D.   A restaurant having some characteristics of a fast food restaurant,
other than drive-up service, which is located exclusively within a shopping
center, shares common parking facilities with other businesses within the
center, and has access to a common interior pedestrian accessway.
RETAIL, GENERAL: An establishment that rents or sells goods to the public, but
excluding uses specifically classified in another definition herein. Typical
uses include apparel stores, antique shops, art and hobby supply stores,
bicycle shops, bookstores, clothing rental stores, department stores, discount
stores, drugstores, electronic appliance stores, florists, food stores,
furniture and appliance stores, gift and novelty shops, glass and mirror shops,
hardware stores, home improvement centers, jewelry stores, medical supply
stores, music stores, optical retail sales, paint stores, pet supplies stores,
photocopying and blueprinting shops, photography supply stores, record, tape
and video stores, sporting goods stores, toy stores and variety stores.
RETAINING WALL: Any structure designed to resist the lateral displacement of
soil or other materials. Examples include block walls, rock walls, concrete
walls, and segmented walls. A retaining wall is not considered a fence.
RIDING ACADEMY OR STABLE: A commercial establishment that boards, breeds,
trains, or raises horses not owned by the owner or operator thereof; or rents
horses for riding or other equestrian activities.
ROOFLINE: The highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses
usable floor space, including roof areas for housing mechanical equipment and
the highest point on any parapet wall if the parapet wall extends around the
entire perimeter of the building.
SEASONAL FARM STAND: A booth, stall or other area where seasonal produce, cut
flowers, bedding plants, or similar items produced or grown on the premise are
sold to the general public.
SECONDARY ACCESS ENTRANCE: See definition of Access Point.
SECONDHAND OR THRIFT STORE, LARGE: A retail establishment, over five thousand
(5,000) square feet in size, that engages in the purchase and resale of used
goods, such as clothing, furniture, appliances, books, and other household
items.
SECONDHAND OR THRIFT STORE, SMALL: A retail establishment, five thousand
(5,000) square feet or smaller in size that engages in the purchase and resale
of used goods, such as clothing, furniture, appliances, books, and other
household items.
SEMITRAILER: A vehicle with or without motive power:
   A.   Designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle;
   B.   Constructed so that some part of its weight and that of its load rests
on or is carried by another vehicle; and
   C.   Are not fifth wheel recreational vehicle trailers.
SENSITIVE LAND: Any land area whose destruction or disturbance could affect the
health, safety, or welfare of City residents, including wetlands, steep slopes,
floodplains, and unstable soils.
SETBACK: The distance on a lot between a building and a property line or, where
adjacent to a public street, a designated right-of-way line as shown on the
master traffic and transportation plan. For a lot on a private right of way or
encompassing an access easement for another lot or parcel, the setback shall be
the distance on a lot between a building and the private right of way line or
access easement boundary closest to the building.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: See title 6, chapter 5 of this code.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of three (3) or more commercial establishments that is
planned, developed, and managed as a unit with common areas for off street
parking and landscaping provided on the property.
SHRUB: A woody, multi-stemmed, perennial plant species. As used in this title
the term refers collectively to deciduous and evergreen varieties, except where
the specific term evergreen shrub is used.
SHRUB, EVERGREEN: A woody, multi-stemmed, perennial plant species with needles
or leaves that remain alive and on the plant through the winter months and into
the next growing season.
SITE PLAN: A schematic, scaled drawing of a building lot or location which
indicates, as may be required by this title, the placement and location of
yards, property lines, adjacent parcels, utilities, topography, waterways,
irrigation, drainage, landscaping, parking areas, driveways, buildings, trash
containers, open storage, streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, signs, lighting,
fences and other features of existing or proposed construction or land use.
SOD: Cultivated turf that has been cut into sections and harvested in
rectangular slabs or rolls, to facilitate transportation to and installation at
another site. Installation is referred to as sodding, and the practice reduces
the time it takes to make turf areas within a landscape design functional,
typically within thirty (30) days.
SPORTSMAN'S PERMIT: The keeping of not more than six (6) purebred dogs, other
than as a kennel, as permitted in the city animal control ordinance.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The issuance date of a building permit; provided, that
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement begins
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. "Begins" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. "Begins" does not include:
   A.   Land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling;
   B.   Installation of streets and/or walkways;
   C.   Excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; or
   D.   Installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STORY: The space within a building between the surface of a floor and the
surface of the floor or roof above it.
STORY, HALF: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a
sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor immediately below it.
STREET: A public or private right of way, including avenues, highways,
boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, walks, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels,
bridges, public easements, and other ways, that provides access to adjoining
property. The street definitions set forth in section 17-1-040 of this code
shall apply to this title.
STREET TREE: An approved tree placed within a park strip, the landscaped
portion of a right-of-way, or within fifteen feet (15') of the nearest edge of
the right-of-way line. Street trees along public streets are considered public
landscaping improvements only when all tree maintenance is performed by the
city.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Any object or building erected or constructed on a lot or parcel
which exceeds six feet (6') in height or exceeds two feet (2') in height and
forms a geometric shape covering a ground area greater than thirty (30) square
feet.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING: A structure that:
   A.   Legally existed before the structure’s current zoning designation; and
   B.   Because of subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform with
the setback, height restrictions, or other applicable regulations of this
title.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes to create a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided, or proposed to be divided
into two (2) or more lots or other division of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either on the
installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions.
   A.    "Subdivision" includes:
      1.   The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument, regardless of whether the division includes all or a portion of a
parcel or lot; and
      2.   Except as provided in subsection B, divisions of land for all
residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for
commercial, agricultural, and industrial purposes.
   B.   "Subdivision" does not include:
      1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purposed of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous
parcel of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined
parcel nor the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an
applicable land use ordinance;
      2.   A boundary line agreement recorded with the county recorder’s office
between owners of adjoining parcels adjusting the mutual boundary in accordance
with Utah Code Annotated, section 10-9a-524, if no new parcel is created;
      3.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record, revising the
legal descriptions of multiple parcels into one legal description encompassing
all such parcels;
      4.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record joining a lot
to a parcel;
      5.   A boundary line agreement between owners of adjoining subdivided
properties adjusting the mutual lot line boundary in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-9a-524 and 10-9a-608 if no new dwelling lot or housing
unit will result from the adjustment and the adjustment does not violate any
applicable land use ordinance;
      6.   A bona fide division of land by deed or other instrument if the deed
or other instrument states in writing that the division is in anticipation of
future land use approvals on the parcel or parcels, does not confer any land
use approvals, and has not been approved by the city;
      7.   A parcel boundary adjustment;
      8.   A lot line adjustment;
      9.   A road, street, or highway dedication plat;
      10.   A deed or easement for a road street, or highway proposed; or
      11.   Any other division of land authorized by law.
SUBDIVISION AMENDMENT: An amendment to a recorded subdivision that: vacates all
or a portion of the subdivision; alters the outside boundary of the
subdivision; changes the number of lots within the subdivision; alters a public
right-of- way, a public easement, or public infrastructure within the
subdivision; or alters a common area or other common amenity within the
subdivision. This definition does not include a lot line adjustment, between a
single lot and an adjoining lot or parcel, that alters the outside boundary of
the subdivision.
SUBSTANTIAL ACTION: Action taken in good faith to exercise development rights
authorized pursuant to a development approval or use permitted under the
authority of this title.
SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE: Evidence that is beyond a scintilla and a reasonable mind
would accept as adequate to support a conclusion.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is
started; or b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
TANDEM PARKING: See definition of Parking, Tandem.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT: Any location, place, area, structure, or business used
for the practice of affixing a permanent mark or design on or under the skin by
a process of cutting for the purpose of scarring or pricking or ingraining an
indelible pigment, dye, or ink in the skin, or instruction for such a practice.
TAVERN: An establishment licensed by the Utah alcoholic beverage control
commission for serving liquor by the drink to the general public.
TEMPORARY DWELLING: See definition of Dwelling, Temporary.
TEMPORARY TRAILER: A temporary trailer or structure utilized solely by a
builder during construction of a project for purposes incidental to the
construction work on the property.
TRADE/ VOCATIONAL SCHOOL: An establishment, for profit or not, conducting a
course of instruction, training, or retraining to prepare individuals to follow
an occupation or trade offering regularly scheduled instruction in technical,
commercial or trade skills, such as, but not limited to, business, real estate,
building and construction trades, electronics, computer programming and
technology, automotive and aircraft mechanics and technology, and similar types
of instruction.
TRAILER PARK: Any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate two (2)
or more travel trailers or camping parties.
TRANSITIONAL CARE DEVELOPMENT: A cohesive development created primarily for the
care and housing of the elderly and/or persons with a disability. To qualify
under this definition, the development must contain at least two (2) of the
following land use classifications:
   A.   Assisted living facility;
   B.   Congregate housing facility;
   C.   Dwelling, single-family or two-family or multiple- family;
   D.   Hospice;
   E.   Medical service, limited; or
   F.   Nursing care facility.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY: A facility owned, operated or contracted by a
governmental entity, or a charitable, nonprofit organization, where, for no
compensation, temporary housing for usually three (3) to twenty four (24)
months is provided to homeless persons, while they obtain work, job skills, or
otherwise take steps to stabilize their circumstances. A transitional housing
facility shall not include a homeless shelter.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE: An establishment that moves people or goods and
services. Typical uses include taxicab service, passengers autos for rent with
drivers, ambulance service, and parcel delivery service.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or
used for temporary human habitation and for travel or recreational purposes,
which is less than eight feet (8') in width and forty feet (40') in length, and
which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or
chauffeur's license without violating vehicle or traffic codes, including, but
not limited to, camp trailers and folding tent trailers.
TREE, DECIDUOUS: A tree species which sheds leaves at the end of each growing
season.
TREE, EVERGREEN: A tree species with needles or leaves that remain alive and on
the tree through the winter months and into the next growing season.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: A commercial vehicle:
   A.   Designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles; and
   B.   Constructed to carry a part of the weight of the vehicle and load drawn
by the truck-tractor.
TURF: A surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. Includes
the terms lawn and sod.
TURF, ARTIFICIAL: Any of various synthetic, carpet like materials made to
resemble turf.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY: Any idle land that is not improved or actually in the
process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church,
park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements
intended for human use occupancy and the grounds maintained in association
therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively
as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes.
UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS: Elements of design that are regulated by this title
which can be modified for businesses or properties within a zone.
USE: Any purpose for which a lot, parcel or structure is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use incidental and subordinate to a permitted or conditional
use and located on the same lot or parcel as such use.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact of the land use on the municipality, surrounding neighbors, or
adjacent land uses, may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible
only if certain conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the
detrimental impacts.
USE, ILLEGAL: A use that is not allowed where located as an accessory use,
conditional use, permitted use, or nonconforming use.
USE, INCOMPATIBLE: A use of land which is different in activity, intensity, or
utilization which is or will be in conflict with uses on adjoining lots or
parcels.
USE, MAIN: The primary purpose for which a lot, parcel or structure is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained as
allowed by the provisions of this title.
USE, NONCONFORMING: A main use of land that:
   A.   Legally existed before the current zoning designation of the land where
the use is located;
   B.   Has been maintained continuously since the time the zoning designation
governing the land changed; and
   C.   Because of subsequent zoning changes does not conform with applicable
requirements of this title.
USE, PERMITTED: A main use of a building or land allowed in one or more of the
respective zones set forth in this title without specific approval of the
planning commission or city council subject to compliance with applicable
provisions of this title.
USE, TEMPORARY: A use not allowed as a permitted, conditional or accessory use
where located and which is established for a limited time with the intent to
discontinue the use upon expiration of the time period authorized by a
temporary use permit.
UTILITY, MAJOR: A facility, other than collection or distribution lines or
supporting structures thereto, of any agency which, under public franchise or
ownership, provides a majority of the general public and/or businesses directly
with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water,
sewage collection or other similar service within the corporate boundaries of
Draper City. The term "utility" shall not be construed to include corporate or
general offices, storage or service buildings or yards, gas or oil processing,
manufacturing or storage facilities or postal facilities, or other uses defined
in this section. Typical uses include commercial radio, television and
microwave communication towers, electric generation plants or substations,
railroad switching yards, reservoirs, sanitary landfills and water and
wastewater treatment plants which provide direct services to a majority of
Draper City businesses and residents.
UTILITY, MINOR: Facilities of agencies that are under public franchise or
ownership to provide services deemed necessary to support development which
involve only minor structures, such as poles and lines, but not including
public utility substations.
VARIANCE: A modification granted by the appeals and variance hearing officer to
a zoning requirement for height, bulk, area, width, setback, separation, or
other numerical or quantitative requirement for a building or structure or
other site improvements as set forth in this title.
VEHICLE: A properly licensed automobile, truck, trailer, boat or other device
in which a person or thing is or can be transported from one place to another
or a bicycle.
VEHICLE RENTAL: An establishment engaged in the rental from the premises of
motorized vehicles, along with incidental service or maintenance. Typical uses
include used automobile and truck rentals, boat rentals, recreational vehicle
rentals, and motorcycle rentals. Vehicle rental businesses may include
incidental and infrequent sales of vehicles in order to turn over inventory.
VEHICLE REPAIR, GENERAL: An establishment providing motor vehicle repair or
maintenance services within completely enclosed buildings, including paint and
body shops or other general vehicle repair services which have associated
storage, overnight or otherwise, of vehicles, equipment, supplies, parts, or
inventory in an enclosed area outside of the building.
VEHICLE REPAIR, LIMITED: An establishment providing motor vehicle repair or
maintenance services within completely enclosed buildings, including paint and
body shops or other general vehicle repair services which have no storage,
overnight or otherwise, of vehicles, equipment, supplies, parts, or inventory
outside of the building.
VEHICLE SALE: An establishment engaged in the retail sale or wholesale from the
premises of motorized vehicles, along with incidental service or maintenance.
Typical uses include new and used automobile and truck sales, boat sales,
recreational vehicle sales, and motorcycle sales.
VETERINARY SERVICE: An establishment providing medical care and treatment for
animals, which may include accessory grooming or boarding services.
VICINITY PLAN: A drawing showing the relationship of proposed real property
development to adjoining property.
WAREHOUSE, SELF- SERVICE STORAGE: An enclosed storage facility of a commercial
nature containing independent, fully enclosed bays which are leased to persons
exclusively for storage of their household goods or personal property.
WATER- CONSERVING PLANT: A plant that can generally survive with available
rainfall once established although supplemental irrigation may be needed or
desirable during times of limited rainfall. Synonymous with the terms water-
wise plantings, drought tolerant plant and xeriscape landscaping.
WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING, GENERAL: An establishment that is primarily engaged
in the storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as
activities involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment.
Uses include major mail distribution centers, frozen food lockers, moving and
storage firms, and warehousing and storage facilities.
WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING, LIMITED: An establishment that is engaged in the
small scale storage and sale of goods to other businesses for resale, excluding
self-storage warehouses, major distribution centers, motor freight terminals,
moving and storage firms and similar high volume, high turnover facilities. No
outside storage is permitted.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: An unmanned structure consisting of
antennas, antenna support structures, or other equipment used to provide
personal wireless services as set forth in section 704 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
YARD: An open space on a lot or parcel that is unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upwards by buildings, except as specifically provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A space extending across the full width of a lot or parcel between
the front building line and the front lot line. The depth of the front yard is
the minimum distance required by this title between the front lot line and the
front building line.
YARD MEASUREMENT: In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width
of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the
least horizontal distance between a lot line and a building.
YARD, REAR: A space extending across the full width of a lot or parcel between
the rear building line and rear lot line. The depth of the rear yard is the
minimum distance required by this title between the rear lot line and rear
building line.
YARD, SIDE: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
side building line and the side lot line. The width of the side yard is the
minimum distance required by this title between the side lot line and the side
building line.
ZONE: An area of the incorporated territory of the City which has been given a
designation which regulates and restricts the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings or structures, or the
use of land all as set forth in this title.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the City Manager charged with
principal responsibility for interpreting and applying the provisions of this
title.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The regulations contained in this title.
(Ord. 949, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord. 957, 12-14-2010; Ord. 976, 7-19-2011; Ord. 986,
3-20-2012; Ord. 1032, 10-23-2012; Ord. 1085, 3-4-2014; Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
Ord. 1185, 1-26-2016; Ord. 1320, 4-10-2018; Ord. 1328, 6-5-2018; Ord. 1349, 9-
4-2018; Ord. 1389, 4-16-2019; Ord. 1394, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1395, 7-2-2019, eff.
retroactive to 5-9-2019; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord.
1431, 5-5-2020; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord. 1474, 2-2-
2021; Ord. 1479, 2-16-2021; Ord. 1475, 3-2-2021; Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord.
1497, 7-20-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021; Ord. 1535, 5-3-
2022; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024; Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025; Ord.
1662, 7-1-2025; Ord. 1672, 9-2-2025)
9-3-050: ILLUSTRATIONS:
For the convenience of users of this title, certain terms are illustrated and
attached hereto as section
9-3-070, "Appendix A", of this chapter and made a part hereof. If any conflict
arises between an illustration and a definition, the definition shall apply.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-3-060: PROHIBITED AND PRESCRIBED USES:
A.   Prohibited Uses: The uses defined in section
9-3-040 of this chapter and listed as permitted or allowed by conditional use
permit in this title for the various zones of the City shall constitute the
entirety of uses allowable in those zones. Uses not listed or determined to be
substantially similar or accessory to a permitted or conditional use are
prohibited unless approved as a new or unlisted business use under section
9-8-050B. The uses listed in
Table 9-3-1 shall be prohibited in all zones unless approved as a new or
unlisted business use under section
9-8-050B.
B.   Prescribed Uses: Uses prescribed under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-
305, or its successor, are allowed in any zone specified by that section, even
if not listed as a permitted or conditional use in this title.
 
Table 9-3-1
PROHIBITED USES IN ALL ZONES
Automobile wrecking yard
Cold storage plants
Hazardous materials storage/treatment
Junk or salvage yard
Pet sales
Secondhand or thrift store, large, with outdoor storage or drop-off of items
during hours the business is closed
 
(Ord. 949, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord. 1662, 7-1-2025)
9-3-070: APPENDIX A:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3505.png]
 
(Ord. 769, 8-7-2007)
CHAPTER 4
DECISION MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS
SECTION:
9-4-010: Purpose
9-4-020: Scope
9-4-030: City Council
9-4-040: Planning Commission  1  (Rep. by Ord. 778, 9-18-2007)
9-4-050: Appeals And Variance Hearing Officer
9-4-060: Staff Referral By Planning Commission
9-4-070: Zoning Administrator
9-4-080: Development Review Committee
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-280 of this Code.
9-4-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the authority of the decision
making bodies and officials responsible for administering the provisions of
this title. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
9-4-020: SCOPE:
The authority of the decision making bodies and officials set forth in this
chapter shall apply to the entirety of this title subject to its various
provisions. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
9-4-030: CITY COUNCIL:
A.   Powers Not Enumerated In This Title: See City Council powers and duties
set forth in title 2, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
B.   Powers And Duties Related To This Title: In administering this title, the
City Council shall have the powers and duties set forth below. Each of such
powers and duties shall be exercised pursuant to the procedural and other
provisions of this title.
1.   Adopt, modify, or reject a proposed General Plan or any amendment thereto
for all or part of the City and its surroundings.
2.   Adopt, modify, or reject proposed amendments to the text of this title and
to the zoning map.
3.   Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
4.   Establish a fee schedule for applications required by provisions of this
title. (Ord. 1347, 9-18-2018)
9-4-040: PLANNING COMMISSION 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 778, 9-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-1-280 of this Code.
9-4-050: APPEALS AND VARIANCE HEARING OFFICER:
A.   There is hereby created and established an appeals and variance hearing
officer of Draper City to provide for just and fair treatment in the
administration of the city’s zoning ordinances, in accordance with provisions
of the Utah municipal land use development and management act, set forth at
Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-101 et seq., as amended. The appeals and variance
hearing officer shall have such powers and duties as set forth below.
B.   Appointment: The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall be appointed
as follows:
1.   The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council.
2.   The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall be appointed for a term of
one year and thereafter may be appointed for succeeding one year terms.
3.   The Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer shall, as a minimum, have such
training and experience as will qualify them to conduct administrative or
quasi-judicial hearings regarding land use, land development, and regulatory
codes dealing with issues related to land use.
4.   The Mayor may remove the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer for cause
upon receipt of written charges filed against the appeals and variance hearing
officer with the city manager and upon the advice and consent of the city
council. The mayor shall provide the appeals and variance hearing officer with
a public hearing if one is requested.
5.   In the case of death, resignation, removal or disqualification, the
position of appeals and variance hearing officer shall be promptly filled by a
replacement appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council for the unexpired term of the previous appeals and variance hearing
officer.
6.   The appeals and variance hearing officer shall be considered an
independent contractor; and as such will enter into a year long contract for
services at the beginning of each appointed term. Terms for compensation and
reimbursement will be determined and agreed upon in the aforementioned
contract. The terms and conditions of the contract shall ultimately be approved
by the city council prior to any individual entering into an agreement with the
city to serve as the appeals and variance hearing officer.
7.   The mayor may, from time to time, appoint an appeals and variance hearing
officer pro tempore on a temporary basis when necessitated by the absence,
unavailability, incapacity or disqualification of the regularly appointed
appeals and variance hearing officer upon the advice and consent of the city
council. Each appeals and variance hearing officer pro tempore shall, as a
minimum, have qualifications which are similar to the regularly appointed
appeals and variance hearing officer.
C.   Organization And Procedure: The appeals and variance hearing officer shall
organize and exercise its powers and duties as follows:
1.   The appeals and variance hearing officer may adopt reasonable policies and
procedures in accordance with city ordinances to govern the conduct of its
meetings and hearings and for any other purposes considered necessary for the
functioning of the position of appeals and variance hearing officer. Such
policies and procedures shall be approved by the city council before taking
effect.
2.   The appeals and variance hearing officer shall hold meetings as needed to
consider matters within its purview under this title. The appeals and variance
hearing officer meetings shall be held on the first Wednesday after the first
Tuesday of each month and such other times deemed necessary by the appeals and
variance hearing officer. All meetings and hearings shall be properly noticed
and held in accordance with the open meetings law set forth in Utah Code
Annotated section 52-4-1 et seq., as amended. Written minutes of all meetings
and hearings of the appeals and variance hearing officer shall be prepared and
filed in the office of the city recorder for review and access by the public in
accordance with the Draper City government records access and management
ordinance.
3.   Decisions made by the appeals and variance hearing officer shall become
effective at the meeting or hearing in which the decision is made, unless a
different time is designated in the appeals and variance hearing officer's
accepted rules or at the time the decision is made.
D.   Powers And Duties: The powers and duties of the appeals and variance
hearing officer shall be limited to the matters set forth below. Each of such
powers and duties shall be exercised pursuant to the procedural and other
provisions of this title:
1.   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, hear and decide appeals from
zoning decisions of the planning commission or zoning administrator applying
the provisions of this title.
2.   Hear and decide variances from the terms of this title.
3.   Hear and decide appeals from decisions made by the zoning administrator
regarding chapter 6 of this title.
E.   Appeals: Appeals to the appeals and variance hearing officer shall be
filed in writing with the zoning administrator within fourteen (14) days from
the date of the decision or action appealed as provided in subsection
9-5-180D1 of this title. The officer or department from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the appeals and variance hearing officer all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
F.   Notice Of Hearing: The appeals and variance hearing officer shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of each appeal, give public notice thereof as
well as due notice to the parties in interest, at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing and shall set certain other criteria as to the form of notice
whether by publication, certified mail or other criteria, reasonably designed
to give notice to those parties subject to be affected thereby.
G.   Decisions Of The Appeals And Variance Hearing Officer: At the hearing of
any matter, the parties affected may appear in person with or without an
attorney. The appeals and variance hearing officer shall decide all appeals and
other issues brought before it within a reasonable time.
H.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal to the appeals and variance hearing officer
shall not stay proceedings taken in furtherance of the action appealed from
unless such proceedings are specifically stayed by order of the zoning
administrator. An appellant may request a stay by submitting to the zoning
administrator, in writing, an application for a stay setting forth the reasons
why a stay is necessary to protect against imminent harm. In determining
whether or not to grant a stay, the zoning administrator shall assure that all
potentially affected parties are given the opportunity to comment on the
request. A ruling on the request for a stay shall be given within five (5) days
from the date the request is received by the zoning administrator. The zoning
administrator, in granting a stay, may impose additional conditions to mitigate
any potential harm that may be caused by the stay, including requiring the
appellant to post a bond. Within ten (10) days of the zoning administrator's
decision regarding the grant or denial of a stay, any adversely affected party
may appeal the decision to the appeals and variance hearing officer, whose
decision will be final.
I.   Appeals From The Appeals And Variance Hearing Officer: A land use
applicant or adversely affected party may file a petition for review of a final
decision of the appeals and variance hearing officer and may have and maintain
a plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, that the petition for such relief is presented to the court within
thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the appeals and variance
hearing officer. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1493,
6-15-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-4-060: STAFF REFERRAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
A.   Staff Referral: The planning commission may direct that any matter over
which it has jurisdiction be referred to the staff of the community development
department for review and preparation of recommendations. Such action shall be
taken either by motion of the planning commission or pursuant to duly adopted
bylaws of the planning commission. The authority for such referrals may be
revoked at any time by motion of the planning commission or amendment of its
bylaws, as the case may be.
B.   Appointment Of Hearing Officer: In the event a matter is referred to
community development department staff which requires a public hearing, the
city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing in
accordance with applicable requirements of this title.
C.   Review And Recommendation: If a matter is referred to the community
development department staff as permitted by this section, the staff shall
conform to any instructions or limitations contained in the referral, and
subject thereto shall review the referred matter, conduct any necessary
hearings, and prepare written recommendations for the planning commission.
D.   Decision: Unless the planning commission shall otherwise direct, any
person who has applied for authorization to develop property under the terms of
this title may, in writing, consent to the staff recommendation and waive
further action by the planning commission. If the applicant waives further
action by the planning commission, the staff recommendation shall be considered
approved by the planning commission. Thereafter necessary permits may be issued
subject to the terms of this title and any applicable conditions of approval.
E.   Limitation: This section shall not apply to any action with respect to
which the planning commission is required by law to take direct action. (Ord.
1199, 5-17-2016)
9-4-070: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
A.   Appointment: The city manager shall designate a staff person who shall be
primarily responsible for administering and enforcing this title. Such person
shall be known as the zoning administrator.
B.   Interpretation: The zoning administrator shall interpret the ordinance to
members of the public, city departments, and to other branches of government,
subject to general and specific policies established by the planning commission
and city council. Upon request, the zoning administrator shall make a written
interpretation of the text of this title pursuant to section
9-5-170 of this title.
C.   Administrative Duties: The zoning administrator shall accomplish or cause
to be accomplished all administrative actions required by this title, including
the giving of notice, holding of hearings, preparation of staff reports, and
receiving and processing of appeals.
D.   Negotiation And Advice: The zoning administrator may negotiate with and
advise all persons making application for any project which requires approval
by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016)
9-4-080: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
A.   Created: A development review committee ("DRC") is hereby created.
B.   Purpose: The purpose of the DRC is to assure that all proposed development
within the city is consistent with the city's general plan and complies with
this title and other applicable ordinances and resolutions.
C.   Members: The DRC shall consist of persons representing the city's
community development, engineering, fire, and public works departments, and
such other persons as the city manager may designate.
D.   Powers And Duties: The DRC shall act under the direction of the city
manager and shall generally have the following duties and responsibilities to
the extent determined by the city manager:
1.   Before any development project is considered by the planning commission or
city council, the DRC should review the proposed development plan to determine
its consistency with general plan policies and compliance with the provisions
of this title and other applicable ordinances and resolutions.
a.   Projects subject to the requirements of this subsection should include
preliminary and final subdivision plats, site plans, concept plans,
condominiums, condominium conversions, and any other matter subject to the
issuance of a permit under this title.
b.   The DRC should present its findings in a single consolidated staff report
which makes a unified recommendation.
(1)   If, in the opinion of the DRC, the proposed project is consistent with
the general plan and complies with applicable ordinances and resolutions, the
DRC should so state in the staff report. Where necessary, the DRC should
propose findings for consideration by the planning commission and city council.
(2)   If, in the opinion of the DRC, the proposed project is not consistent
with the general plan or compliant with applicable ordinances and resolutions,
the DRC should identify the reasons for its determination and should recommend
any conditions of approval which would, in the opinion of the DRC, have the
effect of making the proposed project consistent with the general plan or
compliant with applicable ordinances or resolutions. Where necessary, the DRC
should propose findings for consideration by the planning commission and city
council.
(3)   If DRC representatives are unable to agree upon a unified recommendation,
differences of opinion shall be resolved by the city manager.
2.   Before any application for annexation or amendment to the general plan,
this title or title 17 of this code, or any other matter which involves
discretionary authority by the city is considered by the planning commission or
city council, the DRC should make recommendations concerning such application.
3.   The DRC may establish procedures for the preparation of agendas, the
scheduling of meetings, and the conduct of meetings and field trips. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 5
ADMINISTRATIVE AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-5-010: Purpose
9-5-020: Scope
9-5-030: General Application Requirements
9-5-040: Public Hearings And Meetings
9-5-045: Noticing
9-5-050: General Plan Amendments
9-5-060: Zoning Map And Text Amendments
9-5-070: Permitted Use Reviews
9-5-080: Conditional Use Permits
9-5-090: Site Plan Review
9-5-100: Repealed (Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-110: Variances
9-5-120: Building Permits
9-5-130: Nonconforming Uses
9-5-140: Sign Permits
9-5-150: Temporary Use Permits
9-5-160: Repealed (Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-170: Administrative Interpretations
9-5-180: Appeal Of Administrative Decisions
9-5-190: Procedural Irregularities
9-5-200: Development Agreements
9-5-210: Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Permits
9-5-220: Exactions
9-5-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth procedures for considering various
types of land use and development applications to assure that applications of
the same type will be processed on a uniform basis consistent with applicable
law. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-5-020: SCOPE:
Applications for land use and development approvals shall be submitted,
reviewed and approved as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-5-030: GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following general requirements shall apply to any application required by
this title:
A.   Application Forms: Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by
the zoning administrator and in such numbers as reasonably required by the
zoning administrator for a particular type of application.
B.   City Initiated Applications: The planning commission or city council may
initiate any action under this title without an application from a property
owner. Notice, hearing and other procedural requirements of this chapter shall
apply to an application initiated by the city.
C.   Development Review Sequence: No subdivision site plan or other development
application shall be considered unless:
1.   The approval which is requested in the application is allowed by the zone
existing on the subject property; or
2.   Where permitted by this title, the application is submitted simultaneously
with a proposed zoning map amendment that would allow the proposal.
D.   Accurate Information: All documents, plans, reports, studies and
information provided to the city by an applicant in accordance with the
requirements of this title shall be accurate and complete.
E.   Determination Of Complete Application: After receipt of an application,
the zoning administrator shall determine whether the application is complete.
If the application is not complete, the zoning administrator shall notify the
applicant in writing and shall:
1.   Specify the deficiencies of the application;
2.   State the additional information which must be supplied; and
3.   Advise the applicant that no further action will be taken on the
application until the deficiencies are corrected.
F.   Fees: When an application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the city a
fee as provided in the city's consolidated fee schedule as adopted by the city
council. Application fees shall be in amounts reasonably determined to defray
actual costs incurred by the city to review plans and specifications, act upon
an application and conduct inspections. Any application not accompanied by a
required fee shall be returned to the applicant as incomplete.
1.   An applicant shall also be responsible for fees established to cover the
cost of providing public notice required by subsection
9-5-045 of this chapter.
2.   Fees shall be refundable as follows:
a.   If the application is withdrawn prior to completion of a first review, the
city shall retain twenty-five (25) percent of the fee.
b.   If the application is withdrawn prior to completion of a second review,
the city shall retain fifty (50) percent of the fee.
c.   If the application is withdrawn prior completion of a third review, the
city shall retain seventy-five (75) percent of the fee.
d.   If the application is found to be incomplete, a refund shall be provided
as outlined in subsection G of this section.
e.   No fee shall be refunded after a public hearing or meeting has been held,
or action has been taken on the item by the decision-making body or official.
3.   Fees shall not be required for applications initiated by the city.
G.   Remedy Of Deficiencies: If an applicant fails to correct specified
deficiencies within thirty (30) days after notification thereof the city may
deem the application to be withdrawn and shall return it to the applicant upon
request. Application fees shall be refunded to the applicant, less any fee
established to cover the cost of determining completeness of the application.
H.   Consultation With Neighborhood Organizations: Recognized neighborhood
associations may comment on applications as provided in section
3-1-210 of this code.
I.   Decision Date: The date of a decision or recommendation shall be the date
when the decision or recommendation is made by the decision making body or
official.
J.   Extensions Of Time: Unless otherwise prohibited, upon written request and
for good cause shown, any decision making body or official having authority to
grant approval of an application may, without any notice or hearing, grant
extensions of any time limit imposed by this title on such application, its
approval, or the applicant, provided a written request for such extension has
been received by the community development department prior to the date of
expiration, or provided the city staff or planning commission has initiated an
extension prior to the date of expiration. The total period of time granted by
any such extension or extensions shall not exceed half the length of the
original time period.
K.   Inactive Applications: All land use applications shall be actively pursued
to a final decision by the city. If no activity, such as plan submittals,
reviews, or meetings, has occurred on an application for a period of one (1)
year from the date of last city review, the application will be voided and the
file closed. Prior to the expiration of the one (1) year period, the applicant
may submit a written request to maintain the application as active, wherein
upon finding that there is good cause, the zoning administrator may grant a
one-time six (6) month extension. If the applicant wishes to pursue an
application after it has been voided due to inactivity, a new application is
required, including fees and conformance to current applicable codes. No fees
shall be refunded for applications that are voided due to inactivity.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-040: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND MEETINGS:
Any public hearing or meeting required under this title, as the case may be,
shall be scheduled and held subject to the requirements of this section.
A.   Scheduling A Public Hearing Or Meeting: An application requiring a public
hearing or meeting shall be scheduled within a reasonable time in light of:
1.   The complexity of the application submitted;
2.   The number of other applications received which require a hearing;
3.   Available staff resources; and
4.   Applicable public notice requirements.
B.   Public Hearing And Meeting Procedures: The following procedures shall
apply to a public hearing:
1.   Any person may appear at a public hearing or meeting and submit evidence,
either individually or as the agent of a person or an organization. Each person
who appears at a public hearing or meeting shall state his or her name and, if
appearing on behalf of a person or an organization, state the name of the
person or organization being represented.
2.   The body or official conducting a public hearing or meeting may exclude
testimony or evidence that it finds to be unduly repetitious or otherwise
inadmissible.
3.   The body or official conducting a public hearing or meeting may, upon the
body's or official's own motion, postpone the hearing or meeting. An applicant
may request and be granted one postponement. Thereafter, any postponement shall
be granted at the discretion of the body or official conducting the public
hearing or meeting.
C.   Withdrawal Of Application: An applicant may withdraw an application at any
time prior to action on the application by the decision making body or
official. Application fees shall be refundable as outlined in
9-5-030(F) of this title.
D.   Record Of Public Hearing Or Meeting: Except where required otherwise by
statute, the body or official conducting the public hearing or meeting shall
record the proceedings thereof by any appropriate means. A copy of the public
hearing or meeting record may be acquired upon request and payment of a fee to
cover the cost of duplication of the record. The minutes, tape recordings, all
applications, exhibits, papers and reports submitted in any proceeding before
the decision making body or official, and the decision of the decision making
body or official shall constitute the record thereof. The record shall be made
available for public examination as provided in subsection E of this section.
E.   General Requirements For Findings And Decisions: Action shall be taken in
compliance with any time limits established in this title. Except for the city
council, whose decision shall be made by motion or ordinance, all decisions
shall be in writing and shall include at least the following elements:
1.   A summary of evidence presented to the decision making body or official;
2.   A statement of applicable development standards;
3.   A statement of findings of fact or other factors considered, including the
basis upon which such facts were determined and specific references to
applicable standards set forth in this title or other titles of this code; and
4.   A statement of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, as the
case may be.
F.   Notification: Notice of a decision by the decision making body or official
shall be provided to an applicant within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 675, 3-28-2006; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-045: NOTICING:
Required notice of public meetings and hearings for land use applications and
ordinances shall include and comply with the following provisions:
A.   Applicant To Pay Notice Fees: The applicant for a land use application
shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of the actual costs incurred by the
city to provide notice as listed in this section.
B.   Applicant Notification: For all land use applications, the city shall give
notice to the applicant as follows:
1.   The date, time and place of each public hearing and public meeting to
consider the application;
2.   A copy of each staff report regarding the applicant or the pending
application at least three (3) business days before the public hearing or
public meeting; and
3.   Any final action on a pending application.
4.   If notice is not properly provided to the applicant, an applicant may
waive the failure so that the application may stay on the public hearing or
public meeting agenda and be considered as if the requirements had been met.
C.   Notice To Third Parties:
1.   For site specific land use applications, the city shall mail notice to the
record owner of each parcel within a four hundred foot (400') radius of the
subject property, and the applicant shall post one city provided sign along
each street on which the subject property has frontage. If the subject property
does not abut a street, then the sign shall be posted on a nearby street as
determined by the zoning administrator. The sign shall be of sufficient size,
durability, print quality and location that it is reasonably calculated to give
notice to those passing by. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
remove and dispose of the sign within five (5) calendar days after the hearing.
Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. Third party
property owners who live within the four hundred foot (400') radius but outside
of Draper City boundaries shall be sent notice equivalent to that sent to
property owners within Draper City.
2.   The applicant shall submit a signed affidavit of public posting.
3.   The affidavit shall include a photograph verifying that the sign has been
installed, at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
4.   Failure to post the public notice sign and provide the required
verification at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing will cause a
delay in the processing of the application.
5.   If the sign is destroyed or damaged, the applicant shall replace the sign
within seventy two (72) hours of being notified.
6.   If the City receives written request from the department of transportation
for electronic notice of each land use application that may adversely impact
the development of a high priority transportation corridor, the City shall
provide such notice.
D.   Intent To Prepare Or Amend General Plan: The city shall provide notice in
accordance with
9-2-020(I) of this title.
E.   General Plan Adoption Or Amendment: The city shall provide notice in
accordance with
9-2-020(I) of this title.
F.   Adoption Or Amendment Of Land Use Ordinance: The city shall abide by the
land use regulation modification noticing requirements in Utah Code Annotated
10-9a-205, as amended.
G.   Notice For An Amendment To Public Improvements In A Subdivision Or
Development. Prior to implementing an amendment to adopted specifications for
public improvements that apply to subdivisions or development, a municipality
shall give 30 days mailed notice and an opportunity to comment to anyone who
has requested the notice in writing.
H.   Adoption Or Amendment Of Zoning Map: The city shall send a courtesy notice
to each owner of the private real property whose property is located entirely
or partially within the proposed zoning map enactment or amendment at least ten
(10) days before the scheduled day of the public hearing. Property owner notice
provided in subsection (F) of this section may include such courtesy notice and
be sent together. Such notice shall:
1.   Identify each owner of record of real property that will be affected by
the proposed zoning map or map amendment;
2.   State the current zone in which the real property is located;
3.   State the proposed new zone for the real property;
4.   Provide a reference to the proposed regulations, prohibitions, and
permitted uses that the property will be subject to if the zoning map or map
amendment is adopted;
5.   State that the owner of real property may file a written objection to the
inclusion of the owner's property in the proposed zoning map or map amendment
no later than ten (10) days after the day of the first public hearing;
6.   State the address where the property owner should file the protests;
7.   Notify the property owner that each written objection filed with the city
will be provided to the city council; and
8.   State the location, date, and time of the public hearing.
I.   Notice Of Land Use Applications: The following land use applications shall
be noticed at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing:
1.   Conditional use permits;
2.   Site plans or site plan amendments; and
3.   Variances.
J.   Challenge Of Notice: If notice given under authority of this section is
not challenged in accordance with applicable appeal procedures within thirty
(30) days after the meeting or action for which notice was given, the notice
shall be deemed adequate and proper.
K.   Notice For Continued Items: When an application requiring notice under
this section is continued to a future meeting date, including when a specific
date is listed in the continuation, a new notice shall be provided as outlined
in this section. No additional notice shall be required when an item is
continued as an action item and the public hearing has been closed. (Ord. 1075,
11-19-2013; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1467, 11-17-2020)
9-5-050: GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS:
The general plan and any of its elements may be amended as provided in
subsection
9-2-020F of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-060: ZONING MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for amending the provisions of
this title and the zoning map.
B.   Authority: The city council may from time to time amend the text of this
title and the zoning map as provided in this section. Amendments may include
changes in the number, shape, boundaries, or area of any zoning district,
zoning district regulations or any other provision of this title. The
provisions set forth herein shall not apply to temporary zoning regulations
which may be enacted without public hearing in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-504, as amended.
C.   Initiation: Proposed amendments to the text of this title and the zoning
map may be initiated by the city council, planning commission or a property
owner affected by the proposed amendment as provided in subsection D1 of this
section.
D.   Procedure: Zoning text and map amendments shall be considered and
processed as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   The name and address of every person or company the applicant represents.
c.   The requested amendment and reasons supporting the request.
d.   If the proposed amendment requires a change in the zoning map, the
application shall include:
(1)   An accurate property map showing present and proposed zoning
classifications;
(2)   All abutting properties showing present zoning classifications; and
(3)   An accurate legal description and an approximate common address of the
area proposed to be rezoned.
e.   If the proposed amendment requires a change in the text of this title, the
application shall include chapter and section references and a draft of the
proposed text.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall prepare a staff report evaluating the application.
3.   The planning commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the
application as provided in sections
9-5-040 and
9-5-045 of this chapter. Following the public meeting, the planning commission
shall recommend approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
proposed amendment and shall submit its recommendation to the city council for
review and decision.
4.   The city council shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the
application as provided in sections
9-5-040 and
9-5-045 of this chapter. Following the public hearing, the city council may
approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment.
E.   Approval Standards: A decision to amend the text of this title or the
zoning map is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the city
council and is not controlled by any one standard. However, in making an
amendment, the city council should consider the following factors:
1.   Map Amendments:
a.   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with goals, objectives and
policies of the city's general plan;
b.   Whether the proposed amendment is harmonious with the overall character of
existing development in the vicinity of the subject property;
c.   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the standards of any
applicable overlay zone;
d.   The extent to which the proposed amendment may adversely affect adjacent
property; and
e.   The adequacy of facilities and services intended to serve the subject
property, including, but not limited to, roadways, parks and recreation
facilities, police and fire protection, schools, stormwater drainage systems,
water supplies, and wastewater and refuse collection.
2.   Text Amendments:
a.   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with goals, objectives and
policies of the city's general plan;
b.   Whether a proposed amendment furthers the specific purpose statements of
the zoning ordinance;
c.   Whether the proposed amendment is appropriate given the context of the
request and there is sufficient justification for a modification to the zoning
ordinance;
d.   The proposed amendment will not create a conflict with any other section
or part of this title or the general plan;
e.   Whether the potential effects of the proposed amendment have been
evaluated and determined not to be detrimental to public health, safety, or
welfare and represents an overall community benefit; and
f.   The extent to which a proposed text amendment implements best current,
professional practices of urban planning, design, and engineering practices.
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Any party adversely affected by a decision of the city
council to amend the text of this title or the zoning map may, within thirty
(30) days after such decision, appeal to the district court as provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-801, as amended.
G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of an application to amend the provisions of
this title or the zoning map shall not be deemed an approval of any conditional
use permit, site plan or other permit. Approval of such permits shall be
obtained in accordance with applicable provisions of this title.
H.   Effect Of Disapproval: City council denial of an application to amend the
provisions of this title or the zoning map shall preclude the filing of another
application covering substantially the same subject or property, or any portion
thereof, for one year from the date of the disapproval, except as follows:
      1. The city council or planning commission may propose any text or zoning
map amendment at any time.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 675, 3-28-2006; Ord. 1132, 2- 17-2015; Ord.
1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-070: PERMITTED USE REVIEWS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for issuing permits for uses
permitted within a particular zone.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator is authorized to review and approve
applications for uses permitted within a particular zone.
C.   Initiation: A property owner, the owner's agent or a lessee may request
approval of a permitted use as provided in subsection D1 of this section.
D.   Procedure: Permitted use applications shall be considered and processed as
provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any;
b.   The permitted use requested; and
c.   Plans and other information demonstrating the permitted use conforms to
applicable provisions of this title.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application
pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection E of this section. Any
conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions needed to conform the
permitted use to approval standards.
3.   After making a decision, the zoning administrator shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision.
4.   A record of all permits for permitted uses shall be maintained in the
office of the zoning administrator.
E.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to the issuance of
a permitted use permit. A permitted use shall:
1.   Be allowed as a permitted use in the applicable zone;
2.   Conform to development standards of the applicable zone;
3.   Conform to applicable regulations of general applicability and regulations
for specific uses set forth in this title;
4.   Not be located on any land classified as a primary or secondary
conservation area or sensitive land area, except as expressly permitted by
provisions of this title;
5.   Not be located in any protected area as shown on a natural resource
inventory; and
6.   Conform to any other applicable requirements of this code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001)
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a zoning administrator’s decision regarding
a permitted use permit are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a permitted use permit shall authorize an
applicant to engage in the permitted use subject to any conditions of approval.
H.   Amendments: The procedure for amending any permitted use permit shall be
the same as the original procedure set forth in this section.
I.   Revocation: A permitted use permit may be revoked as provided in section
9-7-060 of this title.
J.   Expiration: A permitted use permit shall expire if not exercised within
one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1498,
8-3- 2021)
9-5-080: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for considering and approving
conditional use permits.
B.   Authority: The planning commission is authorized to issue conditional use
permits as provided in this section.
C.   Initiation: A property owner, or the owner's agent, may request a
conditional use permit as provided in subsection D1 of this section.
D.   Procedure: An application for a conditional use permit shall be considered
and processed as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator, along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   The address and parcel identification of the subject property.
c.   The zone, zone boundaries and present use of the subject property.
d.   A complete description of the proposed conditional use.
e.   A plot plan showing the following:
(1)   Applicant's name;
(2)   Site address;
(3)   Property boundaries and dimensions;
(4)   Layout of existing and proposed buildings, parking, landscaping, and
utilities; and
(5)   Adjoining property lines and uses within one hundred feet (100') of the
subject property.
f.   Traffic impact analysis, if required by the city engineer or the planning
commission.
g.   A statement by the applicant demonstrating how the conditional use permit
request meets the approval standards of subsection E of this section.
h.   A statement indicating whether the applicant will require a variance in
connection with the proposed conditional use.
i.   Such other and further information or documentation as the zoning
administrator may deem necessary for a full and proper consideration and
disposition of a particular application.
2.   If a variance is required, a variance application shall be filed when an
application for a conditional use permit is filed. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
3.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission as
provided in section
9-5-040 of this chapter. Notice of the meeting should be given as provided in
section
9-5-045 of this chapter. (Ord. 675, 3-8-2006)
4.   A staff report evaluating the application shall be prepared by the zoning
administrator.
5.   The planning commission shall hold a public meeting and thereafter shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application pursuant to the
standards set forth in subsection E of this section. Any conditions of approval
shall be limited to conditions needed to conform the conditional use permit to
approval standards.
6.   After the planning commission makes a decision, the zoning administrator
shall give the applicant written notice of the decision.
7.   A record of all conditional use permits shall be maintained in the office
of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
E.   Approval Standards: The standards of this subsection shall apply to the
issuance of a conditional use permit:
1.   A conditional use permit may be issued for a use to be located within a
zone where the particular conditional use is allowed by the use regulations of
the zone.
2.   Reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to substantially
mitigate reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use. These
conditions may include conditions concerning use, construction, character,
location, landscaping, screening, parking, hours of operation, and other
matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this section. Such
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the motion authorizing the
conditional use permit.
3.   If the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed
conditional use cannot be substantially mitigated by the imposition of
reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with applicable standards, the
conditional use may be denied.
4.   The following factors shall be reviewed and considered in determining
whether a conditional use permit application should be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied because reasonable conditions cannot be imposed to
achieve compliance with applicable standards:
a.   The harmony and compliance of the proposed use with the objectives and
requirements of the city's general plan and this title;
b.   The suitability of the specific property for the proposed use;
c.   Whether the proposed use or facility may be injurious to potential or
existing development in the vicinity;
d.   The economic impact of the proposed facility or use on the surrounding
area;
e.   The aesthetic impact of the proposed facility or use on the surrounding
area;
f.   The safeguards proposed or provided to ensure adequate utilities,
transportation access, drainage, parking, loading space, lighting, screening,
landscaping, open space, fire protection, and pedestrian and vehicular
circulation;
g.   The safeguards provided or proposed to prevent noxious or offensive
emissions such as noise, glare, dust, pollutants and odor from the proposed
facility or use; and
h.   The impact of the proposed facility or use on the health, safety, and
welfare of the city, the area, and persons owning or leasing property in the
area.
5.   The planning commission may request additional information as may be
reasonably needed to determine whether the requirements of this subsection E
can be met. (Ord. 949, 10-5-2010)
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a planning commission decision regarding
the transfer, issuance or denial of a conditional use permitare governed by
section
9-5-180 of this chapter. (Ord. 1323, 5-1-2018)
G.   Effect Of Approval: A conditional use permit shall not relieve an
applicant from obtaining any other authorization or permit required under this
title or any other title of this Code.
1.   A conditional use permit may be transferred so long as the use conducted
thereunder conforms to the terms of the permit.
2.   Unless otherwise specified by the Planning Commission and subject to the
provisions relating to amendment, revocation or expiration of a conditional use
permit, a conditional use permit shall be of indefinite duration and shall run
with the land.
H.   Amendments: The procedure for amending any conditional use permit shall be
the same as the original procedure set forth in this section.
I.   Revocation: A conditional use permit may be revoked as provided in section
9-7-060 of this title.
1.   In addition to the grounds set forth in section
9-7-060 of this title, any of the following shall be grounds for revocation:
a.   The use for which the permit was granted has ceased for one year or more;
b.   The holder or user of the permit has failed to comply with the conditions
of approval or any City, State, or Federal law governing the conduct of the
use;
c.   The holder or user of the permit has failed to construct or maintain the
site as shown on the approved site plan or map; or
d.   The operation of the use or the character of the site has been found to be
a nuisance or a public nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction in any
civil or criminal proceeding.
2.   No conditional use permit shall be revoked against the wishes of the
holder or user of the permit without first giving such person an opportunity to
appear before the Planning Commission and show cause as to why the permit
should not be amended or revoked. Revocation of a permit shall not limit the
City's ability to initiate or complete other legal proceedings against the
holder or user of the permit.
J. Expiration: Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use
permit within one year from the date of its issuance, said permit shall expire
and shall have no further force or effect. A written request may be submitted
to the Community Development Department prior to expiration of the conditional
use permit for an extension of up to six (6) months, subject to approval of the
Planning Commission, provided substantial action is shown toward establishing
the conditional use and the requirements for extension under section
9-5-030 of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-090: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedures for reviewing a site plan.
These procedures are established to assure that the plans meet the purposes and
standards of the subject zone, provide for necessary public and private
facilities, infrastructure, emergency access, geologic constraints, and other
considerations surrounding land uses.
B.   Authority: The planning commission and zoning administrator are authorized
to approve or deny site plans as provided in this section. The zoning
administrator may refer any site plan to the planning commission for review if
the zoning administrator determines, in their sole discretion, a planning
commission decision would serve the best interest of the citizens of Draper, or
if other aspects of the proposed development require planning commission
review.
C.   Initiation: A property owner, or the owner's agent, may request approval
of a site plan as provided in subsection D(1) of this section.
1.   A site plan shall be required for any of the uses listed in subsection C
(2) below, unless expressly exempted from such requirement by another provision
of this title.
2.   The planning commission shall review site plans for the following uses:
a.   Any manufacturing use.
b.   Any commercial use.
c.   Any institutional use.
d.   Any multi-family residential use.
3.   A site plan for any use not listed in subsection C(2) above may be
reviewed by the zoning administrator.
4.   No building permit for the construction of any building, structure, or
other improvement to the site shall be issued prior to approval of a site plan
if a site plan is required. No clearing, grubbing, grading, drainage work,
parking lot construction or other site improvement shall be allowed prior to
site plan approval.
D.   Procedure: An application for site plan approval shall be considered and
processed as provided in this subsection.
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator, along with any fee
established by the city's consolidated fee schedule. The application shall
include the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   The uses for which site plan approval is requested.
c.   A certified occupancy survey at a scale no smaller than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the deed boundary, all deed boundaries of
adjacent parcels, and all existing natural and manmade features, such as
fences, ditches, buildings, etc., within fifty feet (50') of the property line.
d.   A single electronic set of development plans showing the information
required in subsections D(1)(d)(1) to D(1)(d)(6) of this section. The
information required by each subsection shall be shown on separate sheets.
Plans shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100'). Plan sets shall be prepared, stamped and signed by the
professional, licensed with the state of Utah, who prepared the drawings or is
professionally responsible for the drawings content, including the engineering,
landscaping and architectural drawings. The development plans shall include:
(1)   Site plan showing the following:
(A)   All facilities related to the project located within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the site boundary.
(B)   Layout, dimensions, and names of existing and future road rights of way.
(New street names must be cleared through the county.)
(C)   Project name, north arrow, legend and tie to a section monument.
(D)   The boundary lines of the project site with bearings and distances.
(E)   Layout and dimensions of existing and proposed streets, buildings,
parking areas, driveways, easements, setbacks, overhangs for setbacks, and
landscape areas.
(F)   Location, dimensions, and labeling of other features such as bicycle
racks, dumpsters, trash cans, fences, retaining walls, nearest fire hydrant,
signage, mechanical equipment, etc.
(G)   Location of manmade features, including irrigation facilities, bridges,
railroad tracks, and buildings.
(H)   A tabulation table, showing total gross acreage, square footage of street
rights of way, square footage of building footprint, square footage of total
building floor area, square footage of landscaping, number of parking spaces,
and square footage of impervious surfaces.
(I)   Identification of property, if any, not proposed for development.
(J)   Defensible space provisions and elevations, if required by the Utah
Wildland Urban Interface Code adopted under Utah Code Section 15A-2-103.
(2)   Grading and drainage plan showing the following:
(A)   North arrow, scale, legend and site plan underlay.
(B)   Topography at one foot (1') intervals.
(C)   Areas of substantial earthmoving shown as new elevation contour lines,
including an erosion control plan.
(D)   Location of existing watercourses, canals, ditches, springs, wells,
culverts, and storm drains, and proposed method of dealing with all irrigation
and wastewater.
(E)   Location of any designated floodplain and wetland boundaries.
(F)   Direction of stormwater flows, catch basins, inlets, outlets, waterways,
culverts, detention basins, orifice plates, outlets to off- site facilities,
and off site drainage facilities when necessary.
(G)   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed buildings, walls,
fences, utilities, paved areas and other site improvements.
(H)   Finish grades and spot elevations as applicable to included site
features.
(3)   Utility plan showing the following:
(A)   North arrow, scale, legend and site plan underlay.
(B)   All existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to:
sewer, culinary water, secondary water, fire hydrants, storm drains, subsurface
drains, gas lines, power lines, communications lines, cable television lines,
and streetlights.
(C)   Location and dimensions of all utility easements.
(D)   A letter from sewer and water providers, addressing the feasibility and
their requirements to serve the project.
(4)   A landscape plan package, inclusive of the following:
(A)   Project data, details, and specifications:
(i)   Project name and property address;
(ii)   Name of the property owner;
(ii)   Names, business addresses, phone numbers and email addresses of the
applicant, landscape architect, and landscaping contractor;
(iii)   The scale of each drawing in both graphical and written formats;
(iv)   The date of the design, and dates of any revisions;
(v)   A north arrow; and
(vi)   Additional details and specifications from the Landscape Architect or
Landscape Designer for tree staking, soil preparation, irrigation component
installation, and other similar landscape work.
(B)   A detailed landscape planting plan showing:
(i)   A legend listing each symbol and line type used in the drawing;
(ii)   The location of existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences,
utilities, amenities, property lines, sidewalks, streets, pavement, impervious
areas, and other similar site improvements;
(iii)   The location, size, and quantities of all existing and proposed trees,
plants, and landscaping materials;
(iv)   An indication as to which existing trees, plants, and landscaping
materials will be removed, and the specific measures that will be taken to
protect existing trees, plants and landscaping that will remain through
construction; and
(v)   The botanical and common names of all trees and plants used within the
plan;
(C)   A detailed landscape irrigation plan, drawn at the same scale as the
planting plan, containing the following:
(i)    Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the type and
size of all components of the system;
(ii)   The location of pressure regulators within the system and the water
pressure they will be set to; and
(iii)   For systems utilizing culinary or potable water, the plan must include
the location of backflow prevention devices.
(5)   Lighting plan, consistent with the requirements of chapter 20 of this
title.
(6)   Architectural building elevations for all buildings showing the
following:
(A)   Accurate front, rear, and side elevations drawn to scale.
(B)   Exterior surfacing materials and colors, including roofing material and
color.
(C)   Outdoor lighting, furnishings and architectural accents.
(D)   Location and dimensions of all signage proposed to be attached to the
building or structure.
(7)   Floor plans for each floor of the building, including any unroofed
balconies or patios, and any rooftop patios or landscaped space, showing the
following:
(A)   A scaled, dimensioned, and labeled layout of the building interior,
including the location of all walls, doors, windows, stairwells, and fixed
furnishings.
(B)   The intended use and individual square footage of each room or area.
(C)   The calculated square footage of each floor attributable to the total
floor area of the building and a separate calculation of the square footage of
any unroofed balconies or patios excluded from the total floor area calculation
of the building.
e.   Soils report, geotechnical reports, and geologic hazard reports as
required elsewhere in this Title.
f.   Drainage report including hydraulic and hydrologic storm drainage
calculations. 100-year events may need to be accommodated in certain locations
in the path of major drainages. See the Drainage Design Criteria for
calculation requirements. Drainage plans shall facilitate a 10-year storm
event. A maximum stormwater controlled release rate of 0.1 cubic feet per
second per acre shall be the maximum permitted discharge in the Salt Lake
County portion of Draper City. In the Utah County area of Draper City, no
discharge shall exceed demonstrated historical flows from any drainage or sum
of drainages. Further reductions in release rates may be required in situations
of insufficient stormwater system capacity.
g.   Any necessary agreements with adjacent property owners regarding storm
drainage or other pertinent matters.
h.   When the project is located within the sensitive lands overlay zone,
additional reports as required by chapter 16 of this title.
i.   Evidence of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws
and regulations as may be requested by the zoning administrator.
j.   Traffic impact analysis, if requested by the city engineer or the planning
commission.
k.   Preliminary title report or ALTA survey.
l.   Wastewater discharge approval from South Valley water reclamation
facility, if required by the South Valley water reclamation facility.
m.   For site plans that include new proposed streets, a letter from the Salt
Lake County Addressing department indicating that the proposed name is both
available and has been reserved for use by the development. Availability or
reservation of a proposed street name with Salt Lake County does not constitute
approval of the proposed street name or addressing from Draper City.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission as
provided in section
9-5-040 of this chapter. Notice of the meeting should be given as provided in
section
9-5-045 of this chapter.
3.   A staff report evaluating the application shall be prepared by the zoning
administrator.
4.   The planning commission shall hold a public meeting and thereafter shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application pursuant to the
standards set forth in subsection E of this section. Any conditions of approval
shall be limited to conditions needed to conform the site plan to approval
standards.
5.   After the planning commission makes a decision, the zoning administrator
shall give the applicant written notice of the decision. The applicant shall
provide the city a copy of the approved site plan, including any required
corrections or revisions. Once in final, approved form, the site plan shall be
marked "Approved" by the city.
6.   A record of all site plan approvals shall be maintained in the office of
the zoning administrator.
E.   Standards For Approval: The following standards shall apply to the
approval of a site plan:
1.   The entire site shall be developed at one time unless a phased development
plan is approved.
2.   A site plan shall conform to applicable standards set forth in this title,
including but not limited to, building heights, setbacks, access points,
parking, landscaping, and building materials.
3.   The proposed development plans meet the intent, goals, and objectives of
the general plan and the purpose of the zone district in which the site is
located.
4.   The public facilities and services in the area are adequate to support the
subject development, as required by engineering standards and specifications.
5.   The proposed development plans comply with the engineering standards found
in Titles 7, 8, 11, 12, 16, and 18 of this code, including traffic, storm water
drainage, and utilities concerns.
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals regarding the approval or denial of a site
plan are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter.
G.   Effect Of Approval: Every site for which a site plan has been approved
shall conform to such plan.
1.   A building permit shall not be issued for any building or structure,
external alterations thereto, or any sign or advertising structure until the
provisions of this section have been met. Any building permit issued shall
expressly require that development be undertaken and completed in conformity
with the approved site plan. No structures or improvements may be added to a
site that are not included on the approved site plan.
2.   All improvements shown on the approved site plan or amended site plan
shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner.
3.   Approval of a site plan shall not be deemed an approval of any conditional
use permit or other permit. Approval of such permits shall be obtained in
accordance with applicable provisions of this title.
H.   Amendments: Except as may be provided for in this section, no element of
an approved site plan shall be changed or modified without first obtaining
approval of an amended site plan as follows:
1.   Alteration or expansion of an approved site plan may be permitted by the
Zoning Administrator upon making all of the following findings:
a.   The proposed use is consistent with uses permitted on the site;
b.   Existing uses were permitted when the site plan was approved, or have
received a conditional use permit;
c.   The proposed use and site will conform to applicable requirements of this
Code;
d.   The proposed expansion meets the approval standards of subsection E of
this section; and
e.   The site can accommodate any change in the number of people on the site or
any change in impact on surrounding infrastructure.
2.   If the Zoning Administrator cannot make all of the findings required in
subsection H(1) above, the amended site plan may only be approved by the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may only approve an amended site
plan after a public hearing that complies with all requirements of this code,
including section
9-5-045.
3.   If the Zoning Administrator can make all findings required in subsection H
(1) above the Zoning Administrator may approve the proposed amendment without a
public hearing and without notice.
4.   Properties that do not conform to the standards found within this code may
be required to come into compliance, subject to the standards in
9-6-040,
9-6-050,
9-6-060, and
9-6-070 of this title.
5.   An amended site plan application shall not be required when the alteration
complies with the below standards.
a.   An accessory building when:
(1)   The accessory building complies with current architectural standards;
(2)   The accessory building is less than five percent (5%) of the floor area
of the existing main building to a maximum of two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(3)   The accessory building does not impact any existing required landscaping
or parking; and
(4)   The proposed amendment meets all zoning and engineering standards.
b.   A main building addition when:
(1)   The main building addition's floor area is not larger than ten percent
(10%) of the floor area of the existing main building to a maximum of five
thousand (5,000) square feet;
(2)   The main building addition does not impact any existing required
landscaping or parking;
(3)   The main building addition is architecturally compatible with the
existing main building or complies with current architectural standards; and
(4)   The proposed amendment meets all zoning and engineering standards.
c.   Changes to site features such as landscaping or parking do not encompass
more than 10% of a site and comply with current zoning and engineering
standards.
I.   Revocation: A site plan approval may be revoked as provided in
9-7-060 of this title.
J.   Expiration: Failure to obtain a land disturbance permit within one year of
approval of any site plan shall void the prior site plan approval. Prior to the
expiration of the one-year period, an applicant may submit a written request to
the community development department for a site plan extension of up to six (6)
months. Approval of this extension may only be granted by the zoning
administrator or planning commission, whichever is the approval authority
outlined in this section, provided the applicant can meet the requirements for
extension under section
9-5-030 and demonstrate substantial action toward obtaining a land disturbance
permit. If a site plan expires, and an applicant wishes to continue with
development of the site a new application shall be required. If there have been
no changes to applicable codes which would necessitate updates to the
previously approved plans, the applicant will be charged a new application fee
of fifty percent (50%) of the current fee outlined in the consolidated fee
schedule and the application shall be approved by the zoning administrator or
planning commission, whichever is the approval authority outlined in this
section, in a public meeting as an action item. If changes to the site plan are
made by the applicant or are required due to changes in applicable codes, the
site plan shall be processed as a new application and is subject to a new
application fee at one hundred percent (100%) of the current fee established in
the consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 567, 4-13-2004;
Ord. 675, 3-28-2006; Ord. 787, 10-23-2007; Ord. 875, 1-6-2009; Ord. 1132, 2-17-
2015; Ord. 1323, 5-1-2018; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord.
1479, 2-16-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-5-100: REPEALED: (Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-110: VARIANCES:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for considering and approving
a variance to the provisions of this title. Variance procedures are intended to
provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from
particular unforeseen applications of the provisions of this title that create
unreasonable hardships.
B.   Authority: The appeals and variance hearing officer is authorized to hear
and decide variances to the provisions of this title as provided in this
section.
C.   Initiation: A property owner, or the owner's agent, may request a variance
to the provisions of this title as provided in subsection D1 of this section.
D.   Procedure: An application for a variance shall be considered and processed
as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator, along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   The address and parcel identification of the subject property.
c.   The specific feature or features of the proposed use, construction or
development that require a variance.
d.   The specific provision of this title from which the variance is sought and
the precise variance being sought.
e.   A statement of the characteristics of the subject property that prevent
compliance with the provisions of this title and result in unnecessary
hardship.
f.   A statement of the minimum variation needed to permit the proposed use,
construction or development.
g.   An explanation of how the application satisfies each standard set forth in
subsection E of this section.
h.   A plot plan showing the following:
(1)   Applicant's name;
(2)   Site address;
(3)   Property boundaries and dimensions;
(4)   Layout of existing and proposed buildings, parking, landscaping, and
utilities; and
(5)   Adjoining property lines and uses within one hundred feet (100') of the
subject property.
i.   An elevation plan drawn to scale showing all elevations of existing and
proposed structures.
j.   When the variance involves building height, a streetscape plan showing the
height of all buildings within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the subject
property.
k.   When a variance involves grade changes a topographical drawing prepared by
a licensed surveyor, showing existing topography in dashed lines at two foot
(2') intervals and showing the proposed grade in solid lines at two foot (2')
intervals.
l.   When a variance involves retaining walls, a plan showing all retaining
walls, including their height relative to proposed grades.
m.   Any other information identified by the zoning administrator to be
pertinent to the requested variance. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the appeals and variance
hearing officer as provided in section
9-5-040 of this chapter. Notice of the meeting should be given as provided in
section
9-5-045 of this chapter.
3.   A staff report evaluating the application shall be prepared by the zoning
administrator.
4.   The appeals and variance hearing officer shall hold a public meeting and
thereafter shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application
pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection E of this section. Any
conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions needed to conform the
variance to approval standards.
5.   After the appeals and variance hearing officer makes a decision, the
zoning administrator shall give the applicant written notice of the decision.
6.   A record of all variances shall be maintained in the office of the zoning
administrator.
E.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to a variance:
1.   The appeals and variance hearing officer may grant a variance only if:
a.   Literal enforcement of this title would cause an unreasonable hardship for
the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of this
title;
b.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district;
c.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial
property right possessed by other property in the same zoning district;
d.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not
be contrary to the public interest; and
e.   The spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice done.
2.   The appeals and variance hearing officer may find an unreasonable hardship
exists only if the alleged hardship is located on or associated with the
property for which the variance is sought and comes from circumstances peculiar
to the property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood. The
appeals and variance hearing officer may not find an unreasonable hardship
exists if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
3.   The appeals and variance hearing officer may find that special
circumstances exist only if the special circumstances relate to the hardship
complained of and deprive the property of privileges granted to other
properties in the same zoning district.
4.   An applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the conditions
justifying a variance have been met.
5.   A use variance may not be granted.
6.   In granting a variance, the appeals and variance hearing officer may
impose additional requirements on an applicant that will mitigate any harmful
affects of the variance, or serve the purpose of the standard or requirement
that is waived or modified.
7.   A variance more restrictive than that requested may be authorized when the
record supports the applicant's right to some relief but not to the extent
requested.
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a decision of the appeals and variance
hearing officer regarding a variance are governed by subsection
9-4-050(I) of this title.
G.   Effect Of Approval: A variance shall not authorize the establishment of
any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the
preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any approvals or
permits that may be required by this title or other applicable provisions of
this code.
H.   Amendments: The procedure for amending any variance decision shall be the
same as the original procedure set forth in this section.
I.   Expiration: Variances shall not expire but shall run with the land.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 1132, 2-17-
2015; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-120: BUILDING PERMITS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for determining zoning
compliance of a building permit application.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator or their designee is authorized to
review applications for building permits for zoning compliance as provided in
this section. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
C.   Initiation: Any person may apply for a building permit as provided in the
current building codes adopted by the city. Zoning compliance of a building
permit application shall be determined as provided in subsection D(1) of this
section. (Ord. 624, 2-8-2005)
D.   Procedure: A building permit application shall be reviewed for zoning
compliance as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete building permit application shall be submitted to the office of
the building official in a form established by the building official, along
with any fee established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall
include at least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the construction
manager/general contractor, and the applicant's agent, if any.
b.   A plot plan for the construction project that:
(1)   is drawn to scale;
(2)   includes a north arrow and legend; and
(3)   provides specifications for the following:
(a)   Lot sized and dimensions;
(b)   Setbacks and overhangs for setbacks;
(c)   Easements;
(d)   Property lines;
(e)   Topographical details, if the slope of the lot or parcel is greater than
ten percent (10%);
(f)   Retaining walls;
(g)   Hard surface areas;
(h)   Curb and gutter elevations as indicated in the subdivision documents;
(i)   Utilities, including water meter and sewer lateral location;
(j)   Street names;
(k)   Driveway locations;
(l)   Defensible space provisions and elevations, if required by the Utah
Wildland Urban Interface Code adopted under Utah Code Section 15A-2-103;
(m)   The location of the nearest hydrant;
c.   Construction plans and drawings, including:
(1)   Elevations, only if the construction project is new construction;
(2)   Floor plans for each level, including the location and size of doors and
windows;
(3)   Foundation, structural, and framing detail; and
(4)   Electrical, mechanical, and plumbing design.
d.   Documentation of Energy Code Compliance.
e.   Structural Calculations, except for tresses.
f.   A geotechnical report, including a slope stability evaluation and
retaining wall design for properties where the slope exceeds fifteen percent
(15%).
g.   A statement indicating that actual construction will comply with
applicable local ordinances and building codes.
2.   After the building permit application is determined to be complete, the
building official shall transmit the application to the zoning administrator.
The zoning administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
zoning compliance request pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection E
of this section. Any conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions
needed to conform the permit to approval standards.
3.   After making a decision, the zoning administrator shall give the building
official written notice of the zoning compliance decision.
4.   A record of all zoning compliance reviews shall be maintained in the
office of the building official.
E.   Approval Standards: No building permit shall be approved for zoning
compliance unless the proposed building, structure or use when built and the
land on which it is located will conform in every respect with applicable
provisions of this title and any applicable conditions of approval required
under a permit applicable to the subject property. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a zoning administrator’s decision regarding
zoning compliance of a building permit are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval shall indicate acceptance of plans as
compliant with zoning ordinances.
H.   Amendments: Amendments to an approved plan will require review and
approval by the same procedures through which the plan received the initial
approval.
I.   Expiration: Subject to an extension of time, a building permit shall
expire and have no further force or effect if the building, activity,
construction or occupancy authorized by the permit is not commenced within one-
hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021; Ord.
1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-130: NONCONFORMING USES:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for determining the existence,
expansion or modification of a nonconforming use.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator is authorized to make a determination
regarding the existence, expansion or modification of a nonconforming use as
provided in this section.
C.   Initiation: A property owner, or the owner's agent, may request a
determination regarding the existence, expansion or modification of a
nonconforming use affecting the owner's property as provided in subsection D1
of this section.
D.   Procedure: An application for determination of the existence, expansion or
modification of a nonconforming use shall be considered and processed as
provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator, along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   The nonconforming use in question.
c.   A description of the action requested by the applicant.
d.   Grounds for finding the use is nonconforming or for allowing expansion or
modification of the nonconforming use.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application
pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection E of this section. Any
conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions needed to conform the
nonconforming use, expansion or modification to approval standards.
3.   After making a decision, the zoning administrator shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision.
4.   A record of all nonconforming use determinations shall be maintained in
the office of the zoning administrator.
E.   Standards For Decision: A determination regarding the existence, expansion
or modification of a nonconforming use shall be based on applicable provisions
of chapter 6 of this title.
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a zoning administrator’s decision regarding
a nonconforming use are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter.
G.   Effect Of Decision: An applicant may continue, expand or modify a
nonconforming use as determined by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-140: SIGN PERMITS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for considering and approving
a sign permit.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator is authorized to issue sign permits as
provided in this section.
C.   Initiation: Any person may apply for a sign permit as provided in
subsection D1 of this section.
D.   Procedure: An application for a sign permit shall be considered and
processed as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator, along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   A statement by the applicant demonstrating how the sign permit request
meets the approval standards of subsection E of this section.
c.   A plot plan showing the following:
(1)   Applicant's name;
(2)   Site address;
(3)   Property boundaries and dimensions;
(4)   Layout of existing and proposed buildings, parking, landscaping, and
utilities; and
(5)   Adjoining property lines and uses within one hundred feet (100') of the
subject property.
d.   An elevation drawing showing:
(1)   Type of sign;
(2)   Sign location in relation to nearest property line;
(3)   Sign face design, if an on premises sign;
(4)   Sign height;
(5)   Sign face area;
(6)   Sign illumination details; and
(7)   Reflective elements and materials.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application
pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection E of this section. Any
conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions needed to conform the
sign permit to approval standards.
3.   After making a decision, the zoning administrator shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision.
4.   A record of all sign permits shall be maintained in the office of the
zoning administrator.
E.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to the issuance of
a sign permit:
1.   A sign shall conform to applicable provisions of chapter 26 of this title.
2.   All signs shall be inspected by a designated officer of the city
immediately after installation. The permittee shall request inspection within
five (5) business days after installation. Any sign not conforming to the
requirements of chapter 26 of this title shall be made to conform or removed.
3.   Building and electrical permits shall be required for signs having a cost,
rental value or lease value exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a zoning administrator’s decision regarding
a sign permit are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter.
G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a sign permit shall authorize an applicant
to:
1.   Construct the sign as indicated on the permit, if no building and
electrical permits are required; or
2.   If building and electrical permits are required, such permits shall be
obtained prior to construction.
H.   Amendments: The procedure for amending any sign permit shall be the same
as the original procedure set forth in this section.
I.   Revocation: A sign permit may be revoked as provided in section
9-7-060 of this title.
J.   Expiration: A sign permit which is not exercised to sign installation
within one hundred eighty (180) days shall be void. An applicant may submit a
written request to the community development department prior to expiration of
the sign permit for an extension of up to ninety (90) days. The zoning
administrator may approve the extension upon a showing that the applicant has
taken substantial action towards the permit and provided the requirements for
an extension under section
9-5-030 of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 815, 4-1-2008. eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 1408, 10-15-
2019; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-150: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for considering and approving
a temporary use permit.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator is authorized to issue temporary use
permits as provided in this section.
C.   Initiation: Any person may apply for a temporary use permit as provided in
subsection D1 of this section, subject to compliance with the provisions of
title 6, chapter 16, "Temporary Uses", of this code.
D.   Procedure: An application for a temporary use permit shall be considered
and processed as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any.
b.   The name and address of the applicant and the name and address of every
person or company the applicant represents.
c.   The person chiefly responsible for the event or use and/or the sponsoring
organization and its chief officer.
d.   The requested temporary use.
e.   The place, date, time of the event, and hours of operation of the proposed
use.
f.   A statement of the approximate number of persons, animals and/or vehicles
which will participate in the event or be generated by the use and an
explanation of how said number was derived, such as number of presold tickets,
available seating and/or parking, and past experience with similar activities.
g.   The following maps, plans, and documents evidencing sufficient measures to
be taken to reasonably protect the health, safety, and welfare of patrons and
the public in general:
(1)   A scaled drawing of the area in which the event is to be held or the use
conducted, showing the location of any existing structures and improvements on
the site of the proposed temporary use, including, but not limited to, parking
areas, curbs, gutter, sidewalks, and outside storage areas; and
(2)   Sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the temporary use will meet the
general and specific requirements of sections
6-16-040 and 6-16-050 of this code.
h.   Other such items as reasonably requested by the zoning administrator to
determine the feasibility of the temporary use.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall solicit recommendations from the city fire chief, city-
county health department, city engineer, and law enforcement agency of the
city. Thereafter, the zoning administrator shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny the application pursuant to the standards set forth in
subsection E of this section. Any conditions of approval shall be limited to
conditions needed to conform the temporary use permit to approval standards.
3.   After making a decision, the zoning administrator shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision.
4.   A record of all temporary use permits shall be maintained in the office of
the zoning administrator.
E.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to the issuance of
a temporary use permit:
1.   A temporary use shall conform to:
a.   The development standards set forth in section
6-16-050 of this code; and
b.   Any recommendations received from the city fire chief, city- county health
department, city engineer, and law enforcement agency of the city.
2.   No temporary use permit shall be issued unless the zoning administrator
finds the proposed temporary use:
a.   Will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental
to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working within
the vicinity, or injurious to property, improvements or the public in general;
b.   Will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of public
transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area, nor block
traffic lanes or hinder traffic during peak commuter hours on weekdays on any
primary arterial street or principal commuter route designated by the city;
c.   Will not conflict with construction or development in the public right of
way or at public facilities;
d.   Will not unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance, or
other emergency vehicles on the streets, nor require the diversion of so great
a number of police, fire, or other essential public employees from their normal
duties as to prevent reasonable police, fire, or other public services
protection to the remainder of the city;
e.   Will not conflict with nor be incompatible with the permitted uses and
regulations of the zone within which the temporary use is located; and
f.   Is in compliance with regulations, conditions and licensing requirements
of applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of a zoning administrator’s decision regarding
a temporary use permit are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a temporary use permit shall authorize an
applicant to engage in the temporary use subject to any conditions of approval.
H.   Amendments: The procedure for amending any temporary use permit shall be
the same as the original procedure set forth in this section.
I.   Revocation: A temporary use permit may be revoked as provided in section
9-7-060 of this title.
J.   Expiration: A temporary use permit shall expire as provided in subsection
6-16-030B of this code. Extensions of time shall be prohibited. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-160: REPEALED: (Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-5-170: ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS:
A.   Purpose: The provisions of this title, though detailed and extensive,
cannot as a practical matter address every specific situation to which these
provisions may be applied. This section allows the zoning administrator to
interpret a provision of this title in light of the general and specific
purposes for which it was enacted and as applied to specific circumstances.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator is authorized to render
interpretations of the provisions of this title, and any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, as provided in this section.
C.   Initiation: Any person may request an administrative interpretation as
provided in subsection D1 of this section.
D.   Procedure: An application for an administrative interpretation shall be
considered and processed as provided in this subsection:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the administrator, along with any fee
established by the city's schedule of fees. The application shall include at
least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any;
b.   The specific provision or provisions of this title for which an
interpretation is requested;
c.   Specific facts of the situation which illustrate the need for an
administrative interpretation;
d.   The precise interpretation claimed by the applicant to be correct; and
e.   When a use interpretation is requested, the application shall include:
(1)   A statement explaining why the proposed use should be deemed as included
within a use category allowed by the zoning district applicable to the
property; and
(2)   Documents, statements, and other evidence demonstrating that the proposed
use will conform to all use limitations established by the zoning district
applicable to the property.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall review the request and make an interpretation in accordance
with the standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
3.   After making a decision, the Zoning Administrator shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision.
4.   A record of all administrative interpretations shall be maintained in the
Office of the Zoning Administrator.
E.   Standards For Making Administrative Interpretations: The following
standards shall apply to administrative interpretations:
1.   Administrative interpretations shall not add to or change the provisions
of this title.
2.   Questions about the location of zoning district boundaries shall be
resolved by applying the standards set forth in section
9-8-040 of this title.
3.   An administrative interpretation shall be consistent with:
a.   The provisions of this title; and
b.   Any previously rendered interpretations based on similar facts.
4.   A use interpretation shall also be subject to the following standards:
a.   A "use", as defined in section
9-3-040 of this title, shall be interpreted as provided therein.
b.   Any use specifically listed as "not permitted" in a table of permitted and
conditional uses for a particular zoning district shall not be allowed in that
zone.
c.   No use interpretation shall allow a use in a zoning district unless
evidence is presented demonstrating the use will conform to development
standards established for that district.
d.   No use interpretation shall allow a use in a particular zoning district
unless the use is substantially similar to uses allowed in that zone.
e.   If a proposed use is most similar to a conditional use authorized in the
zoning district in which it is proposed to be located, any interpretation
allowing such use shall require that the use be approved only as a conditional
use pursuant to section
9-5-080 of this chapter.
f.   No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would
be inconsistent with the statement of purpose of the zoning district in which
it would be located. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
F.   Appeal Of Decision: Appeals of an administrative interpretation rendered
by the zoning administrator are governed by section
9-5-180 of this chapter. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
G.   Effect Of Approval: An administrative interpretation shall apply only to
the property for which an interpretation is given.
1.   A use interpretation finding a use to be a permitted or conditional use in
a particular zone shall be deemed to authorize only that use on the subject
property. A use interpretation shall not authorize another allegedly similar
use for which a separate use interpretation has not been issued.
2.   A use interpretation finding a particular use to be a permitted or
conditional use shall not authorize the establishment of such use nor the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any approvals or permits that may be required by
this title or other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001;
amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-180: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for appealing an
administrative decision applying provisions of this title. (Ord. 1199, 5-17-
2016)
B.   Authority: The appeals and variance hearing officer shall hear and decide
appeals from administrative decisions applying the provisions of this title.
C.   Initiation: The land use applicant, an officer of the city, or an
adversely affected party may appeal a decision administering or interpreting a
provision of this title to the appeals and variance hearing officer as provided
in subsection D(1) of this section. A complete Notice of Appeal shall be filed
within ten (10) calendar days of the decision being appealed.
D.   Procedure: An appeal of an administrative decision shall be considered and
processed as provided in this subsection and shall respect the due process
rights of the participants.
1.   A complete Notice of Appeal shall be submitted to the Office of the zoning
administrator on a form established by the administrator along with the fee
established by the City in its consolidated fee schedule. The Notice of Appeal
shall include at least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent, if any;
b.   The decision appealed;
c.   Grounds for the appeal; and
d.   A description of the action claimed by the applicant to be incorrect.
2.   After the Notice of Appeal is determined to be complete and timely filed,
the zoning administrator shall coordinate with the appeals and variance hearing
officer to schedule a meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be given as provided
in subsection
9-4-050(F) of this title. Prior to the meeting the zoning administrator shall
transmit to the appeals and variance hearing officer all papers constituting
the record of the action which is appealed.
3.   An appeal to the appeals and variance hearing officer shall not stay
proceedings taken in furtherance of the action appealed from unless such
proceedings are specifically stayed by order of the zoning administrator. An
appellant may request a stay by submitting to the zoning administrator, in
writing, a request for a stay setting forth the reasons why a stay is necessary
to protect against imminent harm. In determining whether or not to grant a
stay, the zoning administrator shall assure that all potentially affected
parties are given the opportunity to comment on the request. A ruling on the
request for a stay shall be given within five (5) days from the date the
request is received by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, in
granting a stay, may impose additional conditions to mitigate any potential
harm that may be caused by the stay, including requiring the appellant to post
a bond. Within ten (10) days of the zoning administrator's decision regarding
the grant or denial of a stay, any adversely affected party may appeal the
decision to the appeals and variance hearing officer with jurisdiction over the
appeal, whose decision will be final.
4.   The appeals and variance hearing officer shall conduct a hearing based
upon the record only, taking no new testimony or new information but relying
solely upon the information and final decision of the officer or body from whom
the appeal was taken. The appellant has the burden of proving that the officer
or body erred. In conducting the appeal hearing the appeals and variance
hearing officer shall:
a.   Determine whether the record on appeal includes substantial evidence for
each essential finding of fact;
b.   Determine the correctness of the officer or body's interpretation and
application of the plain meaning of the land use regulations and thereafter
affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, the lower decision, modify that decision,
or impose any conditions needed to conform the matter appealed to applicable
approval standards; and
c.   Interpret and apply a land use regulation to favor a land use application
unless the land use regulation plainly restricts the land use application.
5.   The appeals and variance hearing officer shall have all the powers of the
officer or body from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the
issuance of a permit.
6.   After the appeals and variance hearing officer makes a decision, the
zoning administrator shall give the applicant written notice of the decision.
The decision takes effect on the date when the appeal authority issues a
written decision.
7.   A record of all appeals shall be maintained in the Office of the zoning
administrator. (Ord. 1323, 5-1-2018; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-5-190: PROCEDURAL IRREGULARITIES:
A.   Notwithstanding any provision of this title which sets forth a procedure
for any matter herein, no action, inaction or recommendation regarding the
matter which is the subject of the procedure shall be void or invalid or set
aside by a court due to any error (including, but not limited to, any
irregularity, informality, neglect or omission) which pertains to a petition,
application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation or any
other procedural matter whatsoever unless:
1.   The procedure is required by State or Federal law; and
2.   In an examination of the entire circumstances, including the evidence of
record, the court is of the opinion that the procedural error complained of was
prejudicial to a substantial right of the complainant as shown by the
following:
a.   Had the error not occurred the decision made pursuant to the procedure
would have been different, and
b.   Because of the error the complainant suffered an injury for which relief
must be given.
B.   The court shall presume that action taken pursuant to a procedure was done
in good faith and shall not presume that an error is prejudicial or that an
injury occurred. The complainant shall have the burden of the proof by a
preponderance of the evidence to show that an error is prejudicial or that an
injury occurred.
C.   All procedures within this title shall be subject to this section. (Ord.
1199, 5-17-2016)
9-5-200: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A.   Purpose: A development agreement may be negotiated and executed between a
developer and the City containing any term that the City considers necessary,
including a term related to:
1.   A master planned development;
2.   A planned unit development;
3.   An annexation;
4.   Affordable or moderate income housing with development incentives;
5.   A public-private partnership; or
6.   A density transfer or bonus within a development project or between
development projects.
B.   Initiation: A complete application shall be submitted to the Office of the
Zoning Administrator in a form established by the Administrator, along with any
fees established by the City's schedule of fees. The application shall include
a copy of the proposed development agreement and any related exhibits.
C.   Procedure: All development agreements, upon proper execution, shall be
recorded with the respective County Recorder's Office, shall run with the land,
and shall be binding on all successors in the ownership of the affected
property. A development agreement shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1.   A legal description of the land subject to the development agreement.
2.   The restrictions or conditions to be attached to the property including
development standards and the provision of public facilities.
3.   The configuration of the project as shown on a project master plan.
4.   A statement of the benefits and value the development agreement will have
for the City as a whole, including, but not limited to, assurances of design
standards, dedication and improvement of open space, parks, trails, amenities,
or infrastructure such as public rights-of-way or utilities.
5.   The time frames for performance by the parties.
6.   A description of the various City approvals required before the
commencement of construction and other procedures that will be required after
approval of the development agreement.
7.   Provisions for enforcement of the terms and conditions of the development
agreement.
8.   Provisions for making amendments to the development agreement.
9.   The time limitation of the agreement.
10.   Such other terms as may be proposed and agreed to between the City and
developer or subdivider.
D.   Limitations:
1.    A development agreement under this section may not:
a.    Limit the City’s authority in the future to:
i.    Enact a land use regulation; or
ii.    Take any action allowed under Utah Code Annotated Section 10-8-84, as
amended;
b.    Require the City to change the zoning designation of an area of land
within the City in the future; or
c.    Contain a term that conflicts with, or is different from, a standard set
forth in an existing land use regulation that governs the area subject to the
development agreement, unless the city council approves the development
agreement in accordance with the same procedures for enacting a land use
regulation under Utah Code Annotated Section 10-9a-502, including a review and
recommendation from the planning commission and a public hearing.
2.    The City may not require a development agreement as the only option for
developing land within the City.
3.   The City may require a development agreement for developing land within
the City if the applicant has applied for a legislative or discretionary
approval, including an approval relating to:
a.   The height of a structure;
b.   A parking or setback exception;
c.   A density transfer or bonus;
d.   A development incentive;
e.   A zone change; or
f.   An amendment to a prior development agreement.
4.   The City may not require a development agreement as a condition for
developing land within the City if:
a.   The development otherwise complies with applicable statute and City
ordinances;
b.   The development is an allowed or permitted use; or
c.   The City's land use regulations otherwise establish all applicable
standards for development on the land.
5.   The City may submit to the County Recorder's office for recording:
a.   A fully executed agreement; or
b.   A document related to:
(1)   Code enforcement;
(2)   A special assessment area;
(3)   A local historic district boundary; or
(4)   The memorializing of enforcement of an agreed upon restriction,
incentive, or covenant.
6.   Subject to
9-5-200D5, the City may not cause to be recorded against private real property
a document that imposes development requirements, development regulations, or
development controls on the property.
7.   To the extent that a development agreement does not specifically address a
matter or concern related to land use or development, the matter or concern is
governed by;
a.   Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-530, as amended; and
b.   Applicable land use regulations of this Title.
E.   Expiration: A development agreement shall be signed and notarized by all
parties, and recorded in the relevant county recorder's office within one (1)
year from the date of City Council approval or it will be void. Prior to the
expiration of the one-year period, an applicant may submit a written request
with the community development department, for an extension of up to six (6)
months. Approval of this extension may only be granted by the City Council
provided the applicant can meet the requirements for extension under section
9-5-030 and demonstrate substantial action toward execution of the agreement.
(Ord. 1199, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord.
1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1624, 9-17-2024)
9-5-210: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU) PERMITS:
A.   Purpose: This section sets forth procedures for issuing, renewing,
transferring and revoking permits for an ADU under the provisions of chapter 31
of this title.
B.   Authority: The zoning administrator is authorized to review and approve
applications for an ADU.
C.   Initiation: The owner of record or their agent may request approval of an
initial ADU permit to establish an ADU on the owner's property or to amend an
existing permit.
D.   Procedure: Applications for approval of an initial ADU permit or to amend
an existing ADU shall be reviewed and processed as provided in this section:
1.   A complete application shall be submitted to the office of the zoning
administrator in a form established by the zoning administrator along with any
fee established by the city's consolidated fee schedule. The application shall
include at least the following information:
a.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of record and the
owner of record's agent, if any.
b.   Scaled site plans illustrating:
(1)   Property boundaries and dimensions;
(2)   Layout of existing and proposed buildings and parking; and
(3)   Building setbacks from property lines.
c.   Floor plans of all floors.
d.   For new proposed construction: architectural elevation drawings of all
four sides of the structure including details of proposed colors and materials;
or
e.   For existing structures: digital photographs of all four sides of the
existing building.
f.   A copy of the current sewer bill for the primary dwelling. For properties
where the primary dwelling is not connected to sewer, provide evidence of
septic system maintenance including pumping records for the previous 12 months
or certificate of approval from the respective county health department.
g.   Other information as needed or requested by the zoning administrator to
demonstrate that the use conforms to applicable provisions of this title.
2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the zoning
administrator shall review the application and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application pursuant to the standards set forth in
subsection
9-5-210(E). As part of the review process the zoning administrator may forward
a copy of the application and any related materials to other agencies. Any
conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions needed to conform to the
approval standards.
3.   After making a decision the zoning administrator shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision.
4.   An annual renewal of each ADU permit issued under the applicable
provisions of section
9-31-030 and this section shall be required.
a.   The application for the annual renewal shall consist of a signed and
notarized affidavit from the owner of record on a form approved by the city
attorney attesting to the following:
(1)   The applicant is the current owner of record;
(2)   The applicant continues to occupy the primary dwelling on the property as
their primary residence;
(3)   The ADU remains in compliance with applicable ordinances and all
conditions under which it was approved;
(4)   That continued use the ADU will comply with all applicable ordinances and
the conditions of the initial ADU permit.
b.   When an ADU permit is renewed the zoning administrator shall issue a
certificate of renewal inclusive of the next annual date on which the
certificate and ADU permit shall expire if not renewed.
5.   ADU permits may be transferred to a new owner of the property.
a.   An application for transfer of an ADU permit shall consist of a signed and
notarized affidavit from the new owner on a form approved by the city attorney
attesting to the following:
(1)    The applicant is the current owner of record;
(2)   The applicant occupies the primary dwelling on the property as their
primary residence;
(3)   The ADU remains in compliance with applicable ordinances and all
conditions under which it was approved;
(4)   That continued use the ADU will comply with all applicable ordinances and
the conditions of the initial ADU permit.
b.   Before transfer of an ADU permit to a new owner may occur, an inspection
of the property by the city for verification of continued compliance with
applicable ordinances and conditions of the initial ADU permit shall be
required.
c.   When an ADU permit is transferred to a new owner the zoning administrator
shall issue a new ADU permit in the name of the new owner inclusive of all
conditions of the initial ADU permit.
6.   A record of all ADU permits shall be maintained in the office of the
zoning administrator.
E.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to the issuance of
an ADU permit. An ADU must:
1.   Be a permitted use in the applicable zone;
2.   Be located on a property that is not restricted or prohibited from having
an ADU by any of the provisions within chapter 31 of this title;
3.   Comply with development standards of the applicable zone and chapter 31 of
this title;
4.   Comply with applicable regulations of general applicability and
regulations for the specific use as set forth in this title;
5.   Comply with applicable provisions of state code;
6.   Comply with any other applicable requirements of this code.
F.   Appeal of Decision: The applicant or an adversely affected party may
appeal the zoning administrator's decision to approve or deny an ADU permit in
accordance with the provisions of section 9-5-180 of this chapter.
G.   Effect of Approval: Approval of an ADU permit shall authorize the owner of
record to establish an ADU on the property or to continued use of an ADU in
compliance with the requirements of chapter 31 of this title and subject to any
conditions of approval. An owner of record establishing or modifying an ADU
shall still be required to obtain any building permit or encroachment permit
needed for the construction work and/or inspections necessary to establish the
ADU.
H.   Surrender: The holder of an ADU permit may voluntarily obtain the
applicable building permit or demolition permit to remove an ADU, restore the
property to use as a single-family dwelling, and surrender the ADU permit to
the city. A permit holder that wants to keep the kitchen associated with the
ADU must comply with the requirements of chapter 30 of this title. Once the
restoration to a single-family dwelling is complete the City shall record a
notice of release from any notice of accessory dwelling unit previously
recorded, and record a separate notice of second kitchen if necessary.
I.   Expiration: An ADU permit that authorizes the construction of an ADU shall
expire if a building permit is not issued within one-hundred eighty (180) days
of the ADU permit issuance. Individual ADU permits shall expire one (1) year
from the date of issue, but can be renewed, transferred, or surrendered under
the provisions of this section. The renewal of an ADU permit authorizing the
construction of an ADU shall not be approved if the certificate of occupancy
for the ADU has not been issued prior to the expiration of the permit, and a
new application for the ADU permit shall be required. (Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-5-220: EXCATIONS:
A.   The city may impose an exaction or exactions on development proposed in a
land use application, if:
1.   An essential link exists between a legitimate governmental interest and
the exaction; and
2.   The exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent, to the
impact of the proposed development.
B.   An applicant may request the Community Development Director or designee
review an exaction or exactions for compliance with the standards listed in
subsection A. The Director or designee will issue a written opinion.
C.   An applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Draper City
Municipal Code
2-4-060. (Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
SECTION:
9-6-010: Purpose
9-6-020: Scope
9-6-030: Change In Nonconforming Status
9-6-040: Nonconforming Uses
9-6-050: Nonconforming Structures
9-6-060: Nonconforming Lots Or Parcels
9-6-070: Other Nonconformities
9-6-080: Nonconformities Created By Public Action
9-6-090: Abandonment
9-6-100: Determination Of Nonconforming Status
9-6-110: Nonconforming Uses Detrimental To Health And Safety
9-6-120: Extension Of Time For Recovery Of Investment
9-6-130: Billboards Exempt
9-6-140: Appeals
9-6-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing legally
established uses, structures, lots or parcels that do not conform to applicable
requirements of this title. They may continue to exist and be put to productive
use, but their nonconforming aspects shall be brought into conformance with the
requirements of this title as provided in this chapter. The intent of this
chapter is to recognize the interests of property owners while controlling
expansion of nonconforming conditions. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lots or parcels, structures,
and uses within the city, and to any other matter governed by this title. Any
lot or parcel, structure, or use that was legally established on or before the
effective date of this title may be continued to the extent that it legally
existed on such date and conforms to applicable provisions of this chapter. Any
lot, structure, or use which was not authorized by under preexisting zoning
ordinance(s), as amended, or which was illegal under such ordinance, shall
remain unauthorized and illegal unless expressly authorized or permitted by the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-030: CHANGE IN NONCONFORMING STATUS:
A nonconforming use, structure, lot, parcel, or other nonconformity may not be
changed except in conformance with the provisions of this title. When any
nonconforming use, structure, lot, parcel, or other nonconformity becomes
conforming, it shall not be changed back to the previously existing
nonconforming condition. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-040: NONCONFORMING USES:
A.   Continuation: A nonconforming use of any conforming or nonconforming
structure which was legally existing when such use became prohibited may be
continued as provided in this chapter.
B.   Expansion Within Conforming Building: A nonconforming use existing within
a portion of a conforming building may be expanded to include the entire floor
area of such building provided that such expansion:
1.   Does not include any structural alteration;
2.   Creates no noise, odor, or vibration; and
3.   Otherwise conforms to the requirements of this title.
C.   Nonconforming Use Of Open Land: A nonconforming use of open land may be
continued provided such nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended
into any other portion of a conforming building or open land, and no
structures, additions, alterations, or enlargements thereto shall be made
thereon, except those required by law.
D.   Expansion Of Outdoor Nonconforming Uses: A nonconforming use of a lot or
parcel where the principal use is not enclosed within a building, such as a
salvage yard or a motor vehicle sales lot, shall not be expanded except in
conformity with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-050: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A.   Continuation: A nonconforming structure in any zone may be continued as
provided in this chapter so long as no additions or enlargements are made
thereto and no structural alterations are made therein, except as may be
required by law. If any nonconforming structure is removed from the lot or
parcel on which it was located, each future structure thereon shall conform to
the provisions of this title.
B.   Maintenance And Repair: A nonconforming structure may be maintained.
Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming structure
within the existing footprint thereof; provided, that the degree of
nonconformity is not increased.
C.   Enlargement And Expansion: Any expansion of a nonconforming structure that
increases the degree of nonconformance is prohibited, except as provided in
this subsection:
1.   The initial determination of whether a proposed expansion increases the
degree of nonconformity shall be made by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2001)
2.   A structure which is nonconforming as to height, area, or yard regulations
may be added to or enlarged upon authorization by the appeals and variance
hearing officer; provided, that the appeals and variance hearing officer, after
a hearing, finds the expansion to be compatible with the neighborhood and not
detrimental to the community, as determined by the effect of the expansion on
traffic, value of adjacent and nearby properties, and the availability of
adequate public facilities and services. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
D.   Relocation: If a nonconforming structure is relocated within the city, it
shall be placed only in a location where it fully conforms with the
requirements of this title.
E.   Restoration: A nonconforming structure damaged by fire, wind, tornado,
earthquake, or other disaster may be restored as it existed previously and its
use may be continued so long as restoration is complete within one year, except
that buildings on the state or Draper City historic register may be restored so
long as restoration is initiated within twelve (12) months and complete within
twenty four (24) months.
F.   Unsafe Structures: Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit
the continuing use of a structure found to be in violation of any applicable
life safety or health code. The right to continue use of a nonconforming
structure shall be subject to the life safety requirements of applicable
housing, building, health, and other life safety codes. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-060: NONCONFORMING LOTS OR PARCELS:
A.   Continuation: A nonconforming lot or parcel may continue to be occupied
and used although it may not conform in every respect with the dimensional
requirements of this title, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B.   New Single-Family Dwelling: A new single-family dwelling may be
constructed on a legally established lot or parcel which is nonconforming as to
area and/or width, provided:
1.   The lot or parcel was legally nonconforming when the area or width
requirements were changed;
2.   The use is for the sole purpose of a single-family residence;
3.   There is only one primary building on the lot or parcel; and
4.   The dwelling shall conform to all other requirements as to frontage, yard
setbacks, building heights, street improvements, fire protection, and building
codes.
C.   Lot With Building Or Structure: If a nonconforming lot or parcel contains
a structure legally established before the effective date of this title, then
the owner may continue the then existing use of such structure and may expand
the structure in any way that does not increase the degree of nonconformity. An
increase in structure size shall not be deemed to increase the degree of
nonconformity of the lot or parcel unless the structure increases any
encroachment into a required setback. Remodeling of a structure within an
existing footprint or expansion in compliance with this section shall not
require a variance but shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator as though
the lot or parcel were conforming.
D.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings customarily incidental to a
dwelling may be constructed on nonconforming lots, provided:
1.   The building shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in floor
area nor exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
2.   The lot or parcel was nonconforming when such lot became prohibited under
the terms of this title.
3.   The use of the nonconforming lot or parcel is primarily residential.
4.   The accessory building and its location on the lot or parcel shall meet
all other building and lot requirements as to yard setbacks, fire protection,
and building codes. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-070: OTHER NONCONFORMITIES:
This chapter shall apply to any other circumstance which does not conform to
the requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, fence height or
location; lack of buffers or screening; lack of or inadequate landscaping; lack
of or inadequate off street parking; and any other nonconformity not addressed
by sections
9-6-040,
9-6-050 and
9-6-060 of this chapter.
A.   Nonconforming Development With Approved Site Plan: Nonconforming
development that is consistent with a site plan approved before the effective
date of this title shall be deemed to be in conformance with this title to the
extent that it is consistent with the approved site plan and to the extent that
such plan or conditions imposed thereon directly address the specific issue
involved in a determination of conformity. A nonconformity other than one of
those enumerated in sections
9-6-040,
9-6-050, and
9-6-060 of this chapter shall be brought into conformance upon the occurrence
of any one of the following:
1.   Any increase of more than thirty percent (30%) floor area or fifty percent
(50%) of the County Assessor’s Office assessed value of the building or
premises.
2.   For a lot or parcel located in a commercial or industrial zone, any change
in use to a more intensive use when a new certificate of occupancy is required.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-6-080: NONCONFORMITIES CREATED BY PUBLIC ACTION:
A.   When area or setbacks of a legally created lot or parcel are reduced as
the result of conveyance to a federal, state or local government for a public
purpose and the remaining area or setback is at least seventy five percent
(75%) of the required minimum in the zone where it is located, the lot or
parcel shall be deemed to be in compliance with the minimum lot size and
setback standards of this title without any need for a variance.
B.   When a lot or parcel is determined to be nonconforming, other than as to
lot area or setbacks, as a result of the conveyance of property to a federal,
state, or local government for a public purpose, the owner may continue the
existing use of the lot, parcel, or structure on the lot or parcel. Any
subsequent alterations to the lot or parcel, other than the portion of the lot
or parcel rendered nonconforming by public action, shall comply with this title
and shall not increase the degree of nonconformity caused by the public action.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1534, 4-12-2022)
9-6-090: ABANDONMENT:
Any nonconforming use, structure, or other nonconformity which is not thus
occupied or so used for a continuous period of one year shall be deemed
abandoned and shall not thereafter be reoccupied or used except in a manner
that conforms to the requirements of this title.
A.   Presumption Of Abandonment: A nonconforming use, structure, or other
nonconformity shall be presumed abandoned when any of the following occurs:
1.   The owner has in writing or by public statement indicated intent to
abandon the use, structure, or other nonconformity;
2.   A less intensive use has replaced the original nonconforming use;
3.   The owner has physically changed the structure or its permanent equipment
in such a way as to indicate a change in use or activity to something other
than the nonconforming use; or
4.   The structure has been removed through applicable procedures for the
condemnation of unsafe structures.
B.   Overcoming Presumption Of Abandonment: A presumption of abandonment may be
rebutted upon evidence presented by the owner showing no intent to abandon the
use, structure, or other nonconformity. Such evidence may include proof that
during the alleged period of abandonment the owner has done either of the
following:
1.   Maintained the lot and structure, if any, in accordance with the building
code; or
2.   Has actively and continuously marketed the lot or structure for sale or
lease. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-100: DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS:
In all cases, the property owner shall have the burden of establishing that a
nonconforming lot, structure, or use lawfully exists under this title. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-110: NONCONFORMING USES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH AND SAFETY:
No provisions of this chapter shall be construed to allow the continuance of
any nonconforming structure or use when it is detrimental to the health,
safety, or welfare of the public. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-120: EXTENSION OF TIME FOR RECOVERY OF INVESTMENT:
The zoning administrator may suspend any requirement that a nonconforming use,
structure, lot, parcel, or other nonconformity come into compliance with the
provisions of this title if the owner of the affected property demonstrates
that he has not recovered or amortized the amount of his investment in the
nonconforming use, structure, lot, parcel, or other nonconformity.
A.   Written Request For Extension Required: A property owner shall submit to
the zoning administrator a written request for an extension of time needed to
recover his investment in the affected property.
B.   Information Required: The following information shall accompany the
request:
1.   The amount of the owner's investment in the use, structure, lot, parcel,
or other nonconformity from the time it became nonconforming.
2.   The amount of such investment that has been realized to date and an
estimate of the amounts that will be realized on the date the time limit
expires.
3.   Evidence of any lease or purchase obligations undertaken in reliance on
any previously issued licenses or permits applying to the use, structure, lot,
parcel, or other nonconformity, including any contingency clauses therein
permitting termination of such lease. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-6-130: BILLBOARDS EXEMPT:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to billboards. Nonconforming
billboards shall be terminated in accordance with applicable provisions of Utah
Code Annotated. In the event such provisions are repealed, nonconforming
billboards shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1132, 2-
17-2015)
9-6-140: APPEALS:
Any adversely affected party by a decision of the zoning administrator or other
official enforcing the provisions of this chapter may appeal for relief
therefrom to the appeals and variance hearing officer as provided in this
title. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-7-010: Purpose
9-7-020: Scope
9-7-030: Enforcement Authority
9-7-040: Issuance Of Permits
9-7-050: Types Of Violations
9-7-060: Remedies
9-7-070: Nonconforming Use As Affirmative Defense
9-7-080: Enforcement Procedures
9-7-090: Other Enforcement Matters
9-7-100: Appeals
9-7-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the remedies, penalties, and
procedures for enforcement of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-020: SCOPE:
The remedies, penalties, procedures, and other matters set forth in this
chapter shall apply to any violation of the provisions of this title. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-030: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
This title shall be enforced by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-040: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
All department officials and public employees of the city who are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this
title and shall issue no permit, certificate, or license for uses, buildings,
or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title. Any permit,
certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title,
intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. Any certificate or permit
issued upon a false statement of fact which is material to the issuance thereof
shall be void. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-050: TYPES OF VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this title,
cause the violation of any provision of this title, or fail or refuse to do
some act required under this title, including any of the acts set forth in this
section:
A.   Development Or Use Without Permit: To engage in any development, use,
construction, remodeling, or other activity of any nature upon the land and
improvements thereon subject to the jurisdiction of the city without all of the
required permits, approvals, certificates, and other forms of authorization
required by this title or other city ordinance in order to conduct or engage in
such activity.
B.   Development Or Use Inconsistent With Permit: To engage in any development,
use, construction, remodeling, or other activity which is contrary to the terms
and conditions of any permit, approval, certificate, or other form of
authorization required to engage in such activity. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
C.   Development Or Use Inconsistent With Conditions Of Approval: To violate,
by act or omission, any lawful term, condition, or qualification placed by the
city council, planning commission, appeals and variance hearing officer, or
officer of the city, as applicable, upon a required permit, certificate, or
other form of authorization granted by the city council, planning commission,
appeals and variance hearing officer, or other city officer, allowing the use,
development, or other activity upon land or improvements thereon. (Ord. 815, 4-
1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
D.   Development Or Use Inconsistent With This Title: To erect, construct,
reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain, move, or use any building or structure,
or to use any land in violation of this title.
E.   Making Lot Or Setback Nonconforming: To reduce or diminish any lot area so
that setbacks or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this title and
the applicable final plat or plan.
F.   Increasing Intensity Of Use: To increase the intensity of use of any land
or structure, except in accordance with the procedural and substantive
requirements of this title.
G.   Removing, Defacing, Or Obscuring Notice: To remove, deface, obscure, or
otherwise interfere with any notice required by this title.
H.   Continuing Violation: To continue any of the above violations. Each day a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-060: REMEDIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this title shall be subject to the
enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this chapter and by Utah law,
including any of the following: (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
A.   Withhold Permits: The city may deny or withhold all permits, certificates,
or other forms of authorization pertaining to any land or improvements when an
uncorrected violation exists pursuant to this title or to a condition or
qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization
previously granted by the city council, planning commission, appeals and
variance hearing officer, or other city officer. The city may, instead of
withholding or denying an authorization, grant such authorization subject to
the condition that the violation be corrected. The provisions of this section
shall apply regardless of whether the original applicant or current owner is
responsible for the violation in question. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
B.   Revoke Permits: Any permit may be revoked when the zoning administrator or
his designee determines that actions taken thereunder do not conform to plans,
specifications, or conditions of the permit; that the same was procured by
false representation or was issued by mistake; or that any of the provisions of
this title are being violated.
1.   Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the owner, his or
her agent, or contractor, or upon any person employed at the site of the
building or structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a
prominent location; and, thereafter, no such construction shall proceed.
2.   Upon revocation of a building permit which was issued by mistake, the
owner shall meet with the city manager or his designee to determine in what
respect a mistake was made. When plans are in conflict with ordinances,
resolutions, regulations, or requirements, and when construction has not
progressed to a stage where modification of the plans would require substantial
alteration of the structures in place, the plans shall be modified to conform
with all applicable requirements. When construction has progressed to a stage
where compliance would require substantial alteration of construction in place,
the owner shall meet with the city manager or his designee to negotiate
possible changes in the plans which would more nearly conform to applicable
ordinances, resolutions, regulations, or requirements.
3.   When a mistake has been made calculating the fee for any permit, the
proper fee shall be charged.
C.   Stop Work: In accordance with its power to stop work under the building
code, the city may stop work, with or without revoking permits, on any building
or structure on any land on which exists an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this title or permit or other form of authorization issued
hereunder.
D.   Revoke Plan Or Other Approvals: Where a violation of this title involves
failure to comply with approved plans or conditions upon which the approval of
such plans was made subject, the city may, upon notice to the applicant and
other known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits
affected) and after a hearing, revoke the plan or other approval, or condition
its continuance on strict compliance, the provision of security, or such other
conditions as the city may reasonably impose.
E.   Remove Signs: When a sign is illegally located within a city right of way,
on any city owned property, or in the case of an emergency or an identified
hazard, the zoning administrator may, without notice, cause the immediate
removal of such dangerous or defective sign which presents a hazard to the
public or which is in the public right of way.
1.   Such action by the city shall be at the expense of the owner and shall
include the actual cost of repair or removal of the sign, plus fifteen percent
(15%) of such amount for administrative and overhead costs.
2.   If the owner fails to pay the amount due within thirty (30) days from the
date of billing, the city may initiate legal action against the owner as
provided by law to collect such costs and expenses, including interest at the
legal rate and reasonable attorney fees.
F.   Injunctive Relief: The city may seek an injunction or other equitable
relief in the district court to stop any violation of this title or of a
permit, certificate, or other form of authorization granted hereunder.
G.   Abatement: The city may seek a court order from the district court in the
nature of mandamus, abatement, or other action or proceeding to abate or remove
a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition
in which they existed prior to the violation. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
H.   Penalties: Violation of any of the provisions of this title shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 751, 4-3-2007)
I.   Other Remedies: The city shall have such other remedies as are and as may
be from time to time provided by Utah law or city ordinance for the violation
of any provision of this title.
J.   Remedies Cumulative: These remedies shall be cumulative. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001)
9-7-070: NONCONFORMING USE AS AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to the enforcement of the provisions of this
title that the action complained of is a legally nonconforming lot, structure,
or use as set forth in chapter 22 of this title. The property owner shall have
the burden of establishing that a nonconforming lot, structure, or use lawfully
exists under this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-080: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A.   Inspection Of Buildings, Structures, And Land Uses: The zoning
administrator is hereby authorized to inspect all buildings and structures in
the course of construction, modification, or repair and to inspect land uses to
determine compliance with the provisions of this title.
B.   Right Of Entry: Authorized city personnel shall have the right to enter
any building for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of
this title. Such right of entry shall be exercised only at a reasonable hour.
In no case shall entry be made to any building in the absence of the owner or
tenant thereof without consent of the owner or tenant, or a written order of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
C.   Violation: The zoning administrator shall investigate any purported
violation of this title.
D.   Interference With Enforcement Personnel: It shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with lawful enforcement activities.
E.   Other City Departments To Assist With Enforcement Activities: At the
request of the city manager, other city departments shall assist in the
administration of enforcement activities authorized by this title.
F.   Notice: In the case of violations not involving continuing construction or
development, or any emergency situation, the zoning administrator shall give
written notice of the nature of the violation to the owner of the land and to
any person who is a party to any relevant permit, certificate, or approval. The
persons receiving such notice shall have thirty (30) days to correct the
violation before further enforcement action.
G.   Immediate Enforcement: In the case of a violation involving either
continuing construction or development, or an emergency situation (as
reasonably determined by the zoning administrator) the city may use the
enforcement powers and remedies available to it under this chapter without
prior notice. In such case, the zoning administrator shall send the notice to
the same parties set forth in the previous section simultaneously with the
beginning of enforcement action.
H.   Enforcement And Abatement: Any building or structure set up, erected,
constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained; or any land,
building, or premises used contrary to the provisions of this title is hereby
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Upon request by the zoning
administrator the city attorney may commence action or proceedings for the
abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The
city attorney may take such other steps and may apply to such court as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or
structure, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm, or corporation from
setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using any building, structure,
or property contrary to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-090: OTHER ENFORCEMENT MATTERS:
A.   Other Powers: In addition to the enforcement powers specified in this
chapter, the city may exercise any and all enforcement powers granted to it by
Utah law, as may be amended from time to time.
B.   Continuation: Nothing in this title shall prohibit the continuation of
previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the city pursuant to previous and
valid resolutions, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-7-100: APPEALS:
Any adversely affected party by a decision of the zoning administrator or other
official enforcing the provisions of this chapter may appeal for relief
therefrom to the appeals and variance hearing officer as provided in this
title. (Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
CHAPTER 8
ZONE ESTABLISHMENT
SECTION:
9-8-010: Zone Establishment
9-8-020: Zone Purposes
9-8-030: Official Zoning Map
9-8-040: Interpretation Of Zoning Boundaries
9-8-050: Clarification Of Zoning
9-8-060: Newly Annexed Territories
9-8-010: ZONE ESTABLISHMENT:
In order to accomplish the purposes of the Draper City general plan and this
title, the following zones (or zoning districts), along with their accompanying
abbreviations, are hereby established as follows:
A.   Agricultural zones:
 
A5 Agricultural
A2 Agricultural
 
B.   Residential zones:
RA1 Residential agricultural
RA2 Residential agricultural
RH  Single-family residential (hillside)
R3  Single-family residential
R4  Single-family residential
R5  Single-family residential
RM1 Multiple-family residential
RM2 Multiple-family residential
 
C.   Commercial zones:
CN   Neighborhood commercial
CC   Community commercial
CR   Regional commercial
CG   General commercial
CI   Interchange commercial
CBP  Business/manufacturing park
CO1  Professional office
CO2  Professional office
O-R  Office residential
TC   Town center
DC   Destination commercial
CS   Commercial services
MARF Major freeway arterial frontage
CBU  Commercial buffer
 
D.   Public facility zones:
 
PF Public facility
OS Open space
PI Public institutional
 
E.   Manufacturing zones:
 
M1 Light manufacturing
M2 Major manufacturing
 
F.   Special purpose and overlay zones:
 
MPC Master planned community
OSL Sensitive lands overlay
OHD Historic district overlay
OMP Master plan overlay
CSD Commercial special district
 
(Ord. 1096, 4-29-2014; amd. Ord 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020; Ord.
1447, 8-4-2020)
9-8-020: ZONE PURPOSES:
In addition to the general purposes of this title as set forth in section
9-1-030 of this title, the various zones each serve more specific purposes as
set forth below:
A.   Agricultural Zones: Agricultural zones are established to preserve and
protect agricultural lands and related activities, to permit activities
normally and necessarily related to agricultural production, and to prohibit
land uses that may undermine continued agricultural activity.
1.   The purpose of the A5 zone is to maintain the status of large tracts of
agricultural land by allowing most commercial agricultural uses. Typical uses
include farming, dairy, and cattle production.
2.   The purpose of the A2 zone is to allow a lifestyle that includes generally
noncommercial agricultural uses on large lots. Typical uses include estate
lots, noncommercial stables, and other equestrian facilities.
B.   Residential Zones: Residential zones are established to provide a wide
range of residential land uses at various densities. These zones are intended
to protect the stability of neighborhoods and to encourage, collectively,
diverse types of desirable new residential development and to protect existing
residential uses.
1.   The purpose of the RA1 and RA2 zones is to foster low density development
with little impact on its surroundings and municipal services; to generally
preserve the character of the city's semirural areas; and to promote and
preserve conditions favorable to large lot family life, including the keeping
of limited numbers of animals and fowl. The predominant use in these zones is
intended to be detached single-family dwellings, protected from encroachment by
commercial and industrial uses.
2.   The purpose of the RH zone is to allow large scale, master planned
residential development in foothill and mountainous areas. Developed areas are
intended to consist of various types of clustered dwellings on relatively small
lots, together with carefully limited commercial development. To achieve
relatively low overall densities, developed areas are intended to be offset by
large tracts of conservation land.
3.   The purpose of the R3 zone is to permit medium density residential
development without special mitigation requirements. This zone is intended to
provide incentives to foster residential development with little impact on its
surroundings and on municipal services, and to generally preserve the semirural
character called for in the density element of the general plan.
4.   The purpose of the R4 and R5 zones is to permit medium to medium-high
density residential developments with single-family homes. These zones are
intended to foster thriving and well maintained neighborhoods that allow
upscale single-family homes on smaller lots that require less maintenance and
provide a balanced lifestyle.
5.   The purpose of the RM1 and RM2 zones is to permit well designed
apartments, townhomes, twin homes, and condominiums at relatively high
densities that are appropriately buffered from and compatible with surrounding
land uses.
C.   Commercial Zones: Commercial zones are established to provide areas where
a combination of business, commercial, entertainment, office, and related
activities may be established, maintained and protected. Commercial zones are
intended to provide a suitable environment for those commercial and service
uses which are vital to the economic base of the city.
1.   The purpose of the CN zone is to provide areas where convenience buying
outlets, having small trade areas, may be established to serve surrounding
residential neighborhoods. This zone is intended to promote a combination of
retail and service facilities which, in character and scale, meet day to day
needs of nearby residents.
2.   The purpose of the CC zone is to provide areas where commercial uses may
be established which are generally oriented toward local residents rather than
out of town patrons. Uses typical of this zone include planned retail and
office development.
3.   The purpose of the CR zone is to provide areas where a combination of
destination oriented business, retail commercial, entertainment, and related
uses may be established, maintained and protected to serve both residents and
nonresidents of the city. Typical uses in this zone include large scale, master
planned commercial centers with outlying commercial pads, big box stores, and
offices.
4.   The purpose of the CG zone is to provide areas to accommodate commercial
uses which are not within shopping centers of integrated design. This zone is
intended to apply to existing "strip commercial" developments. The zone should
not be used for new commercial development unless integrated shopping center
development is not practical or desirable because of difficult size, shape,
topography, or similar problems related to land otherwise deemed to be
appropriate for commercial use. Typical uses in this zone include offices,
retail stores, personal services, heavy commercial, and institutional uses.
5.   The purpose of the CI zone is to provide areas with visibility and access
from Interstate 15 that are commuter and traveler oriented. Typical uses
include lodging facilities, personal services, travel plazas, restaurants and
fast food facilities, and commuter parking.
6.   The purpose of the CBP zone is to provide aesthetically attractive planned
developments having a mix of office, research and development, light
manufacturing, and limited retail uses. Typical uses in this zone include
offices, clean indoor manufacturing facilities, service retail, restaurants,
athletic clubs, personal service shops, medical offices, office/warehouse
buildings, and research facilities.
7.   The purpose of the CO zone is to provide locations primarily along
arterial or major collector streets which will accommodate offices or
laboratories for professional persons and other related uses. The zone is
intended to provide availability of professional services conveniently to all
neighborhoods in the city. Two (2) CO zones are provided: CO1 and CO2. CO1
zones are intended to allow office and related uses on relatively small tracts
of land so they can be conveniently and compatibly located adjacent to
residential areas. CO2 zones allow larger office and related use developments
adjacent to commercial areas and away from residential areas. Typical uses in
this zone include offices for doctors, dentists, accountants, and other similar
professions, medical and dental laboratories, and pharmacies.
8.   The purpose of the TC town center zone is to provide a method for
implementing special provisions found within the general plan and the Draper
City conservation area master plan regarding the establishment and promotion of
a historic core area of the community characterized by stringent design
standards for buildings, public spaces, site design and landscaping with a
harmonious mix of commercial uses, limited high density residential uses and
civic areas.
9.   The purpose of the DC zone is to provide an area that is uniquely regional
in nature, with lodging, food establishments, retail, office, service uses, and
entertainment as the only allowed uses.
10.   The purpose of the CS commercial services zone is to provide areas for
uses that are not typically allowed in commercial zones but are lower impact
and less intrusive in nature as they relate to surrounding residential
neighborhoods. This zone is intended to be relatively limited in scope and
application. Typical uses may include office and storage units.
11.   The Major Freeway Arterial Frontage zone is located at approximately
14875 South Minuteman Drive bordered by Minuteman Drive and Marion Vista.
Railroad lines abut the property on the south. The size, unusual shape and
unique location of the property allows for a master planned project with a
potential for office, commercial, multiple-family dwellings, and other uses.
The property has immediate proximity to major transportation corridors such as
Interstate-15 Frontage Road (Minuteman Drive) and almost direct access to I-15
at the 14600 South interchange. The property has a distinct topography and
exposure to freeway traffic and is located away from single-family residential
neighborhoods.
12.   The primary purpose of the Commercial Buffer Zone (CBU) is to support low
intensity commercial uses that act as a buffer between existing residential
neighborhoods and commercial development. Adopted design guidelines may be
applicable when zones are adjacent to the town center (TC) zoning
classification.
D.   Public Facility Zones: Public facility zones are established to provide
public or quasi-public uses.
1.   The purpose of the PF zone is to provide areas for facilities owned by
public and quasi-public entities and which utilize relatively large areas of
land. This zone is intended to provide immediate recognition of such areas on
the official zoning map. Typical uses in this zone are cemeteries, hospitals,
open air theaters, public parks, public schools, and public utility facilities.
2.   The purpose of the OS zone is to recognize on the official zoning map
areas which are open and generally undevelopable due to their sensitive
environmental nature and/or the unavailability of adequate public facilities,
such as conservation areas and national forest land.
3.   The purpose of the PI zone is to provide areas for educational
institutions, municipal uses, and athletic facilities, whether publicly or
privately owned, that host organized team sports. These uses would utilize
relatively large areas of land, and would be established for the health and
betterment of the community at large. This zone is intended to provide
immediate recognition of such areas on the official zoning map. Typical uses in
this zone are schools, parks, municipal facilities, and sports complexes.
E.   Manufacturing Zones: Manufacturing zones are established to provide areas
where manufacturing and industrial processes may be conducted.
1.   The purpose of the M1 zone is to provide areas for uses involving
processing and assembly of manufactured goods, warehousing, and material
storage. Uses which generate excessive noise, vibration, odor, dust, and fumes
are excluded from this zone.
2.   The purpose of the M2 zone is to provide areas where uses involving
industrial processes and natural resource extraction may be permitted without
negatively impacting other areas of the city, especially when undertaken on a
large scale. To assure compatibility with uses in other adjacent zones, most
manufacturing operations are allowed only as conditional uses.
F.   Special Purpose And Overlay Zones: Special purpose and overlay zones are
established to provide a means of implementing supplemental regulations that
apply geographically, regardless of the underlying base zone, if applicable.
Whenever the regulations of a base zone and an overlay zone conflict, the
overlay zone regulations shall apply.
1.   The purpose of the OSL zone is to provide regulations to protect sensitive
land areas such as hillsides, floodplains, and river parkway areas.
2.   The purpose of the OHD zone is to implement regulations designed to
promote the preservation of structures and sites having historical, cultural,
or architectural significance, and to foster economic development consistent
with historic preservation plans adopted by the city.
3.   The purpose of the OMP zone is to provide a method for implementing
special provisions found in various master plans, such as the Bangerter
interchange area, Draper City conservation area, gateway, northern gateway, and
Southpointe master plans.
4.   The purpose of the MPC zone is to promote high quality, innovative and
creative large scale development that includes a mixture of residential,
commercial and employment uses, varying densities, heights, setbacks, lot sizes
and sufficient diversity of housing types. The MPC zone is designed to preserve
open space, provide parks, trails and recreational uses with a desirable living
and working environment with unique identity and character.
5.   The purpose of each CSD zone is to permit a compatible, master planned mix
of day and evening uses consisting of office, light manufacturing, retail,
residential, recreation and open space components. Although development size
and use mix will vary from location to location, each development is intended
to consist of well designed, architecturally integrated structures which are
appropriately landscaped and buffered from surrounding land uses.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 693, 7-11-2006; Ord. 698, 8-1-2006; Ord. 806, 2-
19-2008; Ord. 913, 9-1-2009; Ord. 996, 1-17-2012; Ord. 1096, 4-29-2014; Ord.
1408, 10- 15-2019; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1447, 8-4-2020; Ord. 1479, 2-16-
2021)
9-8-030: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
A.   Zones: The location and boundaries of all zones described in this chapter,
including subsequent amendments, shall be shown on an official zoning map,
entitled "city of Draper official zoning map". The official zoning map,
including all boundaries, notations, and other data shown thereon, is hereby
adopted by this reference as if set forth in its entirety. All territory within
the city shall be subject to the land use restrictions set forth for such
zones, as shown upon the official zoning map.
B.   Amendments: Amendments to the boundaries of a specific zone shown on the
official zoning map shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions set
forth in section
9-5-060 of this title.
C.   Map Updates: The zoning administrator shall update the official zoning map
as soon as possible after amendments are adopted by the city council. Upon
entering any such amendment on the map, the zoning administrator shall note on
the map the date of the revision.
D.   Historic Reference Copy: A print of each updated official zoning map shall
be given to the city recorder to be filed and kept for historical reference.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-8-040: INTERPRETATION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES:
A.   Applicability: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone
shown on the official zoning map, the provisions of this section shall apply to
determine the location of such boundary.
B.   Centerlines Or Edges: Zone boundaries indicated as approximately following
the edge or centerline, as the case may be, of a street, alley, railroad,
highway or other public way, incorporated municipality, floodplain, body of
water or topographic feature that was in existence when the boundary was
established, shall be interpreted as following such edge or centerline.
C.   Lot, Block, And Tract Lines: Zone boundaries indicated as approximately
following platted lot lines, or block or parcel tract boundaries shall be
interpreted as following such lines.
D.   Street Vacations: When a public road, street, or alley is officially
vacated, such property shall have the same zoning as the adjacent property. In
the event vacated property is adjacent to two (2) zones, each zone shall extend
to the centerline of the vacated right of way.
E.   Uncertainties: When a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground
is at variance with one shown on the official zoning map, or in case any other
uncertainty exists with respect to a zone boundary, the zoning administrator
shall determine the boundary location, subject to appeal as provided in this
title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-8-050: CLARIFICATION OF ZONING:
A.   Ambiguous Zone Classification: Any property not clearly zoned on the
city's official zone maps or determined to be subject to a zone classification
under this title is classified in the agricultural zone, A5, and shall be
subject to A5 zone requirements.
B.   Ambiguous Use Classification: If ambiguity arises concerning the
appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of
this title, the following process applies:
1.   Application: An applicant may submit a classification request to the
Zoning Administrator to determine if a proposed business use aligns with an
existing permitted or conditional use in this title. The application shall
include information specified by the Zoning Administrator, such as use
description, operational details, and site plans.
2.   Zoning Administrator Review: The Zoning Administrator shall determine if
the proposed use is substantially similar to an existing permitted or
conditional use based on the following criteria:
a.   Type of goods and services provided;
b.   Number of customers and employees;
c.   Amount and type of on-site storage; and
d.   Noise, odor, or vibration generated.
3.   Determination Of Existing Use: If the Zoning Administrator determines the
proposed use is substantially similar to an existing use, the applicant may
proceed under the regulations applicable to that use.
4.   New Or Unlisted Business Use: If the Zoning Administrator determines the
proposed use is a new or unlisted business use not substantially similar to an
existing use, the applicant may submit the application to the City Council for
review. The City Council shall review the application at a public meeting
within sixty (60) days of submission, provided the applicant responds to
requests for additional information within ten (10) business days and attends
required meetings. The City Council shall approve or deny the new or unlisted
business use based on consistency with the Draper City General Plan, public
health and safety, and zoning compatibility. If approved, the City Council
shall designate one or more appropriate zones for the use and direct staff to
amend this title to incorporate the use as a permitted or conditional use in
those zones. For site-specific or temporary uses, the City Council may
designate zones via resolution, provided staff proposes a code amendment within
one hundred eighty (180) days for uses intended for broader application. If
denied, the City Council shall provide written reasons for the denial, and
staff shall amend this title to add the use to the prohibited uses list in
Section
9-3-060A.
5.   Appeals: The Zoning Administrator's determination under Subsection B2 or
B3 may be appealed to the authority designated under section
9-5-180, within the timeframe specified therein. The City Council's decision
under Subsection B4 may be appealed as provided in Section
9-5-060F.
C.   Ambiguous Development Standards Classification: If ambiguity arises
concerning height, yard, area, or other property development standards, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine the appropriate development standard,
subject to appeal as provided in section
9-5-180 of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1662, 7-1-2025)
9-8-060: NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORIES:
Territory which is annexed shall be deemed to be zoned A5 immediately upon
annexation or as otherwise expressly provided in an annexation agreement. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 9
AGRICULTURAL ZONES
SECTION:
9-9-010: Purpose
9-9-020: Scope
9-9-030: Uses Allowed
9-9-040: Development Standards
9-9-050: Regulations Of General Applicability
9-9-060: Regulations For Specific Uses
9-9-070: Special Regulations
9-9-080: Use And Development Standards Tables
9-9-010: PURPOSE:
See subsection
9-8-020A of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-9-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property located in an
agricultural zone as shown on the official zoning map. No building, structure
or real property shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, structurally or substantially altered, or enlarged, except as set
forth in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or
limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-9-030: USES ALLOWED:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within agricultural zones shall be as set forth in section
9-9-080,
table 9-9-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional use not shown in section
9-9-080,
table 9-9-1 of this chapter shall be prohibited unless the zoning administrator
determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or conditional use.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-9-080,
table 9-9-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the same zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established.
3.   Accessory uses in agricultural zones shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
Garage sales, subject to applicable standards of title 6, chapter 16,
"Temporary Uses", of this code.
Garages, carports, and off street parking areas, subject to applicable
standards of chapter 25, "Parking", of this title.
Hobby activities when conducted by an occupant of the premises solely for
personal enjoyment, amusement, or recreation and which does not conflict with
any other city ordinance.
Home occupations, subject to applicable standards of chapter 34, "Home
Occupations", of this title.
Household pets.
Nurseries and greenhouses, when used for family food production.
Playhouses, patios, porches, gazebos, and incidental storage buildings.
Seasonal farm stands subject to applicable standards of chapter 27,
"Supplementary Development Standards", of this title.
Solar energy systems.
Swimming pools and hot tubs for use by residents and their guests.
Temporary real estate offices, subject to applicable standards of title 6,
chapter 16, "Temporary Uses", of this Code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord.
1661, 7-1-2025)
9-9-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards within Agricultural Zones shall be as set forth in
section
9-9-080,
table 9-9-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-9-050: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
The use and development of real property in Agricultural Zones shall conform to
regulations of general applicability as set forth in the following chapters of
this title:
A.   Chapter 22, "Design Standards And Guidelines".
B.   Chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening".
C.   Chapter 24, "Natural Resources Inventory".
D.   Chapter 25, "Parking".
E.   Chapter 26, "Signs".
F.   Chapter 27, "Supplementary Development Standards". (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-9-060: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
To the extent that use and development of real property includes any matter
encompassed by a regulation for a specific use as set forth in article 6,
chapters 30 through 41 of this title, such regulation shall apply in addition
to the requirements of this chapter and shall prevail over any conflicting
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-9-070: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A.   Increased Height Limits: Notwithstanding the height limitations shown in
section
9-9-080,
table 9-9-2 of this chapter greater building height may be allowed in all
Agricultural Zones pursuant to a conditional use permit. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-9-080: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLES:
TABLE 9-9-1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN AGRICULTURAL ZONES
Use Zones
    A5 A2
Use                         Zones
                            A5                        A2
Agricultural uses:
Agricultural business       P                         P
Agricultural industry       C                         C
Agricultural processing     P                         NP
Agriculture                 P                         P
Animal specialties          P                         P
Animals and fowl for        P                         P
recreation and family food  (1 animal unit per 20,000 (1 animal unit per 20,000
production (subject to      square feet of total lot  square feet of total lot
section                     or parcel area)           or parcel area)
9-27-050 of this title)
Cannabis production         NP                        P
establishment
Keeping of chickens for
familial gain (subject to   P                         P
section
9-27-055 of this title)
Residential uses:
Dwelling, single-family     P                         P
Dwelling, single-family     See
with accessory dwelling     chapter 31 of this title
Dwelling, temporary         P                         P
Residential facility for    See
elderly persons             chapter 38 of this title
Residential facility for    See
persons with a disability   chapter 38 of this title
Temporary construction or   See
model home office           title 6, chapter 16 of this Code
Public and civic uses:
Cemetery                    P                         P
Charter school              P                         P
Church or place of worship  P                         P
Golf course                 C                         C
Government service          P                         P
Higher education facility,  P                         P
public
Park                        P                         P
Private school              C                         C
Public school               P                         P
Public utility substation   See
                            chapter 36 of this title
Riding academy or stable    P                         P
School, elementary, middle, P                         P
or high
Utility, minor              P                         P
Municipal uses:
Franchise Municipal use     P                         P
Municipal use               P                         P
Commercial uses:
Agricultural sales and      P                         C
service
Animal breeder              P                         P
Cattery                     P                         P
Daycare, general            P                         P
Daycare, limited            P                         P
Kennel                      P                         P
Low power radio services    See
facility                    chapter 41 of this title
Medical cannabis pharmacy   P                         P
Preschool, general          P                         P
Veterinary service          P                         P
Accessory uses              See subsection
                            9-9-030B of this chapter
 
(Ord. 1320, 4-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1394, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord.
1438, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1475, 3-2-2021)
TABLE 9-9-2
Development Standard Zones
                     A5 A2
Development Standard                        Zones
                                            A5                A2
Lot standards:
Minimum lot area, single-family dwelling    5 acres           2 acres
Minimum lot area single-family with         5 acres           2 acres
accessory dwelling
Minimum lot area, main buildings other than 5 acres           2 acres
single-family dwellings
Maximum lot depth (as a multiple of lot     5 times lot width 5 times lot width
width at widest point)
Minimum lot frontage                        50 feet           50 feet
Minimum lot width1                          100 feet          100 feet
Building standards:
Maximum floor area of all structures at     10 percent        10 percent
ground level as a percentage of lot area
Maximum height, main buildings2             35 feet           35 feet
Maximum height, accessory buildings2        20 feet           20 feet
Setback standards - front yard3:
Main buildings on interior and corner lots3 30 feet           30 feet
Setback standards - rear yard3:
Main buildings on interior lots3            20 feet           20 feet
Main buildings on corner lots3              12 feet           12 feet
Accessory buildings of 120 square feet or   No requirement
less
Accessory buildings greater than 120 square 20 feet4
feet
Barns and stables                           See section
                                            9-27-050 of this title
Swimming pools                              See section
                                            9-27-180 of this title
Setback standards - side yard3:
Main buildings on interior lots3,4          12 feet           12 feet
Accessory buildings of 120 square feet or   No requirement
less
Accessory buildings greater than 120 square 20 feet4
feet
Barns and stables                           See section
                                            9-27-050 of this title
Swimming pools                              See section
                                            9-27-180 of this title
 
Notes:
    1.    Corner lots should be platted 10 feet wider than interior lots of
subdivisions to accommodate 2 front yards in accordance with section
17-5-020 of this Code.
    2.    Also see height provisions of section
9-27-120 of this title and section
9-9-070 of this chapter.
    3.    Except as modified in section
9-27-140, "Lots And Yards", of this title.
    4.    Must meet drainage and fire regulations.
(Ord. 1395, 7-2-2019, eff. retroactive to 5-9-2019)
CHAPTER 10
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
9-10-010: Purpose
9-10-020: Scope
9-10-030: Uses Allowed
9-10-040: Development Standards
9-10-050: Regulations Of General Applicability
9-10-060: Regulations For Specific Uses
9-10-065: Regulations For Single-Family Dwellings In RM1 And RM2 Zones (Rep. by
Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
9-10-070: Special Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 526, 4-8-2003)
9-10-075: Allowed Driveways
9-10-080: Planned Residential Development Overlay Zone
9-10-090: Use And Development Standards Tables
9-10-010: PURPOSE:
See subsection
9-8-020B of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-10-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property located in a
residential zone as shown on the official zoning map. No building, structure or
real property shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, structurally or substantially altered, or enlarged except as set forth
in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2001)
9-10-030: USES ALLOWED:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within residential zones shall be as set forth in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional use not shown in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-1 of this chapter shall be prohibited unless the zoning
administrator determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or
conditional use.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the same zone, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established.
3.   Accessory uses in residential zones shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
Garage sales, subject to applicable standards of title 6, chapter 16,
"Temporary Uses", of this code.
Garages, carports, and off street parking areas, subject to applicable
standards of chapter 25, "Parking", of this title.
Hobby activities when conducted by an occupant of the premises solely for
personal enjoyment, amusement, or recreation and which does not conflict with
any other city ordinance.
Home occupations, subject to applicable standards of chapter 34, "Home
Occupations", of this title.
Household pets.
Nurseries and greenhouses, when used for family food production.
Playhouses, patios, porches, gazebos, and incidental storage buildings.
Seasonal farm stands in RA1 and RA2 only, subject to applicable standards of
chapter 27, "Supplementary Development Standards", of this title.
Solar energy systems.
Swimming pools and hot tubs for use by residents and their guests. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
9-10-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards within residential zones shall be as set forth in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-3 of this chapter, and in this section. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
A.   Accessory Buildings: The following requirements shall apply to any
accessory building in a residential zone:
1.   All accessory buildings, regardless of size, shall be subject to the
following regulations:
a.   An accessory building shall not encroach upon any easement or right of
way, except as provided in section
9-27-070 of this title.
b.   The combined square footage of all detached accessory buildings shall not
exceed eight percent (8%) of the total lot area.
c.   Accessory buildings shall not be located within ten feet (10') of any
dwelling or building located upon an adjoining lot.
d.   Accessory buildings shall be set at least six feet (6') from the main
building. (Ord. 769, 8-7-2007)
e.   Accessory buildings on a corner lot shall meet the same front yard
setbacks as the main building. For purposes of locating an accessory building
on a corner lot, the "front wall plane" is the plane of the main building
containing the primary entrance.(Ord. 769, 8-7-2007; amd. Ord. 1251, 3-21-2017)
f.   In no case shall an accessory building be built into the required front
yard setback.
g.   Separate meter connections for water, sewer, or gas utilities shall not be
permitted for any accessory building.
2.   In addition to the requirements in subsection A1 of this section, the
following requirements shall apply to accessory buildings:
a.   Accessory buildings two hundred (200) square feet in floor area or under
shall:
(1)   Be located behind the front wall plane of the main building.
(2)   Meet all applicable fire and building code requirements.
(3)   Not exceed twelve feet (12') in height to the peak of roof, or highest
roof point, whichever is greater.
b.   Accessory buildings over two hundred (200) square feet shall:
(1)   Be located behind the front wall plane of the main building;
(2)   Be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property lines;
(3)   Not have exterior walls exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height, measured
from the average grade of the lot as found in the building code presently
adopted by Draper City;
(4)   Not have a roof exceed a twelve to twelve (12:12) pitch; and
(5)   Not exceed twenty five feet (25') as measured from average finish grade
of the lot to the peak of the roof.
B.   Temporary Accessory Structures: The standards for temporary accessory
structures related to a seasonal farm stand shall be as set forth in Section 9-
27-260. (Ord. 769, 8-7-2007; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
9-10-050: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
The use and development of real property in residential zones shall conform to
regulations of general applicability as set forth in the following chapters of
this title:
A.   Chapter 22, "Design Standards And Guidelines".
B.   Chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening".
C.   Chapter 24, "Natural Resources Inventory".
D.   Chapter 25, "Parking".
E.   Chapter 26, "Signs".
F.   Chapter 27, "Supplementary Development Standards". (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-10-060: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
To the extent that use and development of real property includes any matter
encompassed by a regulation for a specific use as set forth in article 6,
chapters 30 through 41 of this title, such regulation shall apply in addition
to the requirements of this chapter and the more restrictive requirement shall
prevail. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-10-065: REGULATIONS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS IN RM1 AND RM2 ZONES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
9-10-070: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 526, 4-8-2003)
9-10-075: ALLOWED DRIVEWAYS:
Any legally created parcel in a residential zone shall be allowed at least one
driveway access to a public street. The first or primary driveway access shall
be approved as part of the site plan review associated with the issuance of a
building permit. Additional drive approaches may be approved for parcels in the
RA1, RA2, R3, R4, R5 and RH Zones that meet the following criteria:
A.   Standards:
1.   The width of the primary driveway shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in
width and shall be at least twenty feet (20') in depth excluding sidewalks.
2.   If a residential lot has two (2) frontages and one of those frontages is
located on a collector or arterial street, the primary driveway shall be
located on the residential street only. No driveway access will be permitted
onto the collector or arterial street.
3.   On a residential lot where the only access from the lot is to a collector
or arterial street, a second curb cut may be permitted to create a horseshoe or
half-circular driveway (see
figure 1(b) of this section).
4.   All driveways shall be located a minimum forty feet (40') from a street
intersection, as measured from back of sidewalk to edge of driveway.
B.   Secondary Driveway: A secondary driveway may be allowed under the
following conditions:
1.   The width of the secondary driveway shall not exceed twenty four feet
(24') and shall be at least twenty feet (20') in depth excluding sidewalks.
2.   Spacing between the primary driveway and the secondary driveway shall be a
minimum ten feet (10'), not including flares (see
figure 1 of this section).
3.   Lot frontage shall be a minimum sixty feet (60').
4.   Secondary driveway must be no closer than five feet (5') from the adjacent
property line, as measured from property line to edge of driveway (see
figure 1 of this section).
C.   Corner Lots: A secondary driveway may be allowed under the following
conditions:
1.   Lot frontage on the side of the lot that contains the secondary driveway
is sixty feet (60') or greater.
2.   The secondary driveway is located a minimum forty feet (40') from the
street intersection, as measured from back of sidewalk to edge of driveway (see
figure 1(c) of this section).
3.   The secondary driveway does not access a collector or arterial street (see
figure 1(d) of this section).
4.   The secondary driveway does not exceed twenty four feet (24') in width and
shall be at least twenty feet (20') in depth excluding sidewalks.
D.   Permit Process:
1.   Construction of any driveway, whether primary or secondary, shall be
permitted in conjunction with a building permit or with an encroachment permit.
2.   Applicant shall demonstrate that traffic safety, sight distance, and
character of the neighborhood are not adversely impacted, and shall comply with
the design standards set forth in the Draper Standard Specifications and
Details.
3.   Engineer may deny any proposed driveway that has the potential to cause a
traffic hazard or other safety concern.
FIGURE 1
DRIVEWAY STANDARDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1283, 10-17-2017; amd. Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020)
9-10-080: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Planned Residential District is to encourage
imaginative and innovative planning of residential neighborhoods which are not
located in the City's Sensitive Lands Overlay Zone, to encourage the
preservation of open space and significant natural features, to offer a wide
variety of dwelling unit sizes and types, to permit greater flexibility in
design of residential neighborhoods, and to enable development of larger
parcels of property that would be difficult or less desirable to develop under
conventional zoning and subdivision regulations.
B.   Qualification:
1.   No planned residential development (PRD) shall be established on any
parcel located within the Sensitive Lands Overlay Zone. The minimum area to
establish a PRD Zone is ten (10) acres.
2.   No PRD shall be approved that does not comply with all development
requirements found within this chapter.
3.   No PRD application shall be accepted for property that has altered its
natural condition through grading or land disturbance permit activity, within
five (5) years prior to the application date for a PRD.
C.   Scope: A planned residential development is a residential development
improved in accordance with an overall project plan and is characterized by the
following:
1.   The density regulations of the zone in which the planned residential
development is located are applied to the total developable area of the planned
residential development rather than separately to individual lots and is
related to the density recommendations of the General Plan.
2.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to any real property
located in a single-family residential zone as shown on the official zoning
map; land which lies within the Sensitive Lands Overlay Zone is not eligible to
utilize the PRD provisions of this Code. Residential zones eligible for a PRD
Overlay are the RA1, RA2, and R3 Zones; RH, RM1 and RM2 Zones are not eligible
for a PRD Overlay. Other nonresidential zones within Draper City are not
eligible for a PRD Overlay. No building, structure or real property shall be
used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally or
substantially altered, or enlarged except as set forth in this chapter. Such
requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable
provisions of this title, this Code, or other laws.
3.   Zoning directly from agricultural, commercial, manufacturing, open space,
or institutional zoning to PRD is not allowed. Establishment of a base
residential zone, which conforms to the land use recommendations of the Draper
City General Plan, is required prior to submitting an application for PRD
zoning and subsequent development approval.
D.   Uses Allowed:
1.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within residential zones shall be as set forth in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP".
2.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
a.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the base zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
b.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established.
c.   Accessory uses in residential zones shall include all accessory uses
allowed in the underlying residential zoning classification.
3.   Allowed Animal Rights: Although the underlying base zone may be RA1 or RA2
zoning, animal rights require special consideration within a PRD due to the
potential for small lots and townhomes which cannot adequately support animals
within their property. Therefore, within any PRD, the following requirements
are in place and supersede the base zone requirements for the care and keeping
of animals:
a.   The base residential zone shall be RA1 or RA2.
b.   The minimum parcel size to apply for large animal rights is twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet.
c.   A conditional use permit is required to establish large animal rights.
d.   One animal unit per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area is
the basic conditional use permit request.
e.   Additional animal units may be requested as part of the conditional use
permit request if it can be shown that all standard conditional use permit
evaluative criteria and required findings can be adequately met.
E.   Application Requirements: A PRD overlay is considered to be a legislative
act of rezoning a parcel of land, and a rezoning application shall follow the
standard zone map amendment process established by this title. A PRD approval
process cannot begin prior to city council establishment of an underlying RA1,
RA2 or R3 residential zone. In addition to the standard zone map amendment
application requirements, a PRD application shall be accompanied by a
development plan and concept subdivision plan which shall consist of:
1.   A professionally drawn map or maps drawn to a suitable scale, showing at
least the following:
a.   The boundary of the proposed district.
b.   The topographic character of the land, at two foot (2') contour intervals.
c.   General drainage analysis and proposal.
d.   Accommodations for all utilities, showing a plan for location of utility
boxes and facilities.
e.   The extent of grading intended for roads, utilities and building pads.
f.   The location of all public streets and proposed street cross sections.
g.   Location of public or common area uses proposed, such as schools, parks,
open space, playgrounds, bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian trails, or other
recreational facilities. Public and private uses shall be specifically
delineated.
h.   The location and configuration of different densities of dwelling units,
showing lot sizes and ownership type.
i.   Where appropriate, said plan shall include recommendations on buffering
from surrounding uses, such as intensive landscaping, building height
limitations, and in rare circumstances, fences and walls. A substantial buffer
shall be required when adjacent to property where large animal rights are
allowed by permitted or conditional use (A5, A2, RA1, and RA2 zoning).
j.   Within the planned residential development, lots and units may be
established of various size and type but shall be logical in size and shape and
shall function by themselves and in relationship to other development units
within the district or adjacent property.
k.   Site inventory of trees four inch (4") caliper or greater, and which trees
are identified for preservation.
l.   Any and all requirements for a concept subdivision plan as required by
this title and title 17 of this code.
2.   A development program including:
a.   A legal description of the district boundary.
b.   Size of the area.
c.   The overall density proposed, and shown as total units per gross acre of
developable land.
d.   The type and mix of development units proposed, as well as four (4) sided
architectural renderings.
e.   The disposition of all lands proposed for private ownership, public
facilities or common ownership.
f.   A phasing schedule if the applicant contemplates construction in
increments.
g.   The approximate size or range of anticipated dwelling size, in square
feet, of each development unit.
h.   General landscaping and street tree plan, including proposals for
buffering.
i.   Street design standards, public.
j.   Proposed project amenities, including all buildings, equipment, furniture,
special landscaping features, recreational elements, and streetlighting.
3.   All proposed restrictive covenants. Covenants shall include all necessary
legal mechanisms to maintain common areas. The proposed covenants shall include
a proposal on fee collection and an entity for administration of the covenants
and homeowners' association, and shall contain at least the following elements:
a.   Membership in the HOA shall be mandatory for all property owners within
the PRD.
b.   The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall incorporate appropriate
provisions for the establishment and maintenance of long term PRD site
development standards, including enforcement mechanisms designed to assure
coherent, coordinated development, maintenance and use activity with the PRD
site.
c.   All improvements that are not dedicated to the city or accepted for
ownership or maintenance by the city shall be perpetually maintained through a
special district owners' association with the power to assess and collect fees
for maintenance or other assessment and maintenance mechanisms acceptable to
the city.
d.   Establishment of a reserve account for the replacement of all items of
common property which will normally require replacement or maintenance within
three (3) to thirty (30) years. An inventory of such items shall be required as
part of this component.
e.   Potential buyers shall be informed of the full implications of purchasing
within an HOA and the requirements that may be placed upon them as a resident
and owner full disclosure is required to be recorded with the plat.
f.   Errors in the CCRs and HOA documents should be easily correctable by not
requiring voting by all members for document changes, but rather a certain
percentage of the HOA members. Documents must be able to be corrected to ensure
its success.
g.   The formation of the HOA meeting these criteria shall be established by
the developer prior to final plat approval, and shall be reviewed and approved
by the city attorney prior to plat recordation.
h.   A property owner shall automatically obtain member status upon purchase of
property within the PRD.
4.   All requirements of the natural resources inventory, required in chapter
24 of this title.
5.   All conditions agreed to by the applicant which are not included in the
written documentation required under subsections A, B, C and D of this section
are part of the development plan.
F.   Design Criteria And Development Standards: The planned residential
development shall observe the following design criteria:
1.   The overall plan shall be comprehensive, embracing land, buildings,
landscaping and their interrelationships and shall conform in all respects to
all adopted plans of all governmental agencies for the area in which the
proposed development is located.
2.   The plan shall provide for a minimum of twenty five percent (25%)
projectwide open space, circulation, off street parking, and pertinent
amenities, and projectwide off street walkability and pedestrian scale design.
Buildings, structures and facilities in the parcel shall be well integrated,
oriented and related to the topographic and natural landscape features of the
site.
3.   The proposed development shall be compatible with existing and planned
land use, and with circulation patterns on adjoining properties. It shall not
constitute a disruptive element to the neighborhood and community.
4.   The internal street system shall not be a dominant feature in the overall
design; rather it should be designed for the efficient and safe flow of
vehicles without creating a disruptive influence on the activity and function
of any common areas and facilities. The design of streetscapes shall be of a
design that exceeds the standard subdivision street tree and streetlighting
requirements.
5.   Common areas and recreational facilities shall be located so as to be
readily accessible to the occupants of the dwelling units and shall be well
related to any common open spaces provided. Public open space, trails, and
facilities shall be located in a manner to maximize access for the general
public.
6.   Architecture and landscape design shall be in harmony within the
development and within the neighborhood and community. The development plan
shall emphasize curb appeal, deemphasize the garage behind the main building
line, and utilize high quality building materials, such as brick, stone, and
synthetic concrete stone and upgraded siding type products throughout the
development and as elements on all sides of buildings. Aluminum and vinyl
siding are prohibited.
7.   A surveyed tree inventory shall be submitted with the application, and all
trees over four inch (4") caliper shall be identified for preservation. A
recommendation from a certified arborist shall be included where trees are
proposed to be removed due to disease or infestation. Trees earmarked for
removal shall be transplanted to landscape and buffer areas, using best
management practices.
8.   Where adjacent to natural undeveloped open space areas, such as the Jordan
River Parkway, Willow Creek, and Corner Creek, extreme sensitivity in design
shall be given to the interface between public and private lands and trails,
fencing design and wildlife compatibility issues. Where possible and desired by
the city, project open space shall extend the natural open spaces rather than
separate geographically such areas and proposed parks.
9.   All parks and main trails shall be connected by internal trails.
10.   All single-family dwellings shall maintain a minimum ten foot (10') side
yard setback.
11.   All garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the
back of sidewalk or planned right of way.
G.   Property Development Standards:
1.   All land uses in a PRD district shall conform to the allowable uses of the
underlying zoning district. Modifications of the underlying district's
development standards may be allowed only as provided in the modifications
procedure below.
2.   Any use requiring a conditional use permit in the underlying zoning
district shall obtain approval as outlined in section
9-5-080 of this title prior to the establishment of the use.
3.   Except as expressly provided herein, all provisions of the zoning and
subdivision ordinances shall apply to development in the PRD district.
4.   The area proposed for a PRD shall be in one ownership or control during
development to provide for full supervision and control of said development,
and to ensure conformance with these provisions and all conditions imposed upon
the preliminary and final subdivision plats. Mere development agreements
between individuals shall not satisfy this requirement. Individual ownership,
partnerships, corporations, and other legally recognized entities are
acceptable. The city shall have the right to review all documents establishing
legal entities.
5.   All public streets shall conform to adopted city cross sections and
construction standards. Private streets or lanes are not allowed within a PRD.
6.   Street trees shall be of a species that will create a large tree canopy
and which are suited to the development and soil conditions of the property.
Small canopy, columnar, and ornamental trees shall be limited in the approved
landscape plan to accent areas, common areas, and small buffer areas, but are
not to be utilized as formal street tree plantings. The Draper City tree guide
shall provide guidance for appropriate trees.
7.   No remnant parcels shall be created. Any land not proposed for development
shall be designated as open space or common areas, as appropriate.
8.   The final development plans shall be prepared by a design team composed of
an architect, a landscape architect, a civil engineer, a geotechnical engineer,
a registered geologist, and a land surveyor, all licensed to practice in the
state of Utah. A statement identifying the team shall be part of the
development application. Where necessary, documents and submittals shall
contain the wet stamp and wet signature of the licensed professional.
H.   Property Development Standards Modification Procedure:
1.   Modifications to minimum lot and yard standards may be approved by the
city in connection with a PRD overlay zone, subject to compliance with the
maximum overall density and lot yield for the property.
2.   The application shall be accompanied by written terminology and graphic
material, which shall illustrate the conditions that the modified standards
will produce, so that the planning commission and city council can make the
determination that the modification will produce a living environment,
landscape quality and project superior to that produced by the standard
residential development standards.
I.   Requirements For All PRDs:
1.   Base Density: Developable land is land under thirty percent (30%) slope
which is capable of being improved with landscaping, recreational facilities,
buildings, streets, or parking. Developable land does not include identified
watercourses, to the typical high water flow line. The hypothetical base
density of a subdivision shown below only represents a calculated average of
land development in Draper City, based on the minimum requirements of the base
zone, and the typical city street dedication requirements, and shall be applied
to only defined developable land within a proposed PRD; it is shown for
demonstrative purposes only. The specific project density for any application
may differ from these hypothetical numbers due to any number of development
related factors, and could be higher or lower. Specific density calculations
are found in subsection I3 of this section.
 
Base Zone Hypothetical Base Density
RA1       0.90
RA2       1.60
R3        2.30
 
2.   Required Components For All PRDs:
a.   Provision Of Public Open Space: This shall mean the provision of common
open space which is distinguishable by its quantity or quality and which is
readily accessible to the residents of the development and the public.
Opportunities to connect to adjacent open space or park areas are preferred
methods to achieve this requirement as encouraged as per the Draper City open
space conservation plan and the Draper City parks, trails, and recreation plan.
Examples of such areas are the Jordan River Parkway, Willow Creek, and Corner
Creek, but may include other locally important spaces, trails, and parks. The
minimum overall open space to qualify for this factor is twenty five percent
(25%) of the entire project area within the project area (road rights of way,
park strips, private trails, and private yards cannot be utilized in
calculating this percentage). One-half (1/2) of the overall provided open space
shall be considered "developable land", as defined within this chapter (minimum
20 percent of overall project acreage). Public trails which conform to the
locations shown on the Draper City master parks and trails plan, and related
public spur trails, can be counted for this requirement. Small gathering places
are also encouraged to be utilized and integrated throughout the project and
shall be open to the public whether maintained privately or publicly. All
public open space that meets this requirement does not necessarily constitute
acceptance of the open space for perpetual maintenance by Draper City.
No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required overall PRD open space
shall be in the form of linear parks or trails.
b.   Preservation Of Natural Features: Preservation of natural features shall
include the preservation of drainages, washes and canals, significant stands of
native vegetation, significant trees or other topographic, scenic, natural, or
historical features, provided such features are left in their undisturbed
natural state. Plat or deed restrictions, maintenance agreements, conservation
easements, limits of disturbance, and other legal mechanisms shall be proposed
by the applicant as part of the evaluation consideration for this factor.
Limiting grading cuts and fills, redesigning streets, and redesigning floor
plans to work with topography can also assist in achieving natural feature
preservation. Attempting to receive or receiving a land disturbance permit or
grading permit prior to PRD approval shall negate the ability to achieve this
requirement, and accordingly, will render the entire application for a PRD moot
and is not allowed. PRD applications shall be eligible only for natural,
undisturbed project sites.
   Where indicated and approved within the overall PRD development plan,
existing site features may be remediated to become more natural, more
environmentally sensitive, or to increase biodiversity. Examples of this could
include: removal of noxious, exotic, or nonnative vegetation and replacement
with Utah native plants; reestablishment of biological riparian streambank
vegetation to aid in erosion control and natural channel enhancements; or
removal of hazardous soil or environmental contaminants and replacement with
Utah native soil or vegetation types. The construction of riprap, concrete
lined channels, or other manmade, engineering solutions to channel control is
not considered preservation of natural features. Methods utilizing biological
processes, native plants, bioengineering, and landscape architecture principles
shall be the preferred and required methods of mitigation, restoration, and
project design.
c.   Interior Amenities And Innovative Site Plan: Interior amenities shall mean
the provision of private recreational facilities such as tennis courts,
swimming pools, recreational centers, multiuse, nonmotorized paths and trails,
and private open spaces or parks which are accessible only to the residents
within the proposed development. In order to qualify for this requirement, the
entire project area must also be determined to be innovative in nature, which
requires a mix of lot sizes, dwelling units and ownership types, integration of
amenities and internal walking paths, wrought iron or similar increased quality
perimeter fencing and landscaping, enhanced landscaping, privately maintained
and architecturally designed entry features, high architectural standards and
design review processes, and an administrable plan to vary house design, sizes,
and heights.
3.   Increased Density Allowance: As a legislative action, determination of
increased overall project density shall be at the discretion of the city
council as part of the PRD overlay zone map amendment process, but shall be
subject to the following considerations:
a.   Prior to any determination of increased density, a project must first
establish base unit yield, as shown in total single- family residential units
for the overall project. To establish this base residential yield, the
applicant must include only developable area as defined in this subsection I,
and all yielded lots must meet all minimum requirements for the base zone and
all standard city minimum street right of way widths. The city shall verify the
accuracy of this base yield calculation as part of its initial PRD review.
b.   In order to qualify for any increased density at all, a PRD must
demonstrate substantially that all requirements in subsection I2 of this
section have been met to the satisfaction of the city.
c.   If all requirements in subsection I2 of this section have been met, a PRD
shall be eligible for an increased density allowance of up to twenty five
percent (25%) of the base residential yield. This yield shall be allocated
across the entire project in accordance with the standards found within this
chapter.
J.   Building Height:
1.   Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'), as measured per
the adopted building code of Draper City. The planning commission and city
council may place additional height restrictions where necessary to preserve
views or to achieve compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. Adding
fill on individual building pads to increase building height is not allowed.
2.   Buildings shall not exceed one story within fifty feet (50') of a single-
family district boundary line where:
a.   There exists on an adjacent lot a one-story residence; or
b.   There are zoning restrictions which limit adjacent undeveloped lots to
one-story residences.
K.   Perimeter Setback Requirements:
1.   Where a planned residential development (PRD) project abuts a single-
family development, the buildings on the PRD shall be set back from the
perimeter property line a distance at least as much as the required rear yard
or perimeter setback of the adjacent district. A landscape plan for this
required setback area shall be submitted.
2.   Where a planned residential development (PRD) project abuts a single-
family district where perimeter walls are specifically approved or required to
be set back from the common perimeter property line, perimeter walls on the PRD
development shall provide equal or greater setbacks.
L.   Findings Required: Before approval or modified approval of an application
for a proposed PRD overlay zone, the planning commission and city council must
find:
1.   That the development proposed is in substantial harmony with the general
plan of Draper City, and can be coordinated with existing and planned
development of surrounding areas.
2.   That the streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
serve the proposed uses and the anticipated traffic which will be generated.
3.   That the facts submitted with the application and presented at the hearing
will establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the planned residential
development will constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability
and stability; that it will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding
area; and that the sites proposed for public facilities such as schools,
playgrounds and parks, are adequate to serve the anticipated population.
4.   That the proposed development will result in a residential development
that is superior in quality and public benefit than a standard residential
development.
5.   That all required elements of providing public open space, preserving
natural features, and providing interior amenities and an innovative site plan,
have been met, in accordance with this chapter.
M.   Concept Plan Review Satisfied: Approval of a PRD zone and development plan
by the city council shall constitute approval of a subdivision concept plan, as
required by title 17 of this code. Preliminary and final plat approvals shall
follow standard city requirements. (Ord. 726, 2-6-2007)
9-10-090: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLES:
TABLE 9-10-1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Use            Zones
    RA1 RA2 RH R3    R4 R5 RM1 RM2
Use                                                         Zones
                   RA1                RA2                RH R3    R4 R5 RM1 RM2
Agricultural uses:
Agricultural       C                  NP                 NP NP    NP NP NP  NP
business
Agriculture        P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Animal specialties C                  NP                 NP NP    NP NP NP  NP
Animals and fowl
for recreation and P                  C
family food        (1 animal unit per (1 animal unit per
production         20,000 sq. ft. of  20,000 sq. ft. of  NP NP    NP NP NP  NP
(subject to        total lot  or      total lot  or
section            parcel area)       parcel area)
9-27-050 of this
title)
Apiary             P                  P                  P  P     P  P  NP  NP
Keeping of
chickens for
familial gain
(subject to        P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
section
9-27-055 of this
title)
Residential uses:
Daycare, limited2  C                  C                  C  C     C  C  C4  C4
Dwelling, single-  P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
family1
Dwelling, single-
family with        See
accessory dwelling chapter 31 of this title
unit
Dwelling, two-     NP                 NP                 NP NP    NP NP P   P
family
Dwelling,          NP                 NP                 NP NP    NP NP P   P
multiple-family
Dwelling,          P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
temporary
Home occupations3  See
                   chapter 34 of this title
Preschool,         C                  C                  C  C     C  C  C4  C4
limited2
Residential
facility for       P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
elderly persons
Residential
facility for       P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
persons with a
disability
Public and civic
uses:
Cemetery           P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Charter schools    P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Church or place of P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
worship
Cultural service   See
(only in a         chapter 33 of this title
historic building)
Golf course        C                  C                  C  C     C  C  C   C
Government service P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Higher education   P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
facility, public
Park               P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Public school      P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Public utility     See
substation         chapter 36 of this title
Utility, minor     P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Municipal uses:
Franchise          P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Municipal use
Municipal use      P                  P                  P  P     P  P  P   P
Commercial uses:
Animal breeder     P                  P                  P  P     P  P  NP  NP
Bed and breakfast  See
inn (only in a     chapter 33 of this title
historic building)
Medical service    See
(only in a         chapter 33 of this title
historic building)
Office, general    See
(only in a         chapter 33 of this title
historic building)
Personal care      See
service (only in a chapter 33 of this title
historic building)
Personal
instruction        See
service (only in a chapter 33  of this title
historic building)
Reception center   See
(only in a         chapter 33  of this title
historic building)
Restaurant,        See
general (only in a chapter 33  of this title
historic building)
Retail, general
(antique store     See
only in a historic chapter 33  of this title
building)
Temporary          See
construction or    title 6, chapter 16 of this Code
model home office
Wireless           See
telecommunication  chapter 41 of this title
facility
 
Notes:
   1.    See
chapter 30 of this title for provisions for a second kitchen in a single-family
dwelling.
   2.    See
chapter 34 of this title for applicable provisions.
   3.    See use table regulations and specifications for Daycare, limited and
Preschool, limited home occupations.
   4.    In detached single-family dwellings only.
(Ord. 1320, 4-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1394, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1438, 5-19-2020 ; Ord.
1475, 3-2-2021 )
TABLE 9-10-3
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Development Standard Zones
                     RA1 RA2 RH R3 R4 R5 RM1 RM2
Development Zones
Standard
            RA1    RA2    RH       R3       R4       R5       RM1      RM2
Lot                                                              
standards1:
Minimum
area,       40,000 20,000 40,000   13,000   10,000   8,000    6,000    4,000
single-     s.f.   s.f.   s.f.     s.f.     s.f.     s.f.     s.f.     s.f.
family
dwelling
Minimum lot
area,
single
dwelling    40,000 20,000 40,000   13,000   n/a      n/a      12,000 s.f.
unit with   s.f.   s.f.   s.f.     s.f.
accessory
dwelling
unit
Minimum
area, two-  40,000 20,000 40,000   13,000   NP       NP       10,000   8,000
family      s.f.   s.f.   s.f.     s.f.                       s.f.     s.f.
dwelling
Minimum
project
area,       NP     NP     NP       NP       NP       NP       1 acre   1 acre
multiple-
family
dwelling
Minimum
area,       NP     NP     NP       NP       NP       NP       1,000    1,000
townhouse                                                     s.f.     s.f.
dwelling
Minimum
area, other 40,000 20,000 40,000   13,000   10,000   8,000    n/a      n/a
main        s.f.   s.f.   s.f.     s.f.     s.f.     s.f.
buildings
Maximum lot
depth (as a
multiple of 4.0 to 3.0 to 4.0 to 1 2.0 to 1 2.0 to 1 2.0 to 1 5.0 to 1 5.0 to 1
lot width   1      1
at widest
point)
Minimum lot 50'    50'    50'      50'      50'      50'      n/a      n/a
frontage
Minimum lot 100'   90'    100'     80'      80'      70'      n/a      n/a
width 2
Building                                                         
standards:
Maximum
dwelling    1 du/  2 du/  1 du/    3 du/    4 du/    5 du/    8 du/    12 du/
unit        acre   acre   acre     acre     acre     acre     acre     acre
density per
acre
Maximum
square
footage of
floor area
at ground
level       40%    40%    40%      40%      40%      40%      n/a      n/a
(including
garages) as
a
percentage
of lot area
Maximum
height,     35'    35'    35'      35'      35'      35'      35'      35'
main
building
Maximum
height,     See subsection
accessory   9-10-040 (A) of this chapter
buildings
Setback
standards -                                                      
front
yard3:
Main
buildings
on interior 30'    30'    30'      25'      25'      25'      20'5     20'5
and corner
lots 4
Accessory   See subsection
buildings   9-10-040 (A) of this chapter
Swimming    See section
pools       9-27-180 of this title
Setback
standards -                                                      
rear yard3:
Main
buildings   20'    20'    20'      20'      20'      20'      20'5     20'5
on interior
lots 4
Main
buildings   12'    12'    12'      10'      8'       8'       6'5      5'5
on corner
lots 4
Accessory   See subsection
buildings   9-10-040 (A) of this chapter
Barns and   See section
stables     9-27-050 of this title
Swimming    See section
pools       9-27-180 of this title
Setback
standards -                                                      
side yard3:
Main
buildings   12'    12'    12'      10'      8'       8'       6'5      5'5
on interior
lots4
Accessory   See subsection
buildings   9-10-040 (A) of this chapter
Barns and   See section
stables     9-27-050 of this title
Swimming    See section
pools       9-27-180 of this title
 
Notes:
   1.    Minimum required lot area on private right-of-way or access easement
shall be net area, excluding any area of the lot located within a private
right-of-way or access easement.
   2.    Corner lots should be platted 10 feet wider than interior lots of
subdivisions to accommodate 2 front yards in accordance with section
17-5-020 of this Code.
   3.    Except as modified by the provisions of section
9-27-140, "Lots And Yards", of this title.
   4.    Except as modified by the provisions of subsection
9-27-140G, "Setback Measurement", of this title.
   5.    Listed setbacks are applicable to Single-family or Two-family
dwellings on individual lots, for Multiple-Family dwellings and developments
the setbacks shall be determined at site plan approval in accordance with the
provisions of subsection
9-32-030 of this Title.
(Ord. 1395, 7-2-2019, eff. retroactive to 5-9-2019; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
CHAPTER 11
COMMERCIAL ZONES
SECTION:
9-11-010: Purpose
9-11-020: Scope
9-11-030: Uses Allowed
9-11-040: Development Standards
9-11-050: Regulations Of General Applicability
9-11-060: Regulations For Specific Uses
9-11-070: Special Regulations
9-11-080: (O-R) Office/Residential
9-11-090: (TC) Town Center Zone
9-11-095: (CBU) Commercial Buffer Zone
9-11-100: (DC) Destination Commercial
9-11-105: (MARF) Major Freeway Arterial Frontage Road
9-11-110: Use And Development Standards Tables
9-11-010: PURPOSE:
See subsection
9-8-020C of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-11-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property located in a
commercial zone as shown on the official zoning map. No building, structure or
real property shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, structurally or substantially altered, or enlarged except as set forth
in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2011)
9-11-030: USES ALLOWED:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within commercial zones shall be as set forth in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional use not shown in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter shall be prohibited, unless the zoning
administrator determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or
conditional use.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the same zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established.
3.   Accessory uses in commercial zones shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
         Cafeterias, dining halls and similar food service facilities when
located within the main use and operated primarily for the convenience of
employees, residents, clients, patients, or visitors to the main use.
         Daycare facilities for the exclusive use of the employees of the
business or activity constituting the primary use during normal hours of
operation of the primary use. Such facilities shall not incorporate more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the primary use.
         Dwelling units, other than mobile or manufactured homes, for security
and maintenance personnel.
         Garages and off street parking areas, subject to applicable standards
of chapter 25, "Parking", of this title.
         Recreational areas and facilities for the use of employees.
         Recycling collection stations.
         Refreshment stands and food and beverage sales located in uses
involving public assembly.
         Solar energy systems.
         Swimming pools and hot tubs for the use of employees.
         Temporary uses, subject to applicable standards of title 6, chapter
16, "Temporary Uses", of this code.
         Trails constructed as part of or interconnected with the planned
Draper City trails system. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011; amd. Ord. 689, 6-27-2006)
9-11-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards within commercial zones shall be as set forth in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
9-11-050: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
The use and development of real property in commercial zones shall conform to
regulations of general applicability as set forth in the following chapters of
this title:
A.   Chapter 22, "Design Standards And Guidelines".
B.   Chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening".
C.   Chapter 24, "Natural Resources Inventory".
D.   Chapter 25, "Parking".
E.   Chapter 26, "Signs".
F.   Chapter 27, "Supplementary Development Standards". (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-11-060: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
To the extent that use and development of real property includes any matter
encompassed by a regulation for a specific use as set forth in article 6,
chapters 30 through 41 of this title, such regulation shall apply in addition
to the requirements of this chapter and shall prevail over any conflicting
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-11-070: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A.   Increased Height Limits: The Planning Commission may approved increases in
height in the TC zone per the standards of subsection
9-11-090(D)(2)(a). The zoning administrator may approve other increases in
height above the height limitations in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-2 of this chapter for integral architectural features of buildings
such as towers, spires, chimneys, and clocks in accordance with the standards
listed in subsection
9-27-120(B). Additional Height is not allowed in the CN zone. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-
2015; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022)
9-11-080: (O-R) OFFICE/RESIDENTIAL:
A.   Purpose: A district composed of certain land and structures used primarily
to provide administrative, clerical, and professional offices, of a residential
scale and character, to serve nearby residential and commercial areas, as well
as the city as a whole. These uses are characterized by low volume, direct
daily customer contact. This district also provides for accessory medium-high
density residential (0 to 12 du/ac). This district is designed to be a
transitional zone, and should be used to buffer low density residential uses
from more intense land uses, districts, and heavily traveled transportation
routes. The property development standards, while strict in order to protect
adjacent low density residential uses, are designed to be flexible enough to
allow experimentation in office and housing design, and to allow housing
constructed within this district to incorporate its own protection from more
intense adjacent uses.
B.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property
located in an office residential zone as shown on the official zoning map. No
building, structure or real property shall be used and no building or structure
shall be erected, structurally or substantially altered, or enlarged except as
set forth in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit
or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws.
C.   Use Regulations:
1.   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures, or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses shown in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter:
2.   Residential uses shall be subordinate and secondary to commercial uses and
shall not occupy more than forty nine percent (49%) of the total site square
footage.
D.   Development Standards: The following property development standards shall
apply to all land and building in the O-R district:
1.   Open Space Requirements:
a.   Land uses that are density based (residential) shall provide a minimum of
thirty percent (30%) of the net lot area in open space.
b.   Land uses that are not density based shall provide a minimum of twenty
percent (20%) of the net lot area in open space.
c.   Open space required by subsections D1a and D1b of this section shall be
provided in the following proportions:
(1)   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the net lot area shall be provided as
frontage open space to provide a setting for the building, visual continuity
within the community, and a variety of spaces in the streetscape, except that
the frontage open space shall not be required to exceed fifty (50) square feet
per one foot (1') of public street frontage excluding drives. Exception: Where
a lot has two (2) or more street frontages, there shall be no less than twenty
(20) square feet of open space per one foot (1') of street frontage for one
street and no less than ten (10) square feet of open space per one foot (1') of
street frontage excluding drives for other street(s).
(2)   A private outdoor living space shall be provided adjoining each dwelling
unit equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross size of the dwelling
unit, except that dwelling units above the first story shall provide such space
equal to a minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross size of the dwelling unit.
(3)   The remainder of the required open space shall be provided in common open
space.
2.   Minimum Property Size: No office-residential zoning shall be established
on any parcel less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3.   Building Height: No building shall exceed twenty four feet (24') in
height.
4.   Density: The minimum gross land area per dwelling unit shall be three
thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
5.   Building Setback:
a.   Wherever an O-R development abuts an A5, A2, RA1, RA2, R3, RH, RM1 or RM2
district, a yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') shall be maintained,
except that accessory buildings for purposes of storage or carports may be
constructed to within twenty feet (20') of the adjacent district boundary line.
b.   Wherever an O-R development abuts any district other than A5, A2, RA1,
RA2, R3, RH, RM1 or RM2, a building may be constructed on the property line.
However, if any yard is to be maintained, it shall be not less than ten feet
(10') in depth. Larger yards may be required by the city council if the
existing or future development of the area around the site warrants such larger
yards.
c.   Where parking occurs between a building and the street, a yard of twenty
five feet (25') in depth shall be maintained. This depth may be decreased to a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') if the city council feels the existing or future
development of the area around the site warrants such action.
6.   Distance Between Buildings:
a.   There shall not be less than ten feet (10') between an accessory building
and a main building or between two (2) main buildings, except that an accessory
building with two (2) or more open sides, one of which is adjacent to the main
building, may be built to within six feet (6') of the main building.
7.   Walls, Fences And Required Screening:
a.   Walls, fences and hedges not to exceed eight feet (8') in height shall be
permitted on the property line of within the required yard areas, except within
the required frontage open space, within which they may not exceed three feet
(3') in height.
b.   All parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets.
c.   All mechanical structures and appurtenances shall be screened.
d.   All storage and refuse areas shall be screened.
8.   Access: All lots shall have frontage on and have vehicular access from a
dedicated street, unless a secondary means of permanent vehicle access has been
approved by the City Council.
E.   Off Street Parking: The provisions of chapter 25 of this title shall
apply.
F.   Signs: The provisions of chapter 26 of this title shall apply.
(Ord. 512, 1-28-2003; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-11-090: (TC) TOWN CENTER ZONE:
A.   Purpose: In addition to that identified in subsection
9-8-020C9 of this title, the Town Center zoning classification is intended to
support primarily the preservation and adaptive reuse of existing structures,
including historic buildings; the preservation of existing natural features,
including trees; new development that blends in with existing conditions and
enhances the traditional Town Center character; the advancement of
architectural and site design standards that promote walkability and human
scale; the creation and maintenance of historic Town Center identity; and
support of transit opportunities.
FIGURE 1
TOWN CENTER CONCEPT
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.jpg]
 
B.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to any real property
located within the Town Center Zone, as shown on the official zoning map. No
building or structure shall be erected, structurally or substantially altered,
or enlarged except as set forth in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be
construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this
Code, or other laws.
C.   Use Regulations:
1.   Buildings, structures, or premises shall be used and buildings and
structures shall hereafter be erected, altered, or enlarged only for the uses
shown in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter.
2.   Permitted and conditional uses within the Town Center Zone shall be as
determined within section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter.
3.   Ground floor uses shall be only those uses listed as commercial, public or
civic, or Municipal uses in section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter. Residential uses of any type are not permitted on
the ground floor. Upper stories may be use listed as permitted or conditional,
subject to the applicable provisions of this title.
FIGURE 2
VERTICAL BUILDING USES
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.jpg]
 
4.   Existing ground level residential uses shall be considered legal
nonconforming and allowed to continue in accordance with subsection E of this
section.
5.   Residential uses incorporated into development, as permitted, within the
TC Zone shall conform to the provisions of chapter 32 of this title, except as
provided for in this section.
6.   Residential densities in the Town Center shall range from six (6) dwelling
units per acre to twenty five (25) dwelling units per acre as outlined in this
section.
FIGURE 3
DESIGNATED DENSITY AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.jpg]
 
7.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of a building's ground floor may be used
for parking and in no case shall under structure parking be adjacent to any
public or private right-of-way. Underground parking is strongly encouraged.
8.   Live/work units are not a permitted use within the TC Zone. A live/work
unit is defined as follows:
- Live/Work Unit: A building or space within a building used jointly for
commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is
secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.
D.   Standards: The following property development standards shall apply to all
land and buildings in the Town Center Zone:
1.   Site Requirements:
a.   Setbacks:
(1)   Front Setback: New buildings shall be built with a maximum setback of
fifteen feet (15') from any right-of-way, public or private. A maximum of forty
percent (40%) of the building's fascia may be located more than fifteen feet
(15') from the front property line in compliance with subsection E of this
section. Buildings being constructed on a parcel adjacent to a parcel
containing an existing building which meets the terms of the front setback
requirement of this zone, shall maintain a minimum of five feet (5') difference
in the setback, not to exceed fifteen feet (15') total.
(2)   Side Setback: Buildings to be located on a parcel shall maintain a
minimum ten foot (10') side setback requirement from an adjacent parcel
containing a residential use. Buildings shall have no side setback requirement
for any side yard adjacent to a parcel which is vacant or which contains a
commercial use. All buildings shall be required to fully comply with the terms
of the current edition of the adopted Building and Fire Codes of Draper City.
(3)   Rear Setback: Buildings shall have no rear setback requirement.
(4)   Corner Lots: Buildings to be located on a corner property shall maintain
front setback requirements as outlined in this section from each bordering
right-of-way and shall not be permitted to create a visual obstruction in
relation to vehicular traffic at, approaching, or leaving the intersection.
FIGURE 4
SETBACKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-48.jpg]
 
b.   Parking:
(1)   Parking Location: No parking shall be permitted between the building
facade and the front property line. All on site parking shall be contained to
the side and/or rear of the building. Parking located to the side of any
building shall be buffered from view from the street by extensive plantings and
landscaping with a horizontal separation from the street of at least ten feet
(10') from the property line or the depth of the building setback, whichever is
greater.
(2)   Parking Requirements: Parking shall be provided for all sites as outlined
in chapter 25 of this title.
(3)   Shared Parking: The following program is provided to permit reduced
parking requirements in the locations and situations outlined herein where the
basic parking requirements of this title would be excessive or detrimental to
goals and policies of the City relating to mass transit and other alternative
modes of transportation. This program to reduce parking requirements may be
applied individually or jointly to properties and developments. A record of
such reductions and the justification for their application shall be maintained
in the Community Development Department's project file.
(A)   Application: The Planning Commission may authorize a reduction in the
total number of required parking spaces for two (2) or more uses jointly
providing on site parking subject to the following criteria:
(i)   The respective hours of operation of the uses do not overlap, as
demonstrated by the application on
table 9-14-1, "Schedule Of Shared Parking Calculations", of this section. If
one or all of the land uses proposing to use joint parking facilities do not
conform to one of the general land use classifications, the applicant shall
submit sufficient data to indicate that there is not substantial conflict in
the principal operating hours of the uses. Such data may include information
from a professional publication, such as those published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE), the Urban Land Institute (ULI), or by a
professionally prepared parking study.
(ii)   A parking plan shall be submitted for approval which shall show the
layout of proposed parking based on Draper City commercial site plan standards.
(B)   Calculation: Calculate the number of spaces required for each use if it
were freestanding (with no application of this program). Applying the
applicable general land use category to each proposed use, use the percentages
to calculate the number of spaces required for each time period, six (6) time
periods per use. Add the number of spaces required for all applicable land uses
to obtain a total parking requirement for each time period. Select the time
period with the highest total parking requirement and use that total as your
shared parking requirement.
TABLE 9-14-1
SCHEDULE OF SHARED PARKING CALCULATIONS
 Weekdays                              Weekends
 Midnight - 7: 7:00 A.M. - 6:00 P.M. - Midnight - 7: 7:00 A.M. - 6: 6:00 P.M. -
 00 A.M.       6:00 P.M.   Midnight    00 A.M.       00 P.M.        Midnight
            Weekdays                         Weekends
            Midnight - 7:00 A.M. 6:00 P.M. - Midnight - 7:00 A.M. - 6:00 P.M. -
            7:00 A.M.  - 6:00    Midnight    7:00 A.M.  6:00 P.M.   Midnight
                       P.M.
Cinema/     0%         70%       100%        5%         70%         100%
theater
Hotel       100%       65%       90%         100%       65%         80%
Office and  5%         100%      5%          0%         60%         10%
industrial
Residential 100%       55%       85%         100%       65%         75%
Restaurant  50%        70%       100%        45%        70%         100%
Retail      0%         100%      80%         0%         100%        60%
 
c.   Site Access And Cross Access: Cross access between parking areas shall be
required. As a means to control the number of potential vehicular access points
from private property onto right-of-way, adjacent commercial sites may be
required to share accessways to parking facilities. Additionally, accessways to
a parking facility should be located at a side property line of a site where
shared access is or could be desirable or necessary. Sites which choose or are
required to share an accessway which is not located on the same site shall be
required to implement a landscaped pedestrian corridor from the front to the
rear of the site in a size equal to the width of the vehicular accessway.
FIGURE 5
ACCESS MANAGEMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.jpg]
 
d.   Lighting: On site lighting shall conform to the provisions of chapter 20
of this title. Lighting should be designed so as to minimize the number of
poles used within the parking area with preferred methods being building
mounted lights or bollard type lighting. Pedestrian pathways should be
illuminated through the use of bollard lighting. A site lighting plan shall be
required for all sites within the TC Zone which demonstrates the photometric
layout throughout the property. All on site lighting shall be shielded and be
of a style and design that allows no light to shine beyond any site property
line. Lighting installed along right-of-way corridors shall conform to the
lighting style prescribed by the City for the corridor. Lighting, including
fixtures and poles, shall be designed to integrate architecturally with the
building and the Town Center area.
e.   Courtyards: Commercial sites within the TC Zone are encouraged to be
designed to incorporate plaza or courtyard areas which are designed to
encourage use of the area as a resting or relaxing place. Such areas shall be
allowed on all sides of a building. These areas are characterized as being well
landscaped areas which include benches, shade features, and certain other
amenities, such as water features or a pedestrian scale tower clock.
FIGURE 6
COURTYARD EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-52.jpg]
 
f.   Service Elements: All service elements, such as dumpsters and building
mechanical equipment, shall be screened through the use of landscaping or
incorporation into the building architecture. All enclosures for such features
shall be constructed of the same materials and of similar architecture as the
building. All such equipment shall be located away from residential uses on
neighboring properties and shall not be visible from any roadway. All ground
utility equipment shall be appropriately screened through the use of
landscaping which provides a visual barrier without prohibiting or restricting
access.
FIGURE 7
SERVICE ELEMENT SCREENING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-54.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-56.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-58.jpg]
 
g.   Landscaping:
(1)   Old Growth: Healthy mature trees, as determined by an ISA certified
arborist, of a four inch (4") caliper or larger shall be preserved subject to
the provisions herein. In the event the constraints of a site necessitate
removal or alteration, or prevent the preservation of existing mature trees,
the installation of a new mature tree at a caliper to caliper ratio (i.e., one
6-inch tree to one 6-inch tree or one 6-inch caliper tree to two 3-inch caliper
trees) shall be required. This requirement shall be in conjunction with the
provisions of subsection D1g(3) of this section.
(2)   Setback Areas:
(A)   Front Setback: Areas between building facades and the street property
line shall be extensively landscaped. Such areas may be used for the purpose of
outdoor patio style cafe seating if that seating is a functional part of the
building use.
(B)   Materials And Plantings: All setback areas shall be landscaped using
appropriate materials and plantings that complement and improve the overall
site landscaping and that of neighboring developed properties. Newly installed
landscaping shall include trees at a ratio of at least one mature tree per four
hundred (400) square feet of landscape area.
(3)   Site Landscaping: All sites shall maintain a minimum of fifteen percent
(15%) total site landscaping. The Planning Commission may approve an adjustment
in the total site percentage of required site landscaping to not less than ten
percent (10%) with the provision of extra amenities such as a paved patio for
outdoor seating, planter boxes containing irrigation and exceptional
vegetation, a courtyard fountain, street furniture, or others exceeding the
intent of this subsection. Findings for landscaping requirements shall be
subject to those of chapter 23 of this title.
(4)   Parking Area Landscaping: All parking areas shall maintain a minimum of
ten percent (10%) landscaping. The parking area shall be considered that area
of a site containing parking stalls, vehicle travel lanes and pedestrian
pathways. The parking area shall not be considered to include vehicular
accessways connecting the right-of-way to the parking area or that area beyond
the outermost curbing or hard surfacing of the parking area. Parking area
landscaping should be designed such that the landscaping provides a visual and
physical break in the bulk and expansiveness of the parking area while
providing shaded areas.
(5)   Landscaping Variety: All landscaping is encouraged to be water efficient
and of appropriate species according to the terms of this Code, the Draper City
Street Tree Guide and all other applicable provisions.
h.   Fencing: Fences, walls, and other separation devices which separate
properties shall be discouraged in the TC Zone. Such features shall be
considered appropriate according to the following:
FIGURE 8
FENCING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-60.jpg]
 
(1)   Fences and hedges shall not exceed three feet (3') in height in the front
building setback for the purpose of separating an outdoor patio style cafe
seating area from the sidewalk or pedestrian pathways. If fencing is
implemented, said fencing shall be decorative and constructed of nonvinyl or
vinyl like materials. All fencing materials used being complementary and
matching to those of the building.
(2)   Upgraded decorative masonry fencing along a rear or side property line
which does not exceed six feet (6') in height for the purpose of separating
commercial and residential uses. Where, in this circumstance, fencing is not
desirable, adequate buffering, to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission,
containing significant plantings and setbacks shall be required.
(3)   Berming or hedges as a part of parking lot landscaping for the purpose of
breaking up the expansiveness of a parking area.
(4)   Berming, hedges, or fencing which conforms to that identified in
subsection D1h(1) of this section for patio style cafe seating may be
implemented when determined necessary to delineate and separate pedestrian and
vehicular travelways which are parallel and immediately adjacent to one
another.
i.   Signage: Signage within the TC Zone shall conform with subsection
9-26-090A, "Town Center District Special", of this title.
j.   Historic Buildings: Uses of land permitted according to this chapter may
be implemented within historic buildings in compliance with the provisions of
this section and those of chapter 33 of this title according to which are more
restrictive.
k.   Other Provisions: Unless otherwise specified within this section, all
provisions of this title and title 17 of this Code shall be applicable to all
development within the TC Zone.
l.   Amenities: Centrally located amenities shall be provided for multiple-
family projects.
(1)   Projects of fewer than fifty (50) dwelling units shall provide an
amenities package appropriate for the project size and location.
(A)   Multiple-family projects shall include at least one amenity for every
fifty (50) units from the following list:
(i)   Tot lot/play structure;
(ii)   Community garden;
(iii)   Courtyard with benches;
(iv)   Picnic tables and barbecue area with shade structures;
(v)   Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor);
(vi)   Sports courts (i.e., tennis, basketball, volleyball);
(vii)   Natural open space area with benches/viewing areas and/or trails;
(viii)   Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of
this guideline.
(2)   Projects of fifty one (51) to one hundred (100) dwelling units shall
include the following amenities in addition to those required in subsection D1l
(1) of this section:
(A)   A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social area,
no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in gathering space, or a minimum
of one outside social function area, no less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet in gathering space.
(3)   Projects of one hundred one (101) or more dwelling units shall include
the following amenities, in addition to those required in subsection D1l(1) of
this section:
(A)   A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social area,
no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in gathering space, and a minimum
of one outside social function area, no less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet in gathering space.
2.   Building Design Requirements:
a.   Building Height: No new building or addition to an existing building
constructed within the TC Zone shall exceed a maximum height of thirty five
feet (35'). Building heights may be limited to less than thirty five feet (35')
to ensure compatibility with neighboring buildings. Furthermore, towers,
spires, chimneys, enclosures for necessary mechanical equipment, clocks, and
similar structures that enhance the architectural character of the building,
equaling not more than ten percent (10%) of the building footprint, may exceed
the maximum building height by not more than fourteen feet (14'), as approved
by the Planning Commission, with a commercial site plan application. Accessory
buildings shall be a maximum of twenty feet (20') total height with no
additional height allowance for architectural features.
FIGURE 9
BUILDING HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-62.jpg]
 
b.   Horizontal Variation: No building facade shall be more than fifty feet
(50') in horizontal length without a visual break that creates the appearance
of storefront bays. This shall be achieved through a change in building
material, building projections or relief measuring at least three feet (3') in
width and depth, or another architectural variation that meets the intent of
this subsection. No such architectural break in the horizontal plane shall be
wider than three feet (3'). No combination of buildings shall extend along
their combined front facade for more than one hundred feet (100'), measured
parallel to the front property line, without a break or separation in the
buildings of at least fifteen feet (15') in width. Such breaks shall be
improved for use as pathways for pedestrian and/or vehicular access to parking
areas or the rear of the site.
FIGURE 10
VARIATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-64.jpg]
 
c.   Vertical Variation: Buildings in excess of two (2) stories in height shall
exhibit architectural detailing that establishes a vertical separation between
lower and upper stories. This may be accomplished by a mid facade cornice or
trim, a change in material, style, or color, a facade stepback or roof pitch
with dormer windows, or other methods that meet the intent of this subsection.
d.   Building Orientation: Buildings within the TC Zone shall have their
architectural orientation toward the front property line of the site which
includes having at least one functioning entry door oriented to the street.
Buildings on corner lot sites shall have an architectural orientation toward
each right-of-way frontage with the appearance of building entry points along
each front facade. Buildings shall also have an entrance oriented toward the
parking area associated with that building.
e.   Transparency: In order to create a more friendly and pedestrian oriented
environment for the area, all buildings shall have a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) each building facade which faces a public or private right-of-way
consisting of windows and doors on the ground level. Side and rear facades
shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) transparency if they face upon a
parking area or a pedestrian or vehicular pathway. Other facades shall have a
minimum twenty five percent (25%) transparency. Tinted or mirrored glass shall
not be allowed on the ground floor.
f.   Architectural Features:
(1)   Adopted Guidelines: All architecture and exterior materials are to follow
the adopted Town Center Design Guidelines.
(2)   Entries: Buildings shall be designed with distinct and inviting entryways
and features.
(3)   Window Accents: Windows shall include accent features such as trim,
sills, oriels, and shutters that serve to soften the appearance of the building
and create a smaller scale pedestrian feel and environment.
(4)   Roofs: Roofs shall be varied in style with elements of hipped, gabled,
and flat roofs. Rooflines shall have ornamentation such as gable dormer
windows, six inch (6") cornice or hips perpendicular to the primary roofline.
(5)   Awnings: The use of awnings on the ground floor is strongly encouraged.
Awnings should be employed uniformly across the horizontal plane of buildings.
Awnings shall be permitted to overhang property lines bordering public rights-
of-way but shall not do so in a manner which interferes with pedestrian or
vehicular movement, necessitates supports extending below the bottom of the
awning frame, or creates any other condition that is a nuisance or unsightly.
(6)   Service Areas: Loading docks and service areas shall be screened from
streets and adjacent properties through architectural design and landscaping.
g.   Building Materials: New buildings within the TC Zone shall be designed and
constructed with minimum of eighty percent (80%) brick on each facade, in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1)   Windows shall be excluded from the calculation of exterior building
material requirements.
(2)   Secondary materials shall be stucco, stone, fiber/cement siding, wood or
similar material in composition and of a complementary hue and shade to the
brick. A maximum of two (2) accent colors may be allowed for secondary
materials.
(3)   A materials board containing a sampling of the desired materials and
their colors shall be required with the submission for review of a proposed
development. Development approval shall be subject to the Planning Commission
approving the materials board for both composition and colors.
FIGURE 11
TRANSPARENCY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-68.jpg]
 
(4)   Brick, rock, and stone elements of a building shall not be painted to
create compliance with the color palette of the site.
(5)   Fiber/cement siding and wood elements of a building may be painted or
stained only as a means to integrate the material into the color palette of the
buildings on the same and neighboring sites.
h.   Projections: Building projections shall not be permitted beyond the
property line, with the exception of permitted signs and awnings, covered
walkways, and other features, as approved by the Planning Commission that are
meant to provide pedestrian cover.
i.   Four Sided Architecture: The design of a building shall be considered on
all sides of the building with each facade being required to meet the terms of
this section.
E.   Redevelopment Provisions:
1.   Nonconforming Uses: Uses existing at the time of adoption and application
of the TC Zone which do not conform to the permitted and conditional uses
allowed within the zone shall be allowed to continue without penalty, including
the allowance of permits for the expansion of said use until the time when that
use changes in accordance with chapter 6 of this title. Upon the change of any
nonconforming use, the new use and the property on which it is located shall be
required to fully conform to the provisions of this section, subject to the
provisions of subsection E2 of this section.
2.   Reuse Of Buildings: In an effort to maintain and enhance the feel of the
Town Center area, development is strongly encouraged to utilize existing
buildings through renovation, structural conversion, and/or physical upgrading
to accomplish the goals and objectives of their development project. In the
event that the existing constraints of the site prevent the reasonable
compliance of the site and/or structure, the Planning Commission may approve
the site and redevelopment thereof as being compliant to the greatest extent
possible. Such sites shall not be considered nonconforming following completion
of the redevelopment work as an exception to chapter 6 of this title when
establishing the following findings:
a.   The constraints of the site do not lend themselves to achieving full
compliance with the terms of this section and have complied to the greatest
extent possible;
b.   The development meets the intent of the general plan and the terms of this
section;
c.   The development is harmonious with surrounding development; and
d.   Adequate provisions have been made to improve the site beyond the minimum
requirements of the TC zoning classification.
F.   Historic Preservation Commission Review: Prior to considering a
development application under the terms of this section, the application shall
be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall
submit a copy of the application to the Historic Preservation Commission.
2.   Within twenty (20) days after receipt, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall review the application with respect to the development
standards set forth in this section and standards for issuance of the
development approval sought by the application.
3.   Within ten (10) days after reviewing an application the commission shall
prepare and transmit a written recommendation to the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 1345, 9-18-2018)
9-11-095: (CBU) COMMERCIAL BUFFER ZONE:
A.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to any real property
located within the Commercial Buffer Zone, as shown on the official zoning map
of Draper City.
B.   Use Regulations: See permitted and conditional uses allowed in commercial
zones, section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter.
C.   Standards: In addition to the development standards found in section
9-11-110 and
table 9-11-2, the following shall apply to all land and buildings in the
Commercial Buffer Zone:
1.   Off Street Parking: Parking requirements shall be as described in chapter
25 of this title. The following standards shall also apply:
a.   Excepting corner lots, no parking shall be permitted between the front
building facade and a public right-of-way. All parking shall be contained to
the side and/or rear of the property that is not adjacent to a public right-of-
way.
b.   For corner lots, parking located on a public right-of-way side of any
building shall be screened from view from adjacent public right-of- way with
landscaping or screen walls. All plantings shall conform to the standards in
section
9-27-080 of this title.
2.   Site Access and Cross Access: Cross access shall be provided between all
adjacent commercial properties on classified roads. Cross access is recommended
for all commercial developments on non-classified streets.
3.   Lighting: On site lighting shall conform to the provisions of chapter 20
of this title.
4.   Service Elements: All service elements, such as dumpsters and building
mechanical equipment, shall be screened through the use of landscaping (see
section 9-23-120) or incorporation into the building architecture (refer to
figure 7 in section
9-11-090).
a.   All enclosures for such features shall be constructed of the same exterior
materials and of similar architecture as the building.
b.   All such equipment shall be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
any residential property line and shall not be visible from any roadway.
c.   All ground utility equipment shall be screened through the use of
landscaping or fencing as per section
9-23-120 which provides a visual barrier without prohibiting or restricting
access to the utility equipment.
5.   Landscaping: Except as specified below, the landscape standards in chapter
23 of this title shall apply in the Commercial Buffer Zone.
a.   Front Setback: Areas between building facades and the abutting right-of-
way property line shall be landscaped. Such landscaped areas may include
outdoor seating.
b.   Materials And Plantings: All setback areas shall be landscaped. Newly
installed landscaping shall include trees at a ratio of at least one tree per
four hundred (400) square feet of landscape area.
c.   Site Landscaping: All sites shall maintain a minimum of twenty percent
(20%) total site landscaping. The Planning Commission may approve an adjustment
in the total site percentage of required site landscaping to not less than
fifteen percent (15%) if the project provides for:
(1)   Natural open space area with benches/viewing areas and/or trails; or
(2)   Courtyard with benches; or
(3)   Picnic benches with shade structures.
Findings for landscaping deviations are the same as those found in chapter 23
of this title.
d.   Parking Area Landscaping: All parking areas shall maintain a minimum of
seven percent (7%) landscaping. The parking area shall be considered that area
of a site containing parking stalls, vehicle travel lanes and pedestrian
pathways. The parking area shall not be considered to include vehicular access
ways connecting the right-of-way to the parking area or that area beyond the
outermost curbing or hard surfacing of the parking area. Parking area
landscaping should be designed to provide a visual and physical break in the
bulk and expansiveness of the parking area while providing shaded areas.
e.   Landscaping Variety: All landscaping is encouraged to be water efficient
and of appropriate species according to the terms of this code, the Draper City
Street Tree Guide and all other applicable provisions.
6.   Fencing: Fences, walls, and other separation devices which separate
properties shall be required in the Commercial Buffer Zone when a property to
be developed is adjacent to a residential use or zone and shares a rear or side
property line.
a.   Fences and hedges shall not exceed three feet (3') in height in the front
building setback for the purpose of separating an outdoor seating area from the
sidewalk or pedestrian pathways. All fencing materials shall be complementary
and match the design of the building. Prohibited fencing materials are chain
link and vinyl fencing.
b.   Upgraded decorative masonry fencing shall be provided along a rear or side
property line to separate commercial and residential uses. The height required
is six feet (6').
c.   All fencing shall conform to the standards in section
9-27-080 of this title.
7.   Signs: Signage shall comply with the provisions of chapter 26 of this
title.
8.   Additional Building Requirements: Except as specified below, the standards
in chapter 9-22 of this title shall apply to the Commercial Buffer Zone.
a.   Building Height: No new building or addition to an existing building
constructed within the Commercial Buffer Zone shall exceed a maximum height of
thirty feet (30'), including all parapets and mechanical equipment screening.
b.   Horizontal Variation: No building facade shall be more than fifty feet
(50') in horizontal length without a visual break. This shall be achieved by a
change in building material, building projections or relief measuring at least
three feet (3') in width and depth.
c.   Building Spacing. No combination of buildings shall extend along a
combined front facade for more than one hundred feet (100') without a
separation in the buildings of at least fifteen feet (15') in width. Such
breaks shall be improved for use as pathways for pedestrian and/or vehicular
access to parking areas or the rear of the site.
d.   Vertical Variation: Buildings in excess of one (1) story in height shall
exhibit architectural detailing that establishes a vertical separation between
lower and upper stories. This shall be accomplished by a mid-facade cornice or
trim, a change in material, style, or color, a facade stepback or roof pitch
with dormer windows.
e.   Building Orientation: Buildings within the Commercial Buffer Zone shall
have at least one (1) functioning front entrance for the general public
oriented to a public right-of-way.
f.   Architectural Guidelines: The properties shown on figure 1 below shall
comply with the Town Center Design Guidelines applicable to commercial
projects. Any site not shown shall comply with chapter 9-22.
   Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4956.png]
g.   Building Materials: New buildings within the Commercial Buffer Zone that
are not identified in figure 1 above shall comply with the commercial design
standards found in chapter 9-22 of this title.
h.   Four (4) Sided Architecture: The design of a building shall be considered
on all sides of the building with each facade being required to meet the
standards of this section.
D.   Redevelopment Provisions:
1.   Reuse Of Buildings: The Planning Commission can approve a deviation to the
standards within this chapter in order to allow for the reuse of existing
buildings subject to the findings listed in this subsection.
a.   The physical shape of the site does not allow full compliance with the
terms of this section and the project has been designed to meet the standards
of this section to the greatest extent possible;
b.   The development meets the intent of the general plan and the terms of this
section;
c.   The development fits with surrounding development; and
d.   Adequate provisions have been made to improve the site beyond the minimum
standards of this section.
E.   Historic Preservation Commission Review: Prior to Planning Commission
considering a development application under the terms of this section, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall review any proposal for a property
listed on the national, state or local historic register and make any
recommendations as needed as part of the development application process. (Ord.
1447, 8-4-2020)
9-11-100: (DC) DESTINATION COMMERCIAL:
A.   Purpose: This district is composed of certain land with excellent
transportation access to major highways and proximity to both Salt Lake and
Utah Counties. The area is characterized by large parcels, but the allowed uses
are limited to general retail, restaurant, lodging, office, service uses, and
recreation and entertainment, indoor. The intent is to create a vibrant center
of activity to complement the other regional retailers near this interchange.
B.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property
located in the Destination Commercial Zone, as shown on the official zoning map
of Draper City.
C.   Use Regulations: See permitted and conditional uses allowed in commercial
zones, section
9-11-110,
table 9-11-1 of this chapter.
D.   Development Standards: The use and development of real property in the
Destination Commercial Zone shall conform to regulations of general
applicability as set forth in section
9-11-050 of this chapter. In addition to these general requirements, projects
within this zone will be required to achieve design excellence in conformance
with the objectives of this unique district as described in the general plan,
land use category no. 27. The site plan shall demonstrate:
1.   Accentuated entrances to buildings.
2.   Awnings over sidewalks where applicable.
3.   Landscape walls, berms or hedges to screen parking lots.
4.   Landscape and pedestrian scale lighting.
5.   Landscape aisles every three (3) full rows of parking to prevent cross
circulation.
6.   Safe pedestrian walkways through the project.
7.   Cohesive sign program.
8.   Permanence by the use of quality building materials, such as masonry.
E.   Off Street Parking: See parking requirements described in chapter 25 of
this title.
F.   Signs: See sign regulations described in chapter 26 of this title.
G.   Lighting: See lighting requirements described in chapter 20 of this title.
(Ord. 698, 8-1-2006)
9-11-105: (MARF) MAJOR FREEWAY ARTERIAL FRONTAGE ROAD
A.   Purpose: The Major Freeway Arterial Frontage zone contains approximately
6.55 acres, based the legal description outlined in Exhibit A and is located at
approximately 14875 South Minuteman Drive bordered by Minuteman Drive and
Marion Vista. Railroad lines abut the property on the south. The size, unusual
shape and unique location of the property allows for a master planned project
with a potential for office, commercial, multiple-family dwellings, and other
uses. The property has immediate proximity to major transportation corridors
such as Interstate-15 Frontage Road (Minuteman Drive) and almost direct access
to I-15 at the 14600 South interchange. The property has a distinct topography
and exposure to freeway traffic and is located away from single-family
residential neighborhoods. The site is located near the Silicon Slopes and the
Point of the Mountain Trail. Currently existing higher intensity land uses such
as the gravel mining and processing operations are located in the area.
B.   Development Standards: The development standards of the Major Freeway
Arterial Frontage zone will guide the design of the buildings, landscaping,
parking, lighting, and signage located within the zone boundary. The concept
plans included herein as exhibits (Exhibits B, C and D) show examples of
various uses for illustrative purposes only and shall not be interpreted as
binding upon the final development. Unless otherwise noted the development
shall be in accordance with the development standards listed herein.
1.   Non Multi-Family Dwelling Uses: Unless otherwise noted the following
standards shall apply to all non multi-family dwelling buildings.
a.   Buildings shall be at least fifty feet (50') in height including any
mechanical penthouse. The maximum height shall be one hundred feet (100')
including all building stories, podiums and mechanical equipment.
b.   All building facades, meaning all sides of a building, shall have the same
character each utilizing the same materials, colors, features, forms, and
design elements appropriate to the scale of the various building sizes and
depths. The multiple sides of any building will not be required to be exactly
the same design but each façade shall have at least three (3) design features
with at least one primary material.
c.   The exact elements will be as deemed appropriate to the scale and other
aspects of the various building sizes and depths by the architect for the
applicant subject to approval by an Architectural Review Board (ARB) as defined
as subsection H below.
d.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, glazing, stone, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS),
concrete, glass fiber reinforced concrete (GFRC), tile, brick, or cement fiber
board.
e.   Buildings, except for hotels, shall have a minimum of forty percent (40%)
high efficiency glazing.
f.   All mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view, either by
enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight. Mechanical equipment on the roof
shall be no taller than ten feet (10') and shall be included with the maximum
height allowed.
g.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within an enclosure designed and made of
materials similar or complimentary to the primary buildings.
h.   The following setbacks shall apply:
(1)   Front, rear and side yards: ten feet (10')
i.   All non multi-family dwelling uses or projects shall be required to
prepare a traffic impact study. This traffic impact study will be paid for by
the developer and any recommendations of the traffic impact study shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
2.   Office warehouse:
a.   All buildings shall be articulated with use appropriate scale, form,
materials, and colors.
b.   All building facades shall have the same character each utilizing the same
materials, colors, features, forms and design elements appropriate to the scale
of the various building sizes and depths.
c.   The exact elements will be as deemed appropriate to the scale and other
aspects of the various building sizes and depths by the architect for the
applicant subject to approval by an Architectural Review Board (ARB) created
for the project by the developer.
d.   Building primary materials shall consist of concrete, with some accent
materials of metal, stone, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), glass
fiber reinforced concrete (GFRC), tile, brick, or cement fiber board.
e.   No building shall be taller than fifty feet (50') including mechanical
equipment.
f.   All mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view, either by
enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight. Mechanical equipment on the roof
shall be no taller than ten feet (10') and shall be included with the maximum
height allowed.
g.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within an enclosure designed and made of
materials similar or complimentary to the primary buildings.
h.   The following setbacks shall apply:
(1)   Front, rear and side yards: ten feet (10').
3.   Retail:
a.   Retail buildings that are required to have a corporate design may utilize
that design with additional design elements that may be required by the ARB for
the development. All corporate designed buildings shall have ARB approval
before submittal of a site plan application to Draper City.
b.   Other retail buildings shall have similar character to those built within
the development using similar materials, colors, features, forms and design
elements. The exact elements will be as deemed appropriate to the scale and
other aspects of the various building sizes and depths by the architect for the
applicant as approved by the ARB for the development.
c.   The multiple sides of any building are not required to be exactly the same
but each façade shall have at least two (2) design features such as different
colors, articulations, heights, building materials (more than one primary
building material), or architectural treatments.
d.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), concrete,
glass fiber reinforced concrete (GFRC), concrete, tile, brick or cement fiber
board.
e.   No building shall be taller than fifty feet (50') including mechanical
equipment.
f.   All mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view, either by
enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight. Mechanical equipment on the roof
shall be no taller than ten feet (10') and shall be included with the maximum
height allowed.
g.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within an enclosure designed and made of
materials similar or complimentary to the primary buildings.
h.   The following setbacks shall apply:
(1)   Front, side and rear yards: ten feet (10').
4.   Hotel:
a.   The maximum height shall be one hundred feet (100') including all building
stories, podiums and mechanical equipment.
b.   Hotel buildings that are required to have a corporate consistent design
may utilize that design with additional design elements that may be required by
the ARB for the development. All corporate designed buildings shall have ARB
approval before submittal of a site plan application to Draper City.
c.   Other hotel buildings shall have similar character with each using similar
materials, colors, features, forms and design elements. The exact elements will
be as deemed appropriate to the scale and other aspects of the various building
sizes and depths by the architect for the applicant as approved by the ARB for
the development.
d.   The multiple sides of any building are not be required to be exactly the
same but each façade shall have at least three (3) design features such as
different colors, articulations, heights, building materials (including more
than one primary material) or architectural treatments.
e.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, exterior insulation and finish systems (EFIS), concrete,
glass fiber reinforced concrete (GFRC), concrete, , tile, brick or cement fiber
board .
f.   All mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view, either by
enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight. Mechanical equipment on the roof
shall be no taller than ten feet (10') and shall be included with the maximum
height allowed.
g.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within an enclosure designed and made of
materials similar or complimentary to the primary buildings.
h.   The following setbacks shall apply:
(1)   Front, rear and side yards: ten feet (10').
5.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Uses:
a.   No more than sixty percent (60%) of the square footage of the property
described in Exhibit A shall be used for the multi-family dwelling uses,
including building footprints, landscaping, open space, amenities, setbacks and
parking. The remaining portion of the property shall be used for non multi-
family dwelling uses permitted in this zone.
b.   The maximum height shall be one hundred feet (100') including all building
stories, podiums and mechanical equipment.
c.   Each separate building will be connected by walkways. The buildings will
share use of any outdoor common areas.
d.   Building setbacks from property lines are as follows:
(1)   Front, side and rear yards shall be ten feet (10') from property lines.
(2)   Parking shall be allowed in setback areas.
e.   Residential project areas shall install sidewalks on at least one side of
all private streets. Sidewalks shall be a width of no less than five feet (5').
f.   All projects shall include a variety of bedroom unit sizes.
g.   The front facade of multiple-family dwelling structures shall have visual
relief through an array of architectural features and varied individual unit
setbacks.
h.   Articulation such as balconies, porches, wall projections, and
fenestration shall be used to break up the visual massing of building facades.
i.   All multiple-family dwellings projects shall include a variety of building
colors and materials.
j.   Color utilization shall be sensitive to the existing development within
the city and the natural landscape in which the project is situated.
(1)   Primary color shall be excluded from color utilization.
k.   Multiple-family dwelling project proposals shall submit a sample board
containing examples of all exterior surfacing materials and colors, including
roofing material and color. The exact elements will be as deemed appropriate to
the scale and other aspects of the various building sizes and depths by the
architect for the applicant as approved by the ARB for the development.
l.   Multiple-family dwelling structures shall incorporate variations of the
following architectural elements:
(1)   Rooflines,
(2)   Window frames,
(3)   Window types,
(4)   Porches,
(5)   Balconies,
(6)   Patios,
(7)   Projections,
(8)   Recesses, and
(9)   Entries.
m.   All sides of multiple-family dwelling structures shall have framed
windows.
n.   All facades of a building shall match the architectural detailing of the
front facade.
o.   Building materials for multiple-family dwelling structures shall consist
of at least fifty percent (50%) brick, stone, or synthetic stone on all sides
of the structure on the main level.
p.   The brick, stone, or synthetic stone may be clustered or accumulated on
the most publicly visible sides of the structure. This exception is dependent
on compliance with the following standards:
(1)   Shared entrances for multiple-family dwelling structures shall be
centrally located, accentuated with architectural detailing, and well lit.
(2)   Utility and mechanical equipment extending from multiple-family dwelling
structures shall be clustered and screened by compatible architectural
materials or appropriate vegetation.
q.   Projects shall have a strong relationship to the public environment that
will enhance the safety and efficiency of the project while improving the
character of the neighborhood.
r.   Structures shall front onto a right of way (public or private) that is
accessible to emergency vehicles.
s.   Projects with frontage on a public street shall orient units toward the
public street.
t.   Projects shall have an active street frontage on all public streets. The
creation of a second frontage road or courtyard area on the street frontage, in
which units may be oriented toward, can also be an acceptable option for
projects located on collector roads.
u.   Carports shall be prohibited.
v.   Fencing, if any, shall consist of quality design and material as approved
by the ARB for the project.
w.   Required guest parking shall be evenly distributed throughout multiple-
family dwelling projects and easily accessible.
x.   All multi-family dwelling uses or projects shall be required to prepare a
traffic impact study. This traffic impact study will be paid for by the
developer and any recommendations of the traffic impact study shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
y.   Private streets within multiple-family dwelling projects emulate public
street standard elements including providing for: on street parallel parking;
high back curb and gutter; and, park strips with street trees and cutback
parking.
z.   Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access points, entryways,
public gathering nodes, and parking areas. Pedestrian access points should be
installed between the project and the external neighborhood.
aa.   Unless noted herein all multiple-family dwelling projects shall submit a
lighting plan that illustrates lighting accommodation for automobile and
pedestrian networks in accordance with chapter 20, "Outdoor Lighting", of this
title.
bb.   Unless noted herein all multiple-family dwelling projects shall submit a
landscaping plan in accordance with chapter 23, "Landscaping and Screening", of
this title.
cc.   Open Space: No less than fifteen percent (15%) of the project area shall
be designated for open space uses. Rooftop, mezzanine and common raised
courtyard open space that is open to all residents may be allowed as part a
project. Open space may either be in the form of urban hardscapes, or
landscaped softscapes or a mixture of the two as specified below:
(1)   Open space areas and amenities shall be available to everyone residing
within the boundaries of a development.
(2)   Open space and amenities may include pathways and outdoor amenities and
public right of way sidewalks.
(3)   Open space excludes private balconies, decks, patio areas, vehicle
parking, streets.
(4)   Open space and amenities should be distributed throughout the project.
(5)   Open space and amenities will include the slope areas of the project.
dd.   All mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view, either by
enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight. Mechanical equipment on the roof
shall be no taller than ten feet (10') and shall be included with the maximum
height allowed.
ee.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within an enclosure designed and made of
materials similar or complimentary to the primary buildings.
6.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Amenities:
a.   Projects with fifty (50) multiple-family dwelling units or fewer shall
include a minimum of three (3) amenities.
b.   Projects with fifty-one (51) multiple-family dwelling units or more shall
include a minimum of six (6) amenities.
c.   Projects with fifty-one (51) or more multiple-family dwelling units shall
also include a minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional
social area, no less than one thousand (1,000) gross square feet in gathering
space and a minimum of one outside social function area, no less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet in gathering space.
d.   Multiple-family dwelling amenities may include the following:
(1)   Pet friendly amenities including dog-park or washing station,
(2)   Lap pool or lounge pool,
(3)   Bike racks or bike storage,
(4)   Storage areas,
(5)   Tot lot/play structure,
(6)   Community garden,
(7)   Courtyards with benches,
(8)   Barbecue area,
(9)   Outdoor fireplace/pit,
(10)   Spa with decking,
(11)   Dedicated co-working area or conference room,
(12)   Game room or lounge area,
(13)   Electric vehicle charging station,
(14)   Gym or workout facility, or
(15)   Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of this
guideline.
C.   Landscape Standards: The overall project will be landscaped with
sensitivity to its environment. A consistent palette of drought tolerant tree
types, plant materials, and ground covers will be incorporated throughout in
relation to the architecture to create a strong and consistent sense of place
and identity. The tree and plant palette will be submitted in conjunction with
specific site plan approval application. The landscape design shall comply with
the following standards:
1.   The landscaping shall define and enhance primary public entrances with
entry monuments.
2.   Ornamental landscaping shall be strategically designed to provide intimate
outdoor spaces for public amenities and at pedestrian pathways and entrances.
3.   The landscape shall promote water conservation by the use of water wise,
drip irrigation, and drought tolerant plant types.
4.   Tree palette shall be a combination of deciduous and non-deciduous trees
and shade and ornamental trees.
5.   The initial tree size shall have a minimum two-inch (2") caliper and be
minimum six feet (6') high.
6.   The minimum landscape percentage for any office use shall be fifteen
percent (15%) inclusive of all phases.
7.   Landscaping berms measuring two feet (2') in height will be used around
the perimeter of any office use to help minimize the visual impact of the
parking field.
8.   The minimum landscape percentage for commercial and retail parking lots
shall be seven percent (7%).
9.   All multi-family dwelling projects shall have at least ten percent (10%)
of landscaping.
10.   All non-residential projects shall have at least fifteen percent (15%) of
landscaping.
11.   If, at the time of approval of site plan as specified in Section G,
below, a perpetual easement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney has been
acquired for landscaping from an adjacent property owner that is contiguous to
the project landscaping then the landscaping on that perpetual easement shall
be credited to the landscaping required for the project.
12.   Detention basins shall be landscaped pursuant to applicable provisions of
the City Code and the landscaping shall be maintained by the owner.
13.   Drought tolerant landscaping is required throughout the development.
14.   Any landscape standard not addressed in this section shall comply with
the provisions of chapter 23, "Landscaping and Screening", of this title.
15.   A five foot (5') tree strip shall be provided along Minuteman Drive and
Marion Vista Drive. A street tree plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application to ensure compliance.
D.   Parking Design:
1.   Parking: Commercial, office, retail, hotel. Parking for any commercial,
office and retail shall comply with applicable provisions of chapter 25,
"Parking", of this title except as outlined below.
2.   Parking Requirements: Parking requirement for each residential area shall
be within the range of one and one-half (1½) to two (2) per unit. One guest
parking stall per five (5) residential units shall be provided for guests.
3.   Hotel parking will be parked at a minimum of one (1) stall per room.
4.   Parking and parking structures for any uses will be configured to reduce
the appearance of large parking expanses.
5.   Parking diamonds will also be allowed in all parking areas and shall be
credited towards any required landscaping. At least one (1) tree shall be
planted in each parking diamond.
6.   Parking structures for multi-family dwelling uses may be incorporated into
the multi-family dwelling buildings.
7.   Any stand-alone parking structures shall be designed with in context with
the primary structures and shall have ARB approval before submittal of a site
plan application to Draper City.
8.   Multiple family dwelling uses may share up to twenty percent (20%) of the
required parking with the non multi-family residential uses in accordance with
Figure 1 below. The Zoning Administrator may approve shared parking subject to
a parking study that conforms with the requirements of Section 9-25-090(C)(1)
and subject to the findings listed in
9-25-050(D).
Figure 1
 
            Weekdays                                 Weekends
            Midnight – 7:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m. – Midnight – 7:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m. –
            7:00 a.m.    6:00 p.m.     Midnight      7:00 a.m.    6:00 p.m.     Midnight
Hotel       100%         65%           90%           100%         65%           80%
Office and  5%           100%          5%            0%           60%           10%
industrial
Residential 100%         55%           85%           100%         65%           75%
Restaurant  50%          70%           100%          45%          70%           100%
Retail      0            100           80            0            100           60
 
E.   Lighting Design:
1.   Parking lot lighting in commercial areas shall provide adequate
illumination at a minimum 0.5 (1/2) foot-candle and maximum of four (4) foot-
candles with 0.2 foot-candles at the property lines.
2.   Parking lot lighting shall utilize cutoff type fixtures.
3.   Parking lot lighting shall not be taller than thirty feet (30').
4.   The "main corridor" will have decorative black streetlights. Spacing to be
no more than three hundred feet (300') on center.
5.   Any lighting standard not addressed in this section shall comply with the
provision of chapter 20, "Outdoor Lighting", of this title.
F.   Signage: All signage shall comply with applicable provisions of chapter
26, "Signs", of this title.
G.   Procedures/Applicability Of Other Code Provisions:
1.   The City specifically finds all policy and legislative type considerations
required to be made for the approval of this section have been considered and
made in the process of adopting this section. The administrative consideration
of the implementation of this section is specifically delegated as specified
herein.
2.   Approval of this Major Freeway Arterial Frontage zone and accompanying
exhibits shall constitute conceptual site plan approval in accordance with the
city code for those potential uses that have conceptual site plans approved
with this article. Engineering requirements shall still be subject to review at
final site plan.
a.   Site plan approval for any future development of office, hotel or
residential uses and building shall be approved administratively by the Zoning
Administrator upon finding substantial compliance with the terms of this Major
Freeway Arterial Frontage zone.
(1)   The first site plan submitted to Draper City for the MARF zone shall show
the delineation of the maximum multi-family dwelling uses acreage and shared
parking, as outlined in Section
9-11-105(B)(5)(a) above, in order to clarify the location and amount of multi-
family dwelling uses permitted on the site described in Exhibit A.
(2)   Any subdivision submitted for the site described in Exhibit A shall
reflect the delineation of uses as outlined in subsection A above.
(3)   If the applicant disagrees with the Zoning Administrator's decision the
applicant has the right to have their site plan reviewed by the Planning
Commission.
b.   The Planning Commission shall be the land use authority for approving site
plans for any uses in the Major Freeway Arterial Frontage zone other than
office, hotel or multi-family dwelling residential uses and buildings. Except
provided otherwise herein, all other permits shall be processed in accordance
with the Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. The images and
renderings in this article are conceptual and may be changed.
3.   If any development provisions are not addressed in this chapter than the
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance shall govern the development.
4.   The project shall comply with the applicable Utah Department of
Transportation (UDOT) standards for roads and the developer will pay their fair
share of all improvements required by a road study.
H.   An Architectural Control Board (ARB) shall be created by the developer of
any project in the MARF and shall have the opportunity to review all
development proposals for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and
any applicable development standards and design guidelines prior to submission
of those proposals to the City for review. The ARB shall provide to the City a
written report of all applications reviewed for which application will be made
to the City. Reports for proposed site plan applications shall address all of
the review criteria listed in this Chapter.
I.   Exhibits:
EXHIBIT A
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY
THE FOLLOWING PARCELS OF LAND LOCATED WITHIN DRAPER CITY, SALT LAKE COUNTY,
UTAH, OBTAINED FROM THE SALT LAKE COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE.
TAX ID NOS. 33-12-400-037-1001 & 33-12-400-037-1002
BEG S 89°25'58" E 113.32 FT & N 88.86 FT FR S 1/4 COR SEC 12, T4S, R1W, SLM;
NW'LY ALG 970.95 FT RADIUS CURVE TO R 260.33 FT (CHD N 60°56'36" W 259.55 FT);
N 36°44'16" E 7.50 FT; N 53°15'44" W 15.97 FT; N 7°31'37" W 42.97 FT TO SE'LY
ROW LINE OF I-15 E FRONTAGE RD; NE'LY ALG 2794.79 FT RADIUS CURVE TO R 455.56
FT (CHD N 42°52'43" E 455.06 FT); N53°33'17" E 192.16 FT M OR L; NE'LY ALG A
643.50 FT RADIUS CURVE TO L 131.91 FT (CHD N 71°44'27" E 131.68 FT); N
77°36'48" E 258.73 FT; NE'LY ALG A 756.50 FT RADIUS CURVE TO L 113.13 FT; S
42°12'26" E 83.38 FT M OR L; S 50°35'53" W 223.52 FT M OR L; SW'LY ALG 5829.65
FT RADIUS CURVE TO L 782.38 FT (CHD S 46°45'40" W 781.79 FT); S 42°34' W 33.46
FT TO BEG. 6.50 AC M OR L.
THE FOLLOWING DESCRIPTION IS AN OVERALL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED MAFR ZONE.
BEGINNING AT A POINT AT THE INTERSECTION OF THE NORTHERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF
MARION VISTA DRIVE AND THE NORTHWESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE UTA RAILWAY
CORRIDOR, SAID POINT BEING SOUTH 89 °25' 58" EAST, ALONG THE SECTION LINE,
113.32 FEET AND NORTH 88.86 FEET FROM THE SOUTH QUARTER CORNER OF SECTION 12,
TOWNSHIP 4 SOUTH, RANGE 1 WEST, SALT LAKE BASE AND MERIDIAN AND RUNNING THENCE
ALONG THE RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF SAID MARION VISTA DRIVE THE FOLLOWING FOUR (4)
COURSES: 1) 260.33 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF A 970.95 FOOT RADIUS CURVE TO THE
RIGHT (CHORD BEARS NORTH 60°56'36" WEST 259.55 FEET); 2) NORTH 36°44'16" EAST
7.50 FEET; 3) NORTH 53 °15' 44" WEST 15.97 FEET;4) NORTH 07°31' 37" WEST 42.97
FEET TO THE SOUTHERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF THE FRONTAGE ROAD FOR 1-15
(MINUTEMAN DRIVE); THENCE ALONG SAID SOUTHERLY RIGHT OF WAY LINE TH E FOLLOWING
FIVE (5) COURSES: 1) 455.56 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF A 2794.79 FOOT RADIUS CURVE
TO THE RIGHT (CHORD BEARS NORTH 42°52' 43" EAST 455.06 FEET); 2) NORTH 53 °33'
17" EAST 192.19 FEET; 3) 131.89 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF A 643.50 FOOT RADIUS
CURVE TO THE RIGHT (CHORD BEARS NORTH 71°33 ' 52" EAST 131.66 FEET; 4) NORTH
77°26' 10" EAST 258.73 FEET; 5) 113.12 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF A 756.50 FOOT
RADIUS CURVE TO THE LEFT (CHORD BEARS NORTH 73 °09 ' 08" EAST 113.02 FEET) TO
THE EASTERLY LINE OF THE UDOT PROPERTY DESCRIBED IN ENTRY NO. 12240997 AS UDOT
PARCEL 902:S; THENCE SOUTH 42°44'49" EAST 82.30 FEET TO TH E NORTHWESTE RLY
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF THE UTA RAILWAY CORRIDOR, THENCE RUNNING ALONG SAID
NORTHWESTERLY RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE THE FOLLOWING THREE (3) COURSES: 1) SOUTH 50°35
' 53" WEST 223.52 FEET; 2) 782.38 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF A 5829.65 FOOT RADIUS
CURVE TO THE LEFT (CHORD BEARS SOUTH 46°45' 40" WEST 781.79 FEET); 3) SOUTH
42°34 '00" WEST 33.46 FEET TO SAID INTERSECTION OF MARION ROAD AND THE UTA
CORRIDOR AND THE POINT OF BEGINNING.
CONTAINS 283,254 SF OR 6.503 ACRES, MORE OR LESS
EXHIBIT B
CONCEPT PLAN FOR OFFICE BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3531.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3529.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3525.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3527.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3523.png]
 
EXHIBIT C
CONCEPT PLANS FOR HOTEL BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3521.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3519.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3539.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3537.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3535.png]
 
EXHIBIT D
CONCEPT PLAN FOR MULTI-FAMILY BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3533.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3547.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3545.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3543.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3541.png]
 
(Ord. 1399, 8-27-2019)
9-11-110: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLES:
TABLE 9-11-1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN COMMERCIAL ZONES
(Except CSD Zones)
Uses Zones
     CN CC CR CG CI CBP CO1 CO2 O-R TC DC CS MARF CBU
Uses                           Zones
                               CN CC CR CG CI CBP CO1 CO2 O-R TC DC CS MARF CBU
Residential uses:                                               
Assisted living facility       P  P  P  P  NP NP  NP  NP  P   P  NP P  NP   NP
Dwelling, multiple- family     NP NP NP NP NP NP  NP  NP  P   C1 NP NP P    NP
Dwelling, single- family       NP NP NP NP NP NP  NP  NP  P   NP NP NP NP   NP
Home occupations               See chapter 34 of this title
Residential facility for       NP NP NP NP NP NP  NP  NP  C   C  NP NP NP   NP
elderly persons
Residential facility for       P  P  P  P  NP NP  NP  NP  P   P  NP P  NP   NP
persons with a disability
Public and civic uses:                                          
Auditorium, major              NP NP C  NP NP NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Auditorium, minor              NP C  C  NP NP C   NP  C   NP  C  NP NP NP   NP
Charter schools                P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Church or place of worship     P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Club or service organization   P  P  P  NP NP P   P   P   P   NP NP NP NP   NP
Cultural service               P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Government service             P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Higher education facility,     NP C  C  C  C  C   C   C   NP  C  NP NP P    NP
private
Higher education facility,     P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
public
Hospital                       NP P  P  NP NP P   NP  P   NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Private school                 C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C   C9 NP C  P    NP
Protective service             P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Public school                  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Public utility substation      See chapter 36 of this title
Reception center               NP P  P  P  NP NP  NP  P   NP  P  P  NP NP   NP
Trade/vocational school        NP C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C   NP NP NP NP   NP
Utility, minor                 P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  NP   P
Municipal uses:                                                 
Franchise Municipal uses       P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Municipal uses                 P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Commercial uses:                                                
Auto, truck, RV, and equipment NP NP C  C  NP C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
storage
Bank or financial institution  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P2 P  P  P    P2
Bar establishment4             P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    NP
Bed and breakfast inns         P  P  NP NP NP NP  NP  NP  P   P3 NP NP NP   NP
Business equipment rental and  NP P  P  P  P  P   NP  P   NP  NP NP NP NP   P
supplies
Business service               NP P  P  P  P  P   P   P   NP  NP NP NP P    P
Car wash                       NP C  C  NP C  C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP P    NP
Cashing services               NP NP NP NP C  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Cattery                        NP NP NP C  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  C8 NP NP NP   C8
Commercial vehicle and         NP NP P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
equipment rental or sale
Commercial vehicle and         NP NP C  C  P  P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
equipment repair
Construction sales and service NP NP C  C  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Convenience store              P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Daycare, general               P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Funeral home                   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   NP  P  NP NP NP   P
Garage, public                 NP P  P  P  P  P   P   P   NP  P  P  P  NP   NP
Gas and fuel, storage and      NP P  P  P  P  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
sales
Gasoline service station       P  P  P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  NP P6 NP P    NP
Grooming service               P  P  P  P  P  P   NP  NP  P   NP NP P  NP   NP
Hotel                          NP P  P  P  P  P   P   P   NP  P  P  NP P    NP
Kennel                         NP NP NP C  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  C8 NP NP NP   C8
Laundry and dry cleaning,      P  P  P  P  P  P   NP  P   NP  P2 P  NP NP   P2
limited
Laundry service                P  P  P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP P  NP   NP
Media service                  NP NP P  P  NP P   P   P   P   P  NP NP NP   P
Medical cannabis pharmacy      P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Medical or dental laboratory   NP NP NP P  P  P   P   P   P   NP NP NP P    NP
Medical service                P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  NP P    P
Motel or motor lodge           NP NP P  P  P  P   NP  P   NP  NP P  NP NP   NP
Nursery                        NP P  P  P  P  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP P  NP   NP
Office, general                P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Office, warehouse              NP NP NP P  NP P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP P    NP
Parking, commercial            NP NP P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Personal care service          P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Personal instruction service   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
Precious metals and gems       NP P  P  P  NP P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
dealer
Preschool, general             P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    NP
Printing and photocopying,     P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    P
limited
Printing, general              NP NP NP P  NP P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   P
Recreation and entertainment,  NP P  P  P  NP P   NP  NP  NP  P  P  NP P    NP
indoor
Recreation and entertainment,  NP C  C  C  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP C    NP
outdoor
Recycling collection station   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P    NP
Repair service                 NP P  P  P  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP P  NP   NP
Research service               NP NP NP P  NP P   P   P   P   NP NP NP NP   NP
Restaurant                     P  P  P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  P2 P  NP P    P2
Retail, general                P  P  P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  P  P  P  P    P
Secondhand or thrift store,
large, with no outside storage
and no drop off of items       NP NP NP P  NP P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
during hours the business is
closed
Secondhand or thrift store,    P  P  P  P  NP NP  NP  NP  P   P  NP NP NP   P
small
Tattoo establishment           NP P  P  P  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Transportation service         NP NP NP C  NP C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Vehicle rental                 NP P  P  P  NP P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Vehicle repair, general        NP NP NP C  NP NP  NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Vehicle repair, limited        NP C  C  C  C  C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Vehicle sale                   NP P  P  P  P  P   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Veterinary service             P7 P  P  P  NP NP  NP  NP  P   P7 NP P  NP   P7
Warehouse, self- service       NP NP NP C  NP C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP C  NP   NP
storage
Wireless telecommunication     See chapter 41 of this title
facility
Manufacturing uses:                                             
Manufacturing, limited         NP NP NP C  NP C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
Wholesale and warehousing,     NP NP NP C  NP C   NP  NP  NP  NP NP NP NP   NP
limited
 
Notes:
   1.    Subject to the provisions of section
9-11-090  of this chapter.
   2.    Limited to no more than 1 drive-through lane.
   3.    In existing historic structures only.
   4.    Subject to the alcohol provisions per title 6, chapter 4 of this Code.
   5.    Without gasoline sales.
   6.    Only on the corner of Bangerter Highway.
   7.    With no kennel services.
   8.    No outdoor kennels or catteries.
   9.    Limited to no more than 15 students.
(Ord. 1345, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1394, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1419, 1-14-2020; Ord.
1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1438, 5-19-2020 ; Ord. 1447, 8-4-2020; Ord. 1464, 11-17-
2020; Ord. 1516, 12-14-2021; Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
TABLE 9-11-2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development Standard Zones
                     CN CC CR CG CI CBP CO1 CO2 O-R TC DC CS CBU
Development   Zones
Standard
              CN    CC    CR    CG   CI    CBP   CO1   CO2   O-R    TC    DC    CS           CBU
Lot                                                                               
standards:
Minimum area  1     5     10    1    5     10    2     5     10,000 10    5                  10,000
of zone       acre2 acres acres acre acres acres acres acres sq.    acres acres 1 acre       sq. ft.
                                                             ft.
Maximum lot   30%   50%   60%   50%  50%   50%   50%   50%   n/a    50%   60%   50%          30%
coverage
Maximum lot
depth (as a
multiple of   No requirement
lot width at
widest point)
Minimum lot   No requirement
frontage
Minimum lot   No requirement
width
Building                                                                          
standards:
Maximum                                                                                      30' or
height, all   35'   45'   45'   35'  55'   55'   35'   45'   24'    35' 3 45'   25'          2
buildings1                                                                                   stories
Preengineered
agricultural  Not permitted
grade metal
buildings
Setback
standards -                                                                       
front yard:
                                                                                No
Main                                                                0 -         requirement;
buildings     No requirement5; see chapter 23 of this title         154   n/a   see chapter  10'
                                                                                23 of this
                                                                                title
Use:                                                                              
Landscaped
buffer                                                                                       30'
adjacent to   See chapter 23 of this title                                      30' min.     min.
residential
zones
Fencing
adjacent to   No requirement; see chapter 23 of this title                      Min. 8' in   6' tall
residential                                                                     height
zones
 
Notes:
   1.    Additional height may be allowed in commercial zones pursuant to
applicable subsections
9-11-070(A),
9-11-090(D)(2)(a) and
9-27-120(B). Additional height is not allowed in the CN zone.
   2.    If property is master planned for neighborhood commercial zoning, then
zone area can be 10,000 square feet.
   3.    See subsection
9-11-090D2a of this chapter.
   4.    See subsection
9-11-090D1a(1) of this chapter.
    5.    There may be additional setback conditions as required in the
International Building Code.
(Ord. 1345, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1447, 8-4-2020; Ord.
1535, 5-3-2022)
CHAPTER 12
PUBLIC FACILITY ZONES
SECTION:
9-12-010: Purpose
9-12-020: Scope
9-12-030: Uses Allowed
9-12-040: Development Standards
9-12-050: Regulations Of General Applicability
9-12-060: Regulations For Specific Uses
9-12-070: Special Regulations
9-12-080: Use And Development Standards Tables
9-12-010: PURPOSE:
See subsection
9-8-020D of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property located in a
public facility zone as shown on the official zoning map. No building,
structure or real property shall be used and no building or structure shall be
hereafter erected, structurally or substantially altered, or enlarged except as
set forth in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit
or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-030: USES ALLOWED:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within public facility zones shall be as set forth in section
9-12-080,
table 9-12-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional use not shown on section
9-12-080,
table 9-12-1 of this chapter shall be prohibited unless the zoning
administrator determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or
conditional use.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-12-080,
table 9-12-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the same zone, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established.
3.   Accessory uses in public facility zones shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
         Cafeterias, dining halls and similar food service facilities when
located within the main use and operated primarily for the convenience of
employees, residents, clients, patients, or visitors to the main use.
         Garages and off street parking areas, subject to applicable standards
of chapter 25, "Parking", of this title.
         Gift shops, newsstands, and similar commercial activities operated
primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, patients, or
visitors to the main use.
         Recreational areas and facilities.
         Refreshment stands and food and beverage sales located in uses
involving public assembly.
         Solar energy systems.
         Swimming pools and hot tubs.
         Temporary uses, subject to applicable standards of title 6, chapter
16, "Temporary Uses", of this code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards within public facility zones shall be as set forth in
section
9-12-080,
table 9-12-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-050: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
The use and development of real property in public facility zones shall conform
to regulations of general applicability as set forth in the following chapters
of this title:
A.   Chapter 22, "Design Standards And Guidelines".
B.   Chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening".
C.   Chapter 24, "Natural Resources Inventory".
D.   Chapter 25, "Parking".
E.   Chapter 26, "Signs".
F.   Chapter 27, "Supplementary Development Standards". (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-060: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
To the extent that use and development of real property includes any matter
encompassed by a regulation for a specific use as set forth in article 6 of
this title, such regulation shall apply in addition to the requirements of this
chapter and shall prevail over any conflicting provision of this chapter. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-070: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
Reserved. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-12-080: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLES:
TABLE 9-12-1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN PUBLIC FACILITY ZONE
Use Zones
    PF OS PI
Use                                                Zones
                                                   PF OS PI
Auditorium                                         P  NP P
Bus terminal                                       P  NP NP
Cemetery                                           P  P  NP
Charter schools                                    P  P  P
Church or place of worship                         P  P  P
Club or service organization                       P  NP NP
Commercial uses:                                        
Medical cannabis pharmacy                          P  P  P
Wireless telecommunication facility                See
                                                   chapter 41  of this title
Convalescent care facility                         P  NP NP
Cultural service                                   P  P  NP
Golf course                                        P  P  P
Government service                                 P  P  P
Higher education facility, private                 C  NP C
Higher education facility, public                  P  NP P
Hospital                                           P  NP NP
Military facility                                  P  P  P
Municipal uses:                                         
Franchise municipal uses                           P  P  P
Municipal uses                                     P  P  P
Operations center                                  P  NP P
Park                                               P  P  P
Post office                                        P  P  P
Private school                                     C  NP C
Protective service                                 P  NP P
Public utility substation                          See
                                                   chapter 36  of this title
Public school                                      P  P  P
Reception center                                   C  NP NP
Recreation and entertainment, indoor (indoor sport P  P  P
facility only)
Recreation and entertainment, outdoor (open air    C  C  C
theater only)
Trade/vocational school                            C  NP C
Utility, minor                                     P  P  P
 
(Ord. 913, 9-1-2009; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1438
5-19-2020)
TABLE 9-12-2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development Standard Zones
                     PF OS PI
Development Standard               Zones
                                   PF             OS             PI
Lot standards:                                                  
Minimum area                       10,000 sq. ft. 5 acres        10 acres
Minimum area (indoor sport                                     3 acres
facility only)
Lot coverage, as a percent of      No requirement
total lot area
Maximum lot depth (as a multiple
of lot width at widest point)
Minimum lot frontage
Minimum lot width
Building standards:                                             
Maximum square footage of floor
area at ground level (including    40%            40%            40%
garages) as a percentage of lot
area
Maximum height, main buildings     35 ft.         35 ft.         35 ft.
Maximum height, accessory          20 ft.         20 ft.         20 ft.
buildings
Setback standards - front yard,                                 
side yard, and rear yard:
Main and accessory buildings       No requirement; see chapter 23 of this title
Barns and stables                  See section
                                   9-27-050 of this title
Setback standards - side yard:                                  
Main buildings                                    No requirement
Accessory buildings of 120 sq. ft.
or less
Accessory buildings greater than
120 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 913, 9-1-2009)
CHAPTER 13
MANUFACTURING ZONES
SECTION:
9-13-010: Purpose
9-13-020: Scope
9-13-030: Uses Allowed
9-13-040: Development Standards
9-13-050: Regulations Of General Applicability
9-13-060: Regulations For Specific Uses
9-13-070: Special Regulations
9-13-080: Use And Development Standards Tables
9-13-010: PURPOSE:
See subsection
9-8-020E of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-13-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property located in a
manufacturing zone as shown on the official zoning map. No building, structure
or real property shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, structurally or substantially altered, or enlarged except as set forth
in this chapter. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or other laws. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2011)
9-13-030: USES ALLOWED:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within manufacturing zones shall be as set forth in section
9-13-080,
table 9-13-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional use not shown on section
9-13-080,
table 9-13-1 of this chapter shall be prohibited, unless the zoning
administrator determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or
conditional use.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-13-080,
table 9-13-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the same zone, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established.
3.   Accessory uses in manufacturing zones shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
Cafeterias, dining halls and similar food service facilities when located
within the main use and operated primarily for the convenience of employees,
residents, clients, patients, or visitors to the main use.
Dwelling units, other than mobile or manufactured homes, for security and
maintenance personnel.
Garages and off street parking areas, subject to applicable standards of
chapter 25, "Parking", of this title.
Recreational areas and facilities for the use of employees.
Recycling collection stations.
Solar energy systems.
Temporary uses, subject to applicable standards of title 6, chapter 16,
"Temporary Uses", of this code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-13-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards within manufacturing zones shall be as set forth in
section
9-13-080,
table 9-13-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-13-050: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
The use and development of real property in manufacturing zones shall conform
to regulations of general applicability as set forth in the following chapters
of this title:
A.   Chapter 22, "Design Standards And Guidelines".
B.   Chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening".
C.   Chapter 24, "Natural Resources Inventory".
D.   Chapter 25, "Parking".
E.   Chapter 26, "Signs".
F.   Chapter 27, "Supplementary Development Standards". (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-13-060: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
To the extent that use and development of real property includes any matter
encompassed by a regulation for a specific use as set forth in article 6,
chapters 30 through 41 of this title, such regulation shall apply in addition
to the requirements of this chapter and shall prevail over any conflicting
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-13-070: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A.   Increased Height Limits: Notwithstanding the height limitations shown on
section
9-13-080,
table 9-13-2 of this chapter, greater building height may be allowed in all
Manufacturing Zones pursuant to a conditional use permit. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2011)
9-13-080: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLES:
TABLE 9-13-1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN MANUFACTURING ZONES
Use Zones
    M1 M2
Use                                             Zones
                                                M1 M2
Agricultural uses:                                 
Agricultural processing                         NP P
Cannabis production establishment               P  P
Public and civic uses:                             
Bus terminal                                    P  NP
Charter schools                                 P  P
Church or place of worship                      P  P
Government service                              P  P
Higher education facility, private              C  NP
Higher education facility, public               P  P
Operations center                               P  P
Private school                                  C  NP
Protective service                              P  P
Public school                                   P  P
Public utility substation                       See
                                                chapter 36 of this title
Trade/vocational school                         C  C
Utility, major                                  P  P
Utility, minor                                  P  P
Commercial uses:                                   
Agricultural sales and service                  P  P
Auto, truck, RV and equipment storage           P  P
Business equipment rental and supplies          P  P
Business service                                P  P
Cattery                                         P  P
Commercial vehicle and equipment rental or sale P  P
Commercial vehicle and equipment repair         P  P
Construction sales and service                  P  P
Convenience store                               P  P
Gas and fuel, storage and sales                 P  P
Gasoline service station                        P  P
Kennel                                          P  P
Low power radio services facility               See
                                                chapter 41 of this title
Media service                                   P  NP
Medical cannabis pharmacy                       P  P
Office, general                                 P  P
Parking, commercial                             P  P
Pawnshop                                        C  NP
Personal instruction service                    P  NP
Printing, general                               P  NP
Recycling station                               P  P
Repair service                                  P  P
Restaurant, fast food                           P  P
Retail, general                                 P  P
Sexually oriented business                      C  C
Tattoo establishment                            P  P
Transportation service                          P  P
Vehicle rental                                  P  P
Vehicle repair, general                         P  P
Vehicle repair, limited                         P  P
Vehicle sale                                    P  P
Veterinary service                              P  P
Warehouse, self-service storage                 P  P
Wireless telecommunication facility             See
                                                chapter 41 of this title
Municipal uses:                                    
Franchise Municipal use                         P  P
Municipal use                                   P  P
Manufacturing uses:                                
Basic industry                                  NP C
Car wash                                        P  P
Car wash, commercial vehicles                   P  P
Freight terminal                                P  P
Laundry services                                P  P
Manufacturing, general                          C  P
Manufacturing, limited                          P  P
Mineral extraction                              NP C
Wholesale and warehousing, general              P  P
Wholesale and warehousing, limited              P  P
 
(Ord. 1146, 4-14-2015; amd. Ord. 1394, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord.
1438, 5-19-2020)
TABLE 9-13-2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development Standards Zones
                      M1 M2
Development Standards      Zones
                           M1                        M2
Lot standards:                                       
Minimum area of zone       10 acres                  10 acres
Maximum lot coverage       No requirement
Maximum lot depth (as a
multiple of lot width at   No requirement
widest point)
Minimum lot frontage       No requirement
Minimum lot width          No requirement
Building standards:                                  
Maximum height, all        45 feet                   45 feet
buildings1
Split face concrete block  P (subject to requirements of chapter 22 of this
buildings                  title)
Preengineered agricultural P (subject to requirements of chapter 22 of this
grade metal buildings      title)
Setback standards:                                   
Front yard:                                          
                           10 foot setback for the   20 foot setback for the
                           first 15 feet in building first 15 feet in building
                           height, plus 1 additional height, plus 1 additional
All buildings2             foot of setback for every foot of setback for every
                           additional foot of        additional foot of
                           building height up to 25  building height up to 35
                           feet of setback           feet of setback
Rear yard:                                           
                                                     None when adjacent to
                                                     another Manufacturing
                                                     Zone, 30 feet where a lot
Minimum setback, all                                 or parcel abuts a boundary
buildings                  10 feet                   of a Commercial or Public
                                                     Facility Zone, 50 feet
                                                     where a lot or parcel
                                                     abuts a boundary of any
                                                     Residential Zone
Side yard:                                           
                                                     None when adjacent to
                                                     another Manufacturing
                                                     Zone, 30 feet where a lot
Minimum setback, all                                 or parcel abuts a boundary
buildings                  10 feet                   of a Commercial or Public
                                                     Facility Zone, 50 feet
                                                     where a lot or parcel
                                                     abuts a boundary of any
                                                     Residential Zone
 
Notes:
   1.    Greater height may be allowed pursuant to a conditional use permit in
all zones.
   2.    Except as modified by the provisions of subsection
9-27-140G of this title.
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1569, 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 14
TRANSIT STATION DISTRICT (TSD)
SECTION:
9-14-010: Purpose And Objectives Of The TSD Zone
9-14-020: Definitions
9-14-030: Establishment Of TSD Zoning
9-14-040: Intensity Areas And Station Hub
9-14-050: Use Regulations
9-14-060: Master Area Plan
9-14-070: Architectural Control Committee
9-14-080: Development Standards And Urban Design Regulations
9-14-090: Site Plan Review
9-14-100: Project Specific Development Agreements
9-14-110: Street And Alley Cross Sections
9-14-010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES OF THE TSD ZONE:
A.   Purpose: The transit station district zone is established to promote
transit oriented and transit supportive development in areas that are generally
located near a commuter rail transit or rapid transit station and to maximize
the flexibility of the development approval process so as to permit such
development in a manner that is responsive to market demands and consistent
with the purposes and objectives of the TSD.
B.   Objectives: The TSD is intended to promote and provide incentives to
create a clustered, high density residential mixed use and pedestrian friendly
development with an effort to provide ready accessibility to freeway service as
well as a unique public transit service environment. This type of development
is generally referred to as TOD, or transit oriented development, and by
focusing development in proximity to transit stations, transit oriented
development can create interesting and successful urban centers, diminish urban
sprawl, and play a major role in realizing regional development strategies. The
objectives of the TSD are to:
1.   Permit and support higher development densities to encourage vertical
development, the utilization of mass transit, and alternative modes of
transportation other than the automobile;
2.   Reduce rates of vehicle miles traveled for both residents and workers in
the TSD;
3.   Allow for mixed land uses and greater development densities by encouraging
a flexible arrangement of residential, commercial and mixed use developments,
while adopting urban development standards to ensure compatibility between the
uses and pedestrian activity;
4.   Minimize distances between destinations by allowing for and promoting a
number of conveniences and uses that are compatible with one another and that
are generally within an approximate one-half (1/2) mile walking distance of
each other, such as home to office, home to retail service, home to education
or religious, and office to retail service;
5.   Promote pedestrian friendly design and architectural structuring that
encourages walking and bicycling, in accordance with the intent of the city's
master parks, recreation, and trails plan;
6.   Increase a variety of multi-family housing opportunities through the
lessening of transportation development and maintenance costs;
7.   Increase incentives for applicants to develop a TOD by encouraging less
money and land spent on parking and road installation and maintenance costs;
8.   Promote alternative methods of transportation and provide planning methods
that take into consideration those who cannot drive or afford an automobile as
well as those that choose not to;
9.   Create and enhance cultural use areas that promote neighborhood and local
social activities;
10.   Integrate public use spaces, plazas, courtyards and pocket parks and
encourage, where reasonably possible, the connection of these areas to other
uses in the TSD and existing public use space and recreational system in the
community of Draper City;
11.   Accommodate an economically viable development plan, recognizing that
such a development plan will likely benefit the city in the form of tax
increment, private investment and the creation of new jobs by the extension of
the rapid commuter rail line within Draper City;
12.   Allow for greater flexibility in street and road infrastructure design
and features that distinguish the area as unique, create a distinctive ambiance
to the development, promote a complete streets philosophy where autos,
bicycles, and pedestrians are considered equally important, and which reduce
maintenance costs through reduced parking and right-of-way widths;
13.   Create a transportation connection to the Bangerter Highway and I-15 from
the Draper City Commuter Rail Station;
14.   Provide for the mutual reinforcement of the Utah Transit Authority's
(UTA's) public investments and private development in and around transit
stations through public-private partnerships;
15.   Pursuant to the authority of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-102(2),
specifically authorize the execution of one or more project specific
development agreements and other ancillary agreements in connection with TSD
developments, which development and ancillary agreements may, among other
things, specify the obligations of the respective parties with respect to the
installation of required infrastructure improvements, reimbursement for system
improvements and oversizing, alternative approval and regulatory methods for
specific projects or such other matters as the City and the applicable project
applicant may agree; and
16.   Create a development that provides high quality architecture, design
standards, and building materials intended to promote long term sustainability.
(Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ACTIVE PEDESTRIAN SPACE: An urban area that is designed predominantly for use
by pedestrians and bicycles, rather than automobiles. These spaces can be an
enhanced sidewalk, plaza, walking street, or woonerf. Active pedestrian spaces
are designed specifically to facilitate human interaction and are used for
gathering or transportation. These spaces allow people to walk or bike from
destination to destination.
AMENITY AREA: The area between the back of curb and the sidewalk/pedestrian
area where street trees and street furnishings are located. This area may be
vegetated, or may contain hard surface paving.
BUILD-TO LINE: The required distance between the back of curb and the building
facade. This metric represents a maximum setback, and normally specifies a
certain percentage of the facade which must meet the setback.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height
of the highest roof surface, where "grade plane" means a reference plane
representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at
exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior
walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest point within the
area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than
six feet (6') from the building, between the building at a point six feet (6')
from the building.
CITY: Draper City, Utah.
CURB CUT: An opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or
leave the roadway.
CURB OR CURB LINE: The predominant back edge of a roadway of paved area,
excluding driveways, indentations and curb cuts.
DCCR STATION: Draper City Commuter Rail Station.
DU/AC: Dwelling units per acre. This abbreviation represents a way of measuring
residential density within a residential development. The number is a net
number of units per land area.
DEVELOPMENT: An application for a conditional use permit, site plan,
residential building permit, or residential subdivision. An application for a
zoning map or text amendment or commercial subdivision shall not be considered
development for the purpose of this chapter.
DRIVE-THROUGH: Facilities allowing transactions for goods or services without
leaving a motor vehicle.
FACADE: That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from
grade to top of parapet, wall or eaves and the entire width of the building
elevation, but excluding the roof.
JOINT USE PARKING STRUCTURE: A parking structure that is utilized by buildings
or tenants on two (2) or more parcels.
LINER FACED STRUCTURED PARKING: A parking structure that includes street facing
retail or commercial uses at the ground level.
MAP: Master area plan.
MASTER DEVELOPER: The owner of one or more parcels of ground within the TSD who
has entered into a development agreement with the city pursuant to which the
owner has been designated as the "master developer" and agreed to develop such
parcels in accordance with the requirements of the TSD. The master developer
shall continue to act as the master developer for such parcels as are governed
by the development agreement designating the master parcel notwithstanding the
sale of any particular parcel and the execution of a project specific
development agreement for such parcel.
PARK STRIP: The area between the back of curb and the sidewalk or pedestrian
area where street trees and street furnishings are located. This term
specifically refers to a vegetated area.
PARKING, OFF STREET: Marked or unmarked parking located within a development
parcel and outside a public or private right of way or street easement.
PARKING, ON STREET: Marked or unmarked parking located completely or partially
within a public or private right of way or street easement.
PEDESTRIAN AREA: An area between the amenity area or park strip and a private
development parcel. This area is normally part of the public right of way, and
includes a sidewalk for pedestrian passage.
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP (Also Referred To As A PPP, Or A P3): Any type of
venture which is funded and operated through a partnership of a government
entity or entities and a private company or companies. The government entity
may be at the state, county, or city level.
PUBLIC USE SPACE: An area of land set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved
for public or private use for recreational or amenity activities, including,
but not limited to, parks, plazas and patios.
RIGHT OF WAY: The boundary of public ownership of a street or alley.
SETBACK: The required distance between the building line and the related front,
side or rear lot line over which no part of any building may extend, unless
otherwise provided. Setbacks may be specified as maximum or minimum distances.
SHARED PARKING: Parking that is utilized by two (2) or more tenants, with each
space counting toward minimum requirements for each use. Shared parking is a
tool used to reduce the overall amount of parking on a site, by allowing uses,
usually uses with different hours of patronage, to "double count" a parking
space toward minimum parking requirements. As an example, a parking space may
be shared by a transit station whose use is primarily weekday, daytime hours,
and a movie theater whose use has higher demand in evenings and on weekends,
but counted independently or, "double counted" toward the minimum requirements
of each use.
SIDEWALK: A paved surface intended for pedestrians located within a public or
private street right-of-way or street easement.
STEP BACK: A required change in the vertical plane of a building facade,
normally increasing the horizontal distance, above a certain number of floors,
between the front of the building and the street. Step backs are primarily used
to ensure light and air access to the street level, and to reduce the
perceptions of buildings "towering" over the street.
TOD: Transit oriented development.
TSD OR TSD ZONE: The Transit Station District land use designation and zoning
district, as described in this chapter.
WAYFINDING: The use of landmarks, signage, and other identifying site features
to guide pedestrian and vehicular traffic through an area. (Ord. 985, 10-13-
2011; amd. Ord. 1024, 8-21-2012)
9-14-030: ESTABLISHMENT OF TSD ZONING:
The Transit Station District is a zoning designation that shall serve as the
underlying zoning district. The boundaries of the TSD shall be identified on
the City's official zoning map. The regulations and provisions contained in
this chapter shall supersede any conflicting provisions in this Code. (Ord.
985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-040: INTENSITY AREAS AND STATION HUB:
A.   Intensity Areas: The TSD is composed of three (3) specific intensity
areas: TSD-1; TSD-2; and TSD-3. Density is expected to be highest in the TSD-
1 and TSD-2 intensity areas, which shall be pedestrian oriented and well
connected to public use spaces, parks, plazas and social gathering areas.
Similar connectivity and pedestrian orientation is encouraged for the TSD-
3 intensity area, but application of the foregoing requirements may not be as
strictly applied given the orientation, grade, or other site specific
constraints affecting the development of a particular parcel within the TSD-
3 intensity area. Multiple uses consisting primarily of multi-family,
commercial, retail, office, and a mix of the foregoing and other uses are
particularly encouraged in the TSD-1 and TSD-2 intensity areas. The boundaries
of the TSD-1, TSD-2, and TSD-3 intensity areas shall be as shown in section
9-14-110, exhibit 9-14-1 of this chapter, and may be adjusted from time to time
as a text amendment to this chapter, pursuant to section
9-5-060 of this title. The official copies of all approved MAPs and intensity
area boundaries shall be maintained in and by the Draper City Community
Development Department.
B.   Transit Station Hub: A large multitransit station hub may be located
within the DCCR station area. The DCCR station and anticipated multitransit hub
is intended to serve the commercial workforce in and around the City. Transit
riders served by a DCCR station will primarily be going to, or coming from
work. It will be necessary to serve the area with improved vehicular access and
pedestrian network systems for safe walking, and it will be vital for the DCCR
station to accommodate a park and ride lot and bus station. It may also benefit
some of the large businesses in the area to serve their transit riders with
shuttles. (Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-050: USE REGULATIONS:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: The land uses allowed in the TSD shall be
as set forth in
table 9-14-1 of this section. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional use not shown on
table 9-14-1 of this section shall be prohibited unless the Zoning
Administrator determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or
conditional use. Uses identified as "conditional" are to be approved by the
Planning Commission pursuant to the standards and procedures for conditional
uses set forth in section
9-5-080 of this title, and shall comply with all other applicable requirements
of this chapter.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in
table 9-14-1 of this section shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
C.   Temporary Uses: Any person may sponsor or conduct for profit or nonprofit
purposes the temporary uses set forth in this section, subject to the issuance
of a temporary use permit in accordance with the standards found within
title 6, chapter 16 of this Code, unless under express provision of this
chapter no such permit is required:
Auction;
Christmas tree sales;
Festival, show, exhibit, circus, carnival, outdoor dance, community fair,
concert or other activity of a similar nature;
Fireworks stand;
Garage/yard sale;
Motorized vehicles sales by a licensed dealer;
Produce stand;
Temporary construction or model home office; or
Temporary retail sales not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet.
TABLE 9-14-1
ALLOWED USES IN THE TSD ZONE
Use Intensity Areas
    TSD-1 TSD-2 TSD-3
Use                                                Intensity Areas
                                                   TSD-1 TSD-2 TSD-3
Agricultural uses:
Community gardens                                  P     P     P
Residential uses:
Daycare, limited                                   P     P     P
Dwelling, single-family                            NP    NP    P
Dwelling, single-family with accessory dwelling    NP    NP    P
Dwelling, two-family                               NP    P     P
Dwelling, multiple-family                          P     P     P
Home occupations                                   See chapter 34 of this title
Preschool, limited                                 See chapter 34 of this title
Residential facility for elderly persons           P     P     P
Residential facility for persons with a disability P     P     P
Public and civic uses:
Auditorium, stadium, or performing arts center,    C     C     C
major4
Auditorium, stadium, or performing arts center,    C     C     C
minor5
Bus terminal                                       P     P     P
Charter schools                                    P     P     P
Church or place of worship                         P     P     P
Club or service organization                       P     P     P
Convalescent care facility                         P     P     P
Cultural service                                   P     P     P
Government service                                 P     P     P
Higher education facility, private                 C     C     C
Higher education facility, public                  P     P     P
Hospital                                           NP    NP    P
Parks, neighborhood                                P     P     P
Parks, regional6                                   NP    NP    P
Post Office                                        P     P     P
Private school                                     C     C     C
Protective service                                 P     P     P
Public school                                      P     P     P
Public utility substation                          P     P     P
School, elementary, middle, or high                P     P     P
Trade/vocational school                            C     C     C
Transit station                                    P     P     P
Utility, minor                                     P     P     P
Municipal uses:
Franchise Municipal use                            P     P     P
Municipal use                                      P     P     P
Commercial uses:
Animal grooming, small shop                        P     P     P
Bank or financial institution                      P1    P1    P2
Bar establishment                                  P     P     P
Bed and breakfast inn                              NP    P     P
Convenience store                                  P4    P4    P
Daycare, general                                   P     P     P
Funeral home                                       NP    NP    P
Gasoline service station                           NP    NP    P
Hotel                                              P     P     P
Laundry and dry cleaning, limited                  P     P     P
Liquor store                                       P     P     P
Media service                                      P     P     P
Medical cannabis pharmacy                          P     P     P
Medical or dental laboratory                       P     P     P
Medical service                                    P     P     P
Medical service, limited                           P     P     P
Motel or motor lodge                               NP    C     P
Office, general                                    P     P     P
Personal care service                              P     P     P
Personal instruction service                       P     P     P
Preschool, general                                 P     P     P
Printing and photocopying, limited                 P     P     P
Reception center                                   P     P     P
Recreation and entertainment, indoor               P     P     P
Recreation and entertainment, outdoor              NP    NP    C
Recycling collection station                       P     P     P
Repair service                                     NP    NP    P
Research service                                   P     P     P
Restaurant, fast food                              P     P     P3
Restaurant, general                                P     P     P
Retail, general                                    P     P     P
Small secondhand or thrift store                   P     P     P
Vehicle repair, limited                            NP    NP    C
Veterinary service                                 P     P     P
Wireless telecommunication facility                P     P     P
 
Notes:
   1.    Without drive-through.
   2.    Limited to no more than 1 drive-through lane.
   3.    Over 2 acres.
   4.    Over 3,000 seats.
   5.    Under 3,000 seats.
   6.    Over 2 acres.
(Ord. 985, 10-13-2011; amd. Ord. 1085, 3-4-2014; Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord.
1328, 6-5-2018; Ord. 1394, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1438, 5-19-
2020; Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
9-14-060: MASTER AREA PLAN:
A.   Intent: The intent of the master area plan (MAP) and the process for
submitting and obtaining approval of such MAP is to provide an applicant of
large or phased projects (MAP area) with a mechanism to obtain the City's
approval of a conceptual framework for such projects within the TSD. Public use
spaces, proposed land uses, and specific design and development standards
within the MAP area shall be identified and a conceptual plan describing those
elements of the MAP area shall be part of the MAP. An approved MAP constitutes
approval of a master plan that will guide future development within the MAP
area.
B.   MAP Required: A MAP shall be required in connection with the development
of any property within the TSD. A MAP may be submitted for approval with
respect to one or more parcels or any combination of parcels within the TSD.
Prior to submission of a proposed MAP to the City, an applicant shall submit
the same to the Architectural Control Committee (ACC) for review, which review,
when completed, shall be set forth in a written instrument provided to the city
by the ACC. The ACC shall review and evaluate a proposed MAP for conformity
with the requirements of this chapter and any applicable development standards
and design guidelines. Except as expressly provided above or unless
specifically approved by the ACC in writing, no development shall be approved
by the city unless such development pertains to land included within a MAP area
for which a MAP has been approved. A MAP may establish site specific
development standards and regulations that deviate from development standards
contained in other chapters of the development code for the purposes of
achieving the objectives of this chapter.
C.   MAP Requirements:
1.   Narrative: Each MAP shall include a narrative providing the following:
a.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and owners of the
project;
b.   A letter confirming review of the proposed MAP by the ACC;
c.   A general description of proposed land uses, parking plan and public use
space elements to be included in the MAP area;
d.   A general description of the transportation systems within the MAP area,
whether existing or proposed, including collector and arterial streets, and a
general description of the proposed plan for accommodating auto, bicycle and
pedestrian circulation and connectivity, and parking, along with the
utilization and accommodation of any existing or proposed public transit
connections within the MAP area or located on adjoining properties;
e.   A general description of major stormwater drainage and other utility
systems anticipated to be required in connection with the development of the
MAP area, including, where applicable, the proposed or likely service providers
for such utility services;
f.   Contemplated development guidelines, architectural and site design
standards for the MAP area, including setback standards for any TSD-3 intensity
area, and any proposed development standards for the periphery of the MAP area
designed to promote compatibility between the MAP area and adjoining
properties, and, if applicable, a description of how structured parking will be
architecturally integrated into the development, which is required when
structured parking is proposed;
g.   A general description of the estimated sequence and timing of development
of the MAP area, including the proposed phasing of public use space and any
major on site or off site infrastructure improvements or facilities required or
anticipated to be required in connection with the development of the MAP area;
h.   A comprehensive sign program, which program shall establish the allowed
types of signs and their permitted sizes and locations, and which may be
submitted as part of the initial MAP application or pursuant to a supplement or
amendment thereto;
i.   An economic analysis proving that there is sufficient commercial product
in any TSD-1 or TSD-2 intensity area to produce revenue positive results to the
city;
j.   A land use analysis identifying acceptable ratios of uses outlined in
section
9-14-050,
table 9-14-1 of this chapter; and
2.   Graphics: Each MAP shall include the following graphic submittals:
a.   A conceptual drawing identifying the general location of the proposed land
uses by area and indicating the anticipated range of residential and commercial
densities, where applicable, within the MAP area;
b.   A conceptual drawing identifying the general location of any arterial and
collector roadways, bicycle networks, and central or loop trail system and
trailheads planned for the MAP area;
c.   A conceptual drawing identifying the general location of any neighborhood
parks or other major public use space areas proposed for the MAP area; and
d.   Maps and legal description of the boundaries of the applicable MAP areas,
and any proposed adjustment to the approved boundaries of the TSD-1, TSD-2, and
TSD-3 intensity areas. Any proposed adjustment to approved intensity area
boundaries shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to subsection
9-14-040A of this chapter.
3.   Additional Submittal Options:
a.   Parking Reduction: An applicant may request a reduction of parking
requirements otherwise set forth in this chapter pursuant to a MAP application,
which request shall address the justifications for or design features
supporting the requested reduction through a professionally prepared parking
study.
b.   Transportation Facilities And Infrastructure: If the applicant wishes to
have specific approval of transportation facilities and infrastructure the
details of which are not generally required pursuant to the MAP requirements,
the applicant may request such approval provided the applicant submits studies
supporting the specific facilities or infrastructure and identifies such
facilities and infrastructure in reasonable detail in connection with its MAP
application. An overall streetscape master plan may also be developed as part
of the MAP application.
c.   Stormwater, Water Quality And Drainage: If the applicant desires to
utilize a stormwater collection system that aggregates stormwater from multiple
parcels in the MAP area, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive stormwater
plan in connection with its MAP application.
4.   Waiver Of Specific Submissions: Any information required for MAP submittal
may be waived by the city, on the basis that the information is not applicable
to the proposed uses being reviewed within the proposed MAP. Such waivers shall
be documented in writing by the zoning administrator prior to the planning
commission review of the MAP for the waiver to take effect.
D.   Review Process: Submittals for MAP approval shall follow the following
process:
1.   Planning Commission Review: Within forty five (45) days of receiving all
required submissions relating to a MAP, the planning commission shall hold a
public hearing on any MAP proposed pursuant to this section and shall recommend
approval or denial to the city council within twenty one (21) days of the
public hearing. The applicant may opt to waive the strict application of this
time line if additional time is necessary to address or negotiate specific
issues with the city prior to the development of a formal staff recommendation
to the planning commission.
2.   City Council Review: After receiving the recommendation from the planning
commission with respect to a MAP, the city council shall hold a public hearing
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the recommendation. The city council
shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the MAP within twenty one (21)
days of the public hearing. The decision of the city council to approve or deny
a MAP shall be deemed a final decision entitling the applicant to appeal the
decision to a district court as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-
801, or its successor section.
3.   Noticing: Review of an application for approval for or amendment to a MAP,
as described in this subsection, shall be noticed to the public by way of
mailing written notice to neighboring property owners based on information
provided by the applicant as called for in subsection
9-5-045A of this title, posting of public hearing signs on the property as
called for and determined in subsection
9-5-045C of this title, and posting of a notice of public hearing on the Utah
public notice website. All such noticing shall be done at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to each public hearing.
E.   Criteria For Review: The planning commission and city council shall have
discretion to disapprove a MAP with respect to the required elements of a MAP
application only on the basis of: 1) the failure to provide and comply with all
of the required elements under this section unless waived pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter; 2) the failure of the master circulation plan to
adequately serve the MAP area and areas surrounding the project; 3) the failure
of any item required by this section to provide for a community character
substantially consistent with the purposes of the TSD, including the failure of
the land use analysis to provide for at least twenty five percent (25%)
commercial, retail, or office uses; or 4) development standards or design
guidelines that are inconsistent with high quality transit oriented design
standards, including the use of high quality building materials.
F.   Recording: All approved MAPs, and all approved amendments to such MAPs,
shall be recorded in the real property records with a notation that all land
within such boundaries shall be subject to the provisions of such MAP or
amendment unless or until amended.
G.   Major And Minor Amendments: Provided the written review of the ACC has
been previously obtained and submitted to the city, including ACC review of a
site plan or site plan amendment, an approved MAP may be amended at any time
and such amendment may occur simultaneously with the processing of a site plan
application or a site plan amendment. The Zoning Administrator shall decide
whether a proposed amendment is a "major" or "minor" amendment. A major
amendment shall be reviewed and approved or denied using the process
established for the initial MAP approval. A minor amendment shall be reviewed
and approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator. In order to initiate an
amendment, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Administrator those MAP
submission items that would change if the proposed amendment were approved.
Appeal of the Zoning Administrator's decision regarding a MAP amendment shall
be to the City Council.
1.   Major Amendments: Changes of the following types shall define an amendment
as major:
a.   Those which materially modify or reallocate the allowable height, mix of
uses, or density of a development;
b.   Those which materially alter the location or amount of land dedicated to
parks, trails, public use space, natural areas or public facilities; or
c.   Those which modify any other aspect of the MAP that would significantly
change its character.
2.   Minor Amendments: Amendments that are not major amendments shall be termed
"minor amendments" and shall include incremental dimensional changes, minor
changes in locations of uses, and similar changes that do not qualify as a
major amendment. The Zoning Administrator may also refer the application to
other departments or agencies for comment.
H.   Effect Of Approved MAPs:
1.   Legislative Determination: Approval of a MAP shall constitute a
legislative determination that the MAP is consistent with the TSD Zone.
2.   Binding: All MAPs and MAP amendments recorded pursuant to this chapter
shall be binding upon the City and the applicants and their respective
successors and assigns with respect to the development of property within the
MAP area. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the implementation of any phasing plan
included in the MAP is to be used for strategic timing only and shall not be
binding upon the applicant or any successor of the applicant.
3.   Period Of Force: A recorded MAP shall be in full force and effect until
such time as the MAP is amended, replaced by a new MAP for the same location,
or terminated pursuant to a written agreement between the applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest with respect to the applicable portion of the
MAP area and the City.
4.   Vested Property Rights: An approved MAP shall constitute a site specific
development plan which triggers a vested property right in favor of the
applicant or subsequent owner of the property included in the MAP area. Such
vested property right shall remain vested for the duration of the MAP. The
applicant's or subsequent owner's vested rights are directly proportional to
the level of detail approved in the MAP. (Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-070: ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL COMMITTEE:
An Architectural Control Committee (ACC) shall be appointed by the master
developer and shall have the opportunity to review all MAP and development
proposals for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any
applicable development standards and design guidelines prior to submission of
those proposals to the City for review. The ACC shall provide to the City a
written report of all applications reviewed for which application will be made
to the City. Reports for proposed site plan applications shall address all of
the review criteria listed in subsection
9-14-090D of this chapter. The ACC shall have up to thirty (30) days from the
date of receipt of an application in which to complete its review and submit
its report to the City. Following receipt of that report, or the expiration of
the thirty (30) day review period, the City may review and approve the MAP or
other development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In the
event that the master developer no longer is the owner of record of any parcels
within the TSD, the City shall designate another party to appoint and
coordinate an ACC provided that any such party so designated is an owner of
record of a commercial parcel within the TSD. (Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-080: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND URBAN DESIGN REGULATIONS:
A.   Density: Consistent with the goals and objectives of the TSD, there shall
be no maximum residential density or nonresidential intensity in the TSD. The
following minimum residential densities are required in those portions of a TSD
intensity area where residential uses are proposed to be built:
TSD-1: Thirty five (35) du/ac.
TSD-2: Fifteen (15) du/ac.
TSD-3: Five (5) du/ac.
B.   Required Buffer: An average two hundred foot (200') wide, with a minimum
one hundred foot (100') wide, recreational or public use space buffer is
required immediately south of and adjacent to the existing Galena Hills
Subdivision. There shall be no buffer required east of the west right-of-way
boundary of Galena Park Boulevard, as shown in section
9-14-110, exhibit 9-14-1 of this chapter. This buffer shall be extensively
landscaped and extend the length of the existing single-family residential
development, and is meant to assist in transitioning from the smaller scale of
the existing residential development to the taller, denser development of the
TSD. Public infrastructure, including roadways and related improvements may be
located within the required buffer area only for the purpose of providing
connectivity to existing or proposed street rights-of-way. The provision of
this connectivity may be for permanent or temporary connections to the existing
or realigned Galena Hills Boulevard right-of-way and shall be provided in a
manner that the street connection within the buffer area is minimized to the
greatest extent possible for the most reasonable alignment. With the exception
of the connection to the existing or realigned Galena Hills Boulevard, there
shall be no streets or roadways allowed within the buffer area. Those portions
of residential or commercial buildings that are located within the area that is
within fifty feet (50') of the required buffer shall be limited to a maximum of
thirty six feet (36') in height.
C.   Building Height: Massing and shadow studies will be required as part of
site plan approval, and can be used as justification to modify the maximum or
minimum heights allowed. Consistent with the goals and objectives of the TSD,
there shall be no maximum building height in the TSD. Unoccupied accessory
buildings shall have no minimum height requirement. The following minimum
heights are required, unless minimum height standards are modified as part of
the MAP, site plan approval process, or in order to comply with the buffer
requirements of subsection B of this section:
TSD-1: Forty five feet (45').
TSD-2: Thirty six feet (36').
TSD-3: No minimum.
(Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
D.   Building Orientation And Entrances:
1.   The front facade of all principal buildings in the TSD-1 and TSD-
2 intensity areas shall face onto the street or an active pedestrian space, and
not be oriented toward a parking lot or parking structure.
2.   Pedestrian connections shall be provided between the sidewalk and each
primary building entry in the TSD-1 and TSD-2 intensity areas. (Ord. 985, 10-
13-2011; amd. Ord. 1024, 8-21-2012)
E.   Roadway Network And Street Guidelines:
1.   The street network shall be compact and connected, promoting efficient
pedestrian and vehicular travel. Streets shall be designed to minimize modal
conflict between pedestrians, cyclists and automobiles.
2.   Where possible considering the applicable land uses, the street network
shall create small blocks, in order to promote walking and a positive
pedestrian environment.
3.   The street network shall use appropriately sized, not overly wide street
cross sections. In this regard, existing City standards may be modified to
accommodate a smaller street width to facilitate a walkable community. These
cross sections shall include a pedestrian area consisting of a sidewalk and
amenity area, on street parking, and travel lanes. On street bike lanes shall
be included, as appropriate. Typical cross sections for streets and alleys
within the TSD are set forth in section
9-14-110 of this chapter. Final street cross sections shall be approved in
connection with the applicable MAP.
4.   All streets developed and maintained within the TSD shall be constructed
in accordance with structural pavement section standards generally applicable
to similarly sized streets in the City. Alternate or decorative paving
treatments, such as unit pavers or decorative concrete may be proposed by the
applicant and approved by the City staff.
5.   Alleys shall be privately owned.
6.   The adjacent property owner will be required to maintain the 22.5 foot
section of right-of-way, and maintenance duties will remain until such time as
City expands the roadway to full buildout. At full buildout the maintenance of
the park strip will continue to be the responsibility of the adjacent property
owner. (Ord. 1263, 6-6-2017)
F.   Vehicular Access:
1.   Alleys shall be encouraged as the standard, primary access for all
nonresidential uses within the TSD-1 and TSD-2 intensity areas, including
primary access to garages, service functions, and trash storage and collection.
2.   Within the TSD-1 and TSD-2 intensity areas, curb cuts shall be prohibited,
except for alleys, unless no other acceptable access is available to the
particular site. On a block facing multiple rights of way, curb cuts may be
allowed on the less traveled street. In cases where curb cuts are provided, the
vehicular pathway shall be of sufficient depth so that a delivery vehicle does
not obstruct the pedestrian sidewalk.
G.   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Circulation: Convenient pedestrian circulation
systems shall be provided to minimize pedestrian-auto conflicts. Pedestrian
walkways shall connect building entrances to each other and connect building
entrances, sidewalks and public streets to existing or planned transit stops.
Sidewalks shall be at least eight feet (8') wide in the TSD-1 intensity area.
In the TSD-2 and TSD-3 intensity areas, the sidewalk shall not be less than
five feet (5') wide.
H.   Streetscape And Landscape Requirements: Streetscape and landscape within
and visible from the public rights of way shall be designed to facilitate
pedestrian wayfinding and to create an attractive, pedestrian scaled
environment. Plant materials shall be selected for their appropriateness to the
northern Utah environment and for visual appeal. Tree species which are deemed
shade or canopy trees are preferred to smaller ornamental varieties.
I.   Parking Requirements:
1.   Parking Required: The number of parking stalls required shall be
calculated pursuant to the requirements of chapter 25 of this title as modified
according to the terms of this chapter unless alternative requirements are
established pursuant to an approved MAP. The location and type of parking
stalls required shall be provided according to the following:
a.   Within the TSD-1 intensity area, parking shall be provided as on street
parking, where the road cross section can accommodate such parking and is
specifically approved as part of a MAP, or within a parking structure with ADA
accessible and delivery parking only being allowed as off street surface
parking;
b.   Within the TSD-2 intensity area, parking shall be provided as on street
parking, where the road cross section can accommodate such parking and is
specifically approved as part of a MAP, within a parking structure, or as off
street surface parking with a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the total
parking requirement being allowed as off street surface parking; and
c.   Within the TSD-3 intensity area, on street and off street, surface parking
for nonresidential uses shall be permitted when approved as a part of a MAP.
2.   Structured Parking Not Required: Structured parking described in
subsections I1a and I1b of this section shall not be required where public
financing or funding is not available or offered to construct sufficient
structured parking to meet the requirements of this chapter. When structured
parking is not required, off street surface parking in the TSD-1 and TSD-
2 intensity areas shall be provided and shall include at least the following
design features, to be addressed specifically and approved with the MAP
including the subject properties:
a.   Eight foot (8') wide pedestrian pathways shall be provided, spaced no more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') apart, through all parking areas and shall
include landscaping and vegetative plantings on each side;
b.   Plaza areas at the primary entrance to all buildings from the parking
area;
c.   Pedestrian walkways connecting all building entrances to street right of
way sidewalks;
d.   Extensive pedestrian pathway system that connects all buildings to all on
site parking areas, all other buildings within the same MAP area, and paths
leading directly to the DCCR station;
e.   Landscaping and planting beyond that anticipated for site plans approved
according to the provisions of chapter 23 of this title; and
f.   All on site surface parking area shall be located to the interior of the
site and to the rear of all primary buildings.
3.   Required Parking; Reductions: To encourage transit oriented development
throughout the TSD, minimum parking requirements shall be reduced twenty five
percent (25%) from those otherwise required for such land use pursuant to the
development code. A further reduction up to an additional twenty five percent
(25%) may be requested based on the inclusion of transit supportive features
within the site design as part of the site plan approval process and based on a
professionally prepared parking study. These features include, but are not
limited to, the following:
a.   Shared parking as shown by a legally executed agreement between multiple
entities;
b.   Formation of a parking district, and construction of joint use parking
reservoir structures;
c.   Shared access points for adjacent parking lots;
d.   Provision of shuttle service, outside the one-fourth (1/4) mile radius to
the DCCR station, connecting to the DCCR station; and
e.   Provision of motorcycle and bicycle specific spaces.
4.   Large And Phased Developments:
a.   Parking minimums must be met at every phase of development.
b.   Temporary parking on parcels slated for later phase development shall be
allowed, but must be clearly marked as such on official site plans.
5.   Parking Dimensions: Off street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine
feet (9') wide by eighteen feet (18') deep. Tandem parking spaces and other
measures to maximize parking efficiency and reduce the overall parking
footprint shall also be permitted.
J.   Public Use Space Requirements:
1.   The TSD shall include at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total
development area for public use space purposes, calculated on a per acre basis.
For purposes of this requirement, public use space shall include parks, trails,
plazas, courtyards, or other outdoor amenities and public spaces, including
hard surfaced areas conducive to enjoyment of the outdoors in an urban setting.
Street pavement, curb and gutter, park strip, and standard sidewalk, i.e., five
feet (5') or less in width, shall not be considered public use space. For
purposes of the determining public use spaces, sidewalks or walkways of at
least ten feet (10') in width which are designed and constructed as a part of
the city's trail system may be counted and included as public use space.
2.   Provided the mechanism for allocating or distributing the public use space
is set forth in an approved MAP, the fifteen percent (15%) public use space may
be calculated on an aggregated basis across multiple phases and/or across
multiple parcels within the TSD. In such circumstances, individual site plans
or project specific MAPs may be approved without including on site public use
space, pursuant to an approved MAP public space strategy.
3.   Applicants of individual sites or phases may choose to make a onetime cash
in lieu payment to the master developer to be used for the creation of public
use space within the TSD.
4.   Except as may be otherwise specified in an approved MAP, for large and
phased developments, fifty percent (50%) of the required public use space area
shall be complete when fifty percent (50%) of the total MAP land area has been
developed. One hundred percent (100%) of public use space shall be complete
when one hundred percent (100%) of the total MAP land area has been developed.
These public use space completion requirements may be waived by the city
depending on the distribution and location of individual components within the
overall public use space system, as detailed in an approved MAP.
K.   Lighting Standards:
1.   Lighting shall be provided within the public right of way along all
streets and alleys.
2.   All lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff, dark skies compliant, and
shall meet the requirements of chapter 20 of this title.
3.   Lighting design shall meet the minimum standards developed by the
Illumination Engineering Society.
4.   Materials and equipment chosen for lighting fixtures shall be durable and
weather well. A standard list of approved lighting fixture choices may be
included by the applicant as part of the MAP design guidelines.
L.   Signage Standards:
1.   Signage shall serve primarily identification and wayfinding purposes.
2.   Signs shall be made of high quality, durable materials to a level of
design and finish appropriate to the building/location where they are
installed.
3.   Signage affixed to the upper floor face of buildings shall be allowed but
will require review by the ACC.
4.   Specific signage standards for a MAP area shall be approved in connection
with the applicable MAP, and it is specifically contemplated that such signage
standards shall deviate from existing signage standards in the City. (Ord. 985,
10-13-2011; amd. Ord. 1024, 8-21-2012)
9-14-090: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
A.   Site Plans Subject To ACC Review: All site plans and construction of
permitted or conditional use structures or additions larger than five hundred
(500) square feet to such structures shall be subject to ACC review. No
building permits will be issued by the City without evidence of prior ACC
architectural review.
B.   City Review And Approval: All subdivision and conditional use applications
shall be subject to the City's regular review process. A subdivision plat
establishing major roadways and infrastructure systems may be advanced,
reviewed, and approved prior to completion of the MAP process but such
subdivision plat shall be subject to the City's typical subdivision review and
approval process. Site plans applications may be approved administratively by
the Zoning Administrator upon finding substantial compliance with the terms of
an approved MAP for the same properties, or the Zoning Administrator may defer
the review of the application to the Planning Commission.
C.   Application Contents: Applications shall contain the following
information:
1.   Preliminary Plan: A conceptual site plan with context photos of the site
and immediately adjacent properties, preliminary building elevations,
preliminary written and graphic presentation of the landscape plan, building
materials, architectural details and treatments, all other supporting items
that the ACC may request to make a preliminary determination that the final
development plan will comply with the standards and guidelines of this chapter
and the MAP.
2.   Final Development Plan: A final site plan containing all civil engineering
elements, the landscape plan, building elevations, building materials,
architectural details and treatments, and all items required by the ACC to make
a determination that the final development plan complies with this chapter and
is consistent with the MAP.
D.   ACC Review Criteria: The ACC review shall address the following criteria:
1.   General:
a.   Compliance with the standards and design guidelines of this chapter and
the approved MAP;
b.   Continuity of MAP character;
c.   Interconnected transportation network emphasizing transit, pedestrian and
bicycle modes of travel;
d.   Compatible arrangement of uses and transit facilities;
e.   Architecture and landscape design;
f.   Long term quality and sustainability of development;
g.   Snow storage and snow removal plan for all public and private rights-of-
way; and
h.   Range of housing density, size, and type.
2.   Site Design:
a.   Appropriate location and screening of service entrances, utilities,
parking;
b.   Minimized visual impact of parking;
c.   Safe, attractive connections to the pedestrian and bike circulation
system;
d.   Minimized pedestrian, bike, vehicular, and transit conflict;
e.   Clear, intuitive wayfinding;
f.   Site design arranged to emphasize transit and the DCCR station;
g.   Creation of outdoor public spaces and contribution to TSD public use
space;
h.   Snow storage and snow removal plan for all on site vehicular and
pedestrian areas; and
i.   Consistency with landscaping and lighting plans of the MAP.
3.   Architecture:
a.   Human scale facades, pedestrian interest, and interface between buildings
and the public realm;
b.   Orientation of buildings and entrances;
c.   Durable, high quality materials;
d.   Consistent architectural theme and quality; and
e.   Compliance with building heights, build-to lines and setbacks.
E.   City Approval Criteria: Site plan and conditional use applications shall
be reviewed for consistency with this chapter and an approved MAP, and upon a
determination of such consistency, which determination shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, shall be approved pursuant to subsection B of
this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such approval may be
conditioned upon the applicant's providing reasonable evidence to the City that
such on site or off site infrastructure improvements or facilities as the City
reasonably determines are necessary to service the applicable portion of the
MAP area have been installed or will be installed in connection with the
development of the applicable portion of the MAP area. (Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-100: PROJECT SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A.   Project Specific Development Agreements Permitted: Pursuant to the
authority of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-102(2), projects within the TSD
may be developed pursuant to a project specific development agreement (PSDA)
generally executed in connection with the completion of a MAP. Additional terms
and conditions not addressed in the MAP may be agreed to by the parties to a
PSDA. The provisions of an approved PSDA shall govern over any conflicting
provisions of this Code, except when such provisions compromise the health,
safety and welfare of individuals.
B.   Approval Process: The process for approval of a PSDA shall be governed by
the provisions of this section and, if set forth in the PSDA, any subsequent
approvals for a project covered by a PSDA shall be governed by any supplemental
procedural provisions agreed to by the parties in an approved PSDA.
C.   City Council Review: The City Council shall hold a public hearing within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the PSDA application, unless additional time
is requested by the applicant. The City Council shall approve or deny the PSDA
within twenty one (21) days of the public hearing. The decision of the City
Council to approve or deny a PSDA shall be deemed a final decision entitling
the applicant to appeal the decision to a District Court as set forth in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-801, or its successor section.
D.   PSDA Binding: An approved PSDA shall be binding upon the applicant and its
successors and assigns and upon the City, and shall vest the right of the
applicant and its successors and assigns to develop the area subject to an
approved PSDA in accordance with such PSDA. Further applications pertaining to
a project covered by an approved PSDA shall not be disapproved by the Planning
Commission or City Council unless such application is inconsistent with the
approved PSDA or because disapproval is required to maintain the public health
and safety.
E.   Amendments: The applicant, or its successors or assigns, may propose an
amendment to an approved PSDA at any time by submitting a request to the City's
Zoning Administrator. Within forty five (45) days of receiving a proposed
amendment, the City Council shall approve or deny the proposed amendment,
unless additional time is requested by the applicant. The City Council shall
approve the proposed amendment if it substantially complies with the purposes
of the TSD Zone and does not otherwise contain sufficient grounds for the
denial of the PSDA under subsection D of this section. (Ord. 985, 10-13-2011)
9-14-110: STREET AND ALLEY CROSS SECTIONS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-70.jpg]
    MIXED USE CORE STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-72.jpg]
 
   NEIGHBORHOOD STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.jpg]
 
   PRIVATE ALLEY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.jpg]
 
EXHIBIT 9-14-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6521.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6511.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6519.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6515.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6513.png]
 
(Ord. 985, 10-13-2011; amd. Ord. 1263, 6-6-2017; Ord. 1313, 3-6-2018; Ord.
1380, 3-5-2019; Ord. 1594, 11-7-2023)
CHAPTER 15
MASTER PLAN OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
9-15-010: Purpose
9-15-020: Scope
9-15-030: Bangerter Interchange Area Master Plan
9-15-040: Draper City Conservation Area Master Plan
9-15-050: Gateway District Master Plan
9-15-060: Northern Gateway Master Plan
9-15-070: Southpointe Master Plan
9-15-080: Town Center Overlay Zone (Rep. by Ord. 673, 1-17-2006)
9-15-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create a mechanism whereby special provisions
and policies included within the Bangerter interchange area master plan, Draper
City conservation area master plan, gateway district master plan, northern
gateway master plan, Southpointe master plan, and other master plans which may
be adopted, can be implemented by ordinance. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over any conflicting provision of
this title unless such conflicting provision is expressly intended to prevail
over a provision set forth in this chapter. When two (2) master plans cover the
same territory and have conflicting provisions as a result, the requirements of
the most recently adopted master plan shall prevail. The requirements of this
chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions
of this title, this code, and other laws. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-030: BANGERTER INTERCHANGE AREA MASTER PLAN:
Reserved. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-040: DRAPER CITY CONSERVATION AREA MASTER PLAN:
Reserved. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-050: GATEWAY DISTRICT MASTER PLAN:
Reserved. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-060: NORTHERN GATEWAY MASTER PLAN:
Reserved. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-070: SOUTHPOINTE MASTER PLAN:
Reserved. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-15-080: TOWN CENTER OVERLAY ZONE:
(Rep. by Ord. 673, 1-17-2006)
CHAPTER 16
HILLSIDE SENSITIVE LANDS OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
9-16-010: Purpose
9-16-020: Scope
9-16-030: Procedure
9-16-040: Development Requirements
9-16-050: Development Standards
9-16-010: PURPOSE:
The city deems it important to the peace, health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city that land within hillside sensitive land overlay zones
be protected to ensure that urban development be guided in a manner that will
minimize the potential for flooding, erosion, and other natural hazards and
will protect natural scenic beauty. The objectives to be achieved by the use of
the hillside sensitive lands overlay zone shall include:
A.   Preservation of natural vegetation, geologic features, wildlife habitat
and open space;
B.   Minimizing the amount of grading and earthwork, including street
excavation and site grading;
C.   Retaining trees and other native vegetation, except in those cases where a
high fire hazard results, which stabilizes steep hillsides, retains moisture,
prevents erosion and enhances the beauty of the natural landscape;
D.   Designing and constructing roads, where necessary, in such a way as to
minimize scars from cuts and fills and to avoid permanent scarring of hillsides
and other sensitive land areas, and to make them easily accessible for fire
protection, snow removal, school buses, and emergency vehicles;
E.   Placing building sites to permit ample room for landscaping, surface
drainage, parking, and sewer serviceability;
F.   Grading which will eliminate sharp angles at the top and at the toe of cut
and fill slopes, both with respect to building sites and to road cross
sections;
G.   Creating street rights of way, grades, lot layouts and structure designs
which will aid the objective of reducing excavation and natural topographic
disturbance;
H.   Allowing cluster type development or similar concepts that will minimize
disturbance of steep or sensitive terrain;
I.   Authorizing early temporary or permanent planting, or both, wherever
appropriate to maintain necessary cut and fill slopes, stabilizing them by
plant roots and concealing the raw soil from view; and
J.   Protecting view corridors. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
9-16-020: SCOPE:
A.   Application: The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all
lands located within the hillside sensitive lands overlay zone as delineated on
the official zoning map.
B.   Conflicting Provisions: In the event of conflict between this chapter and
other provisions of this code, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
C.   Preliminary Activities: The following requirements shall govern any
preliminary surveying, testing, or design related activities conducted within
the hillside sensitive lands overlay zone for the purpose of exploring,
evaluating and/or establishing locations for any permanent improvements.
Preliminary activities associated with the investigation of geologic hazards
shall also be subject to the requirements of section
9-19-070, "Preliminary Activities", of this title.
1.   Land Disturbance Proposals: Proposals for surveying, testing or other
design related activities requiring physical entry into areas located within
the hillside sensitive lands overlay zone shall be submitted to the zoning
administrator for review and approval. The areas of proposed disturbance shall
be staked at the applicant's expense. Following staking, the city's
representatives shall have a reasonable opportunity to observe the staking.
Prior to granting a permit, the zoning administrator shall receive input from
the city engineer.
2.   Land Disturbance Permit: As required by title 18 of this code and except
as otherwise noted therein, no person shall commence or perform any land
disturbance, grading, relocation of earth, or any other land disturbance
activity without first obtaining a land disturbance permit. Application for a
land disturbance permit shall be filed with the city engineer on forms
furnished by the city for such purposes. The permit shall be limited to the
staked areas of proposed disturbance.
3.   Improvements To Conform: Following the completion of any preliminary
surveying, testing, or design related activities in accordance with this
section, any permanent improvements subsequently developed or installed in the
hillside sensitive lands overlay zone shall conform to the provisions of this
code. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
9-16-030: PROCEDURE:
A.   General: Proposals for development in the hillside sensitive lands overlay
zone shall follow the procedure set forth in this section and other applicable
provisions as set forth in this code, and shall be reviewed and approved by the
zoning administrator before issuance of applicable entitlements.
1.   Proposals for development other than single-family residences regulated by
this title shall be reviewed by the Draper City planning commission.
2.   Developments regulated by title 17 of this code shall be reviewed and
approved by the planning commission at the concept and preliminary plan stages.
3.   All proposals for development within the hillside sensitive lands overlay
zone shall be reviewed by the development review committee. The development
review committee shall advise the zoning administrator, planning commission and
city council as to compliance with the requirements of this code and this
chapter.
B.   Conceptual Master Plan Approval: Development within the hillside sensitive
lands overlay zone shall first require approval of a conceptual master plan and
shall include the following information:
1.   A development map, drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') or larger, which shows:
a.   One or two foot (2') contour intervals;
b.   Natural slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater color shaded;
c.   The proposed development layout of lots, roads, schools, churches, parks,
open space, fire stations, commercial, cut or fill slopes or area of
disturbances, and any other proposed land use;
d.   Any roads with grades in excess of eight percent (8%); and
e.   Native vegetation, type and location.
2.   A report which indicates:
a.   Total development area;
b.   Number of lots or units;
c.   Proposed density;
d.   Percentage of each use, such as residential, commercial, recreation, and
transportation; and
e.   A statement of justification for the project design.
C.   Preliminary Approval: Following conceptual master plan approval, a
preliminary approval shall be obtained. The following information and reports
shall be submitted as part of an application for preliminary approval and may
be in addition to information required for preliminary approval for a
subdivision:
1.   A development plan or model at a scale determined appropriate by staff,
which shows:
a.   Two foot (2') contour intervals or as determined appropriate by staff;
b.   Natural slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater color shaded; and
c.   The proposed development layout of lots, roads, open space, cut or fill
slopes or area of disturbances, and existing native vegetation.
2.   A geotechnical report which contains the following information:
a.   Nature, distribution and classification in accordance with the American
Association Of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) M145
classification of soils and soil aggregate mixtures for highway construction
purposes for existing soils to the appropriate depth of influence by the
proposed development, but not less than ten feet (10') deeper than the proposed
excavations or to bedrock;
b.   Strength of existing soils, bearing capacity of supporting soils,
settlement estimates, lateral pressures and trench excavation limitation;
c.   Groundwater levels that may affect development and estimated elevation of
high groundwater levels;
d.   Appropriate laboratory testing for classification, consistency, strength
and consolidation conditions;
e.   Slope stability;
f.   Potential frost action based on material type and groundwater level;
g.   Frost depth;
h.   Geologic and hydrologic hazards, unless described in subsections C4 and C5
of this section, entitled geotechnical and geological report and grading and
drainage report; and
i.   A verified written statement by the persons or firm preparing the
geotechnical report describing the general suitability of the site for the
owner's intended use, identifying soil constraints to development and stating
the professional opinion of the author as to the ability of the proposed
development plan to mitigate or eliminate said constraints in a manner as to
prevent hazard to life, hazard to property, adverse affects on the safety use
or stability of a public way or drainage channel, and adverse impact on the
natural environment. If the geotechnical report prepared for a subdivision
shows the presence of critically expansive soils, high water table, organic
soils, liquefiable soils, collapsible soils, or other soil characteristics
which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects of the proposed
roadways, buildings, damage to the building from the water, or premature
deterioration of the public improvements, a geotechnical investigation for the
subject section of roadway or of each lot in the subdivision shall be
submitted.
3.   A vegetation report identifying:
a.   Location and identification of existing vegetation;
b.   Vegetation to be removed and the method of disposal;
c.   Vegetation to be planted to replace the amount and type being removed;
d.   Slope stabilization measures to be installed;
e.   An analysis of the environmental effects of such operations including
effects on slope stability, soil erosion, water quality, wildlife, and fire
hazard; and
f.   Topsoil stockpile areas for restoration of topsoil following completion of
construction.
4.   A geotechnical and geological report in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 19, "Geologic Hazards", of this title.
5.   A grading and drainage report which includes stormwater management,
erosion, and grading plans describing the methods by which surface water,
natural drainages, flooding, erosion and sedimentation loss, and hydrologic
hazards will be controlled during and after construction with all drainage
calculations and plans submitted in accordance with the Draper City drainage
design criteria referenced in title 11, chapter 2 of this code and showing:
a.   Present topography including elevations, lines and grades including the
location and depth of all proposed fills and cuts of the finished earth
surfaces using a contour interval of one or two feet (2');
b.   The proposed area to be graded clearly delineated on the plan;
c.   A description of soil conditions of the watershed. Erosion calculations
shall employ predictions of soil loss sheet erosion using the universal soil
loss equation or appropriate equivalent. Data to be provided shall include
factors of:
(1)   Rainfall intensity and duration;
(2)   Soil erodibility;
(3)   Land slope and length of slope or topography;
(4)   Condition of the soil surface and land management practices in use; and
(5)   Surface cover, grass, woodland, crops, and pavements.
D.   Report Preparation: All required reports shall be prepared by persons
licensed to practice their specialty or expertise in the state of Utah, if such
license for practice is required.
E.   Final Approval: Final approval shall require satisfactory compliance with
all of the requirements of the preliminary review, and compliance with all
Draper City requirements for final plat approval as set forth in this code.
(Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
9-16-040: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Development In General: Slope areas in excess of thirty percent (30%) may
not be developed, and no more than thirty percent (30%) of a development's
slope areas in excess of thirty percent (30%) may be included in the area
calculation to determine density. The planning commission may modify this
requirement upon finding that:
1.   No significant harm will result;
2.   The proposed modification will result in a more functional and improved
plan; and
3.   The developer/builder agrees to comply with any conditions or requirements
imposed by the planning commission to mitigate any adverse effects which may
result from the proposed modification.
B.   Subdivision, Single-Family Lots: Except as provided in subsection A of
this section, the minimum lot size and yard requirements of the underlying zone
shall apply except that every lot shall have at least three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet of buildable area. The buildable area is the area
where the slope is thirty percent (30%) or less, and shall be completely
contiguous and have a minimum dimension of fifty feet (50'). Lots shall allow
dwelling units to be located within two hundred fifty feet (250') from a public
street. All main and accessory buildings shall be built within the buildable
area.
C.   Density Limitations: Except as provided in subsection A of this section,
the density limitations of the underlying zone shall apply except that all
buildings shall be built upon the buildable area.
D.   Maximum Impervious Material Coverage: The total maximum allowable coverage
by impervious material within a project or portion of a project within the
sensitive lands overlay zone shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the
total project area. Areas of roofs and driveways will be estimated and included
in the total impervious surface area.
1.   The planning commission may allow commercial, institutional or multi-
family residential projects to exceed the thirty five percent (35%) impervious
coverage limitation, based upon the recommendations of the city engineer and
community development director, and adherence to the following criteria:
a.   The proposed project demonstrates that it does not create an adverse
drainage, erosion control, or other natural hazard;
b.   The proposed project meets the city's landscaping requirements for
commercial, institutional, and/or multi-family projects or development;
c.   The proposed project meets all other requirements of the sensitive lands
overlay zone and land disturbance ordinances (title 18 of this code). (Ord.
1009, 9-4-2012)
9-16-050: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Intent: It is intended by this chapter that the development standards and
provisions, as set forth in this code, shall be required in connection with all
building and construction in the hillside sensitive lands overlay zone.
B.   Grading Drainage And Erosion: The area of the watershed shall be used to
determine the amount of stormwater runoff generated before and after
construction.
1.   The developer is responsible for interim stabilization of all disturbed
areas during the period of construction to prevent erosion off site effects,
and for final stabilization once construction is completed.
2.   Existing drainage channels shall remain as historically located except
that roads and utilities may be installed across such channels as approved by
the planning commission or the city council. Where these channel modifications
are planned, the developer shall obtain applicable Utah division of water
rights and U.S. army corps of engineers permits. The developer shall provide
evidence of such applications to the city. Structures and/or lots shall be
arranged so as to ensure adequate setbacks from all drainage channels. The 100-
year storm shall be that basis for calculating setbacks.
3.   Facilities for the collection of stormwater runoff shall be required to be
constructed on development sites and:
a.   Shall be the first improvements or facilities constructed on the
development site;
b.   Shall be designed so as to detain safely and adequately the maximum
expected stormwater runoff for a 10-year storm. A maximum stormwater controlled
release rate of 0.1 cubic feet per second per acre shall be the maximum
permitted discharge in the Salt Lake County portion of Draper City. A maximum
stormwater controlled release rate of 0.03 cubic feet per second per acre for a
10-year event and 0.06 cubic feet per second per acre for a 100-year event
shall be the maximum discharge rates permitted in the Utah County portion of
Draper City. However, no discharge shall exceed demonstrated historical flows
from any drainage or sum of drainages. Further reductions in release rates may
be required in situations of insufficient stormwater system capacity;
c.   Shall be so designed as to divert surface water away from cut faces or
sloping surfaces of a fill;
d.   Utilize the existing natural drainage system to the extent possible in its
unimproved state;
e.   Where drainage channels are required, use wide shallow swales lined with
appropriate vegetation, rock, or other approved material instead of cutting
narrow, deep drainage ditches;
f.   Use flow retarding devices, such as detention ponds, check dams, and
recharge berms where practical to minimize increases in runoff volume and peak
flow rate due to development;
g.   Include a hydrology map showing tributary areas for predevelopment, during
construction, and postdevelopment; and
h.   Shall not allow detention or retention basins to be constructed on an
identified geologic hazard.
4.   Construction on a development site shall minimize the disturbance of
vegetation cover.
5.   Erosion control measures on a development site shall minimize increased
suspended solids loading in runoff from such areas. A drainage design system to
control stormwater erosion during and after construction shall be contained in
a detailed grading and drainage report submitted by the developer.
6.   A description of any hydrologic hazards associated with the proposed
development site and adjacent area shall be required. Hydrologic hazards may
include high water table, surface water impoundments, gradient of the property,
and floodplains.
C.   Cut And Fill Slopes:
1.   Cut and fill slopes shall be provided in accordance with chapter 19 of
this title, slope stability ordinance, and title 18, "Land Disturbance", of
this code.
2.   Roadway cut and fill slopes located outside the dedicated public right of
way shall be located within recorded easements providing for slope protection
and preservation. The easements shall be in a form acceptable to the city.
D.   Earthwork:
1.   All surface areas to receive fill shall be stripped of any surface
vegetation, topsoil, and organics and cleared of any trash and debris that may
be present at the time of construction.
2.   After the site has been cleared and stripped, the exposed subgrade soils
in those areas to receive fill shall be scarified to a depth of eight inches
(8"), moisture conditioned and compacted to the compaction requirements of the
city standards and specifications.
E.   Setbacks: The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this subsection
are minimum requirements and may be increased by the city if necessary for
safety and stability, to prevent damage of adjacent properties from deposition
or erosion, or to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. Setbacks
deal with distances from property lines, structures or faults, and must satisfy
requirements of the following subsections. Retaining walls may be used to
reduce the required setbacks when approved by the city:
1.   Setbacks from property lines shall comply with the current building codes
adopted by the city.
2.   Setbacks between graded slopes, cuts or fills, and structures shall comply
with the current building codes adopted by the city.
3.   No structure shall be located over a fault. Determinations of the
appropriate setback distance from the fault shall be made using the data
obtained in the geological report by the person or firm who prepared the
geological report, but in no case shall this distance be less than ten feet
(10').
F.   Vegetation And Revegetation:
1.   All areas of development sites cleared of natural vegetation in the course
of construction of off site improvements shall be replanted with vegetation
which has good erosion control characteristics.
2.   New plantings shall be protected with mulch material and fertilized when
in conjunction with planting and watering schedule.
3.   Persons or firms having expertise in the practice of revegetation, such as
a licensed landscape architect or nurseryman, shall supervise the planning and
installation of revegetation cover for the total development site.
4.   Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary, e.g., for the
construction of buildings, roads and filled areas, as approved by the city
engineer.
5.   Where permanent roads or roadbeds are to be used during construction and
stormwater inlets have already been installed, they shall be protected to
prevent sediment laden water entering the storm sewer system.
G.   Geology:
1.   No structures shall be built on or within ten feet (10') of any identified
faults.
2.   No structures or improvements shall be allowed on any area known to be
within an active landslide area.
3.   Problems associated with development on or near perched groundwater and
shallow groundwater shall be mitigated.
4.   No structures shall be allowed in any rockfall zone.
H.   Fire Protection:
1.   Footing and foundation permits shall not be issued until work on the water
system has commenced. A full building permit shall be issued only when the
water system is completed and operational to provide fire protection.
2.   Each development site proposal and building permit application shall be
reviewed by the fire department to determine whether it complies with the
current International Fire Code. Developments which do not comply shall be
disapproved.
3.   Restrictive covenants for a development in the hillside sensitive lands
overlay zone shall not require the use of wood shake shingles or wood exterior
siding, regardless of whether or not such materials have been treated with fire
retardant.
I.   Streets And Rights Of Way:
1.   The city's street standards and specifications shall apply to all
development, except where conditions related to proper development of hillside
sensitive land areas necessitate altering these standards as described below
and elsewhere in this chapter and as may be approved by the city.
2.   Street grade requirements:
 
Normal                  Permissible Exception
Maximum grade           12%         None
Maximum grade at street 5% maximum  As determined by planning commission
intersections
 
3.   Streets, roadways and private accessways shall follow as nearly as
possible the natural terrain.
4.   The maximum amount of impervious surface for streets shall be twenty
percent (20%) of the entire development site.
5.   Points of access shall be provided to all developed and nondeveloped areas
for emergency and firefighting equipment.
6.   Development sites which are located near well established canyon trails
shall provide reasonable access to those trails.
7.   Although minimum rights of way may be reduced to forty five feet (45'),
all fill slopes must be contained within the right of way.
8.   Except as explicitly waived by the planning commission, appropriate sight
triangles shall be observed at all intersections in the hillside sensitive
lands overlay zone.
9.   Variations of street design standards developed to solve special sensitive
land visual and functional problems may be presented to the planning commission
for consideration. Examples of such variations may be the use of split roadways
to avoid deep cuts, one-way streets, modifications of surface drainage for
curb, gutter and sidewalk design and other innovative designs for sensitive
lands development.
a.   The maximum grade of such streets or rights of way shall be twelve percent
(12%) except as hereafter provided.
b.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to streets or rights of way
already constructed or which have heretofore been approved by the city.
c.   Streets shall be designed to meet the Draper City standards.
J.   Trails:
1.   "Trails" means a system of public recreational pathways located within the
city for use by the public.
2.   The subdivider shall dedicate and improve to city standards trails
necessary to provide public access to public lands and other trails shown on
city or county master plans or required by the planning commission. Trails
shall be located so that the route is feasible for both construction and long
term maintenance; side slopes shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) and rock
cliffs and other insurmountable physical obstructions shall be avoided. The
specific location of the trail right of way shall be verified on the ground
before approving the subdivision. The amount of land required for trail
dedication without compensation shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the land
within the subdivision, excluding trails located within a standard street right
of way.
K.   Architectural Design:
1.   The design of buildings proposed for construction in the sensitive lands
overlay zone is encouraged to be visually compatible with the natural beauty of
the foothills and canyon areas.
2.   The use of materials for buildings and fences shall blend harmoniously
with the natural setting.
3.   The planning commission may review the design and comment on the specified
exterior materials and colors for all structures other than single- family and
two-family dwellings.
4.   Exposed foundation walls shall not exceed four feet (4') above finished
grade at any point.
L.   On Site Development: The property owner shall be fully responsible for
making all improvements in accordance with the development site approval, such
as drainage, erosion and vegetation requirements. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; amd.
Ord. 1479, 2-16-2021; Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
CHAPTER 17
RESIDENTIAL SPECIAL DISTRICTS (RSD)
ARTICLE A. FOX GATE FARMS
SECTION:
9-17A-000: Location Of District
9-17A-010: Purpose
9-17A-020: Permitted Uses
9-17A-030: Conditional Uses
9-17A-040: Development Standards
9-17A-050: General Site Improvement Standards
9-17A-000: LOCATION OF DISTRICT:
The Fox Gate Farms residential special district zone is located generally
between approximately 12400 and 12550 South, and between 450 and 580 East.
(Ord. 484, 8-6-2002)
9-17A-010: PURPOSE:
The RSD - Fox Gate Farms zone is established to provide a residential
environment within Draper City that is characterized by a moderate density
development with single-family detached dwellings, in turn providing a
compatible transition between neighboring residential and commercial areas.
Significant features of the development include enhanced pedestrian
streetscapes and walkways throughout the interior of the development, with
connecting walkways to adjoining areas. (Ord. 484, 8-6-2002)
9-17A-020: PERMITTED USES:
Gardening and fruit growing for home use or storage.
Parks.
Single-family residential.
Utility, minor.
Uses as listed in chapters 34, "Home Occupations", and 36, "Public Utility
Substations", of this title; and title 6, chapter 16, "Temporary Uses", of this
code. (Ord. 484, 8-6-2002)
9-17A-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Daycare, limited. (Ord. 484, 8-6-2002)
9-17A-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
In addition to development standards otherwise contained in the zoning
ordinance, all areas within the development shall comply with the development
standards set forth below and those illustrated in the Fox Gate Farms design
and development standards. Site plan and subdivision reviews are required for
development within the zone according to the requirements and standards of
title 17 of this code. Approval of this RSD zone acknowledges acceptance of the
approved master development plan for the Fox Gate Farms development as
satisfying Draper City's requirements for concept subdivision plan review. The
developer may request that the site plan and both the preliminary and final
subdivision plats be reviewed concurrently by the city.
A.   Lot And Building Standards:
Lot standards:                                    
Minimum lot area                                 7,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot frontage                             50 ft.
Minimum lot width                                70 ft.
Building standards:                               
Maximum dwelling unit density per acre           3.2 du/acre
Minimum building size1:                           
Main buildings:                                   
Single-story:                                     
Above ground                                     1,500 sq. ft.
Basement                                         1,200 sq. ft.
Two-story:                                        
Above ground                                     2,200 sq. ft.
Basement                                         1,800 sq. ft.
Multi-story:                                      
Above ground                                     1,400 sq. ft.
Third level                                      350 sq. ft.
Basement                                         400 sq. ft.
Accessory buildings:                              
Garage                                           600 sq. ft.
Other                                            200 sq. ft.
Development standard:                             
Maximum height, main building                    35 ft.
Maximum height, accessory buildings              20 ft.
Setback standards - front yard (from curb line):  
Interior lot:                                     
With sidewalk                                    24 ft.
Without sidewalk                                 15 ft.
Corner lot (side street):                         
With sidewalk                                    19 ft.
Without sidewalk                                 10 ft.
Setback standards - rear yard:                    
Interior lots:                                    
Minimum                                          10 ft.
Average                                          15 ft.
Exterior lots:                                    
Minimum                                          15 ft.
Average                                          20 ft.
Accessory buildings                              See subsection
                                                 9-10-040A of this title
Setback standards - side yard:                    
Minimum                                          5 ft.
Combined                                         15 ft.
 
Note:
1.   If basements are limited or restricted because of groundwater or other
deterrents, then the house size shall be increased by 15 percent.
B.   General Site Design And Architectural Standards:
1.   Garages:
a.   Minimum of two (2) stalls per dwelling.
b.   Side load garages required on twenty six (26) of thirty three (33) lots
(80 percent of project).
c.   Third car garage may face street if set back at least eighteen feet (18')
behind the front of the main garage.
2.   Driveways:
a.   Minimum average driveway width of sixteen feet (16').
b.   Combined driveways are allowed with each lot providing an equal width.
3.   Porches: Front vintage sitting porches are a required design feature of
each dwelling with a minimum dimension of six feet by twelve feet (6' x 12').
C.   Architectural Standards:
1.   Exterior walls:
a.   Brick or stone required on up to thirty three percent (33%) of building.
b.   Stucco on remainder.
c.   Siding such as "hardy board" or "masonry" horizontal decorative siding to
achieve a vintage look is allowed with the written approval of developer.
d.   T-111 siding or any projects of similar nature not permitted.
2.   Roofing:
a.   Asphalt shingles - architectural grade thirty (30) year shingles to be the
standard.
b.   Tile and shake shingles.
3.   Windows:
a.   Vinyl coated on exterior.
b.   Shutters - decorative exterior shutters. (Ord. 484, 8-6-2002)
9-17A-050: GENERAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Streetscape Plan: A streetscape plan approved by the planning commission
shall be required before final plat approval of any portion of the development.
Such plan shall show improvements for the entire width of each street which is
not yet constructed for all areas which transition from an existing street to a
street within the project. The purpose in showing adjoining areas is not to
obligate the developer to off site improvements, but rather to facilitate the
transition from neighboring areas and to set standards for future streetscape
improvements to those neighboring areas.
B.   Landscape Plan: An approved landscape plan for each development or phase
of development within shall be required before final plat approval of that
portion of the development. The purpose of the plan shall be to show not only
the proposed landscape treatment for the subject development, but the
transition from adjoining development, whether within or outside of the
project. Specifically requirements of the landscape plan are as contained in
the design guidelines for the project.
C.   Screening And Buffering: Specifications for required screening and
buffering are as contained in the design guidelines for the project. Those
standards include requirements for landscaping and fencing of areas at the
parameter of the development, and throughout the open space areas shall be
installed in accordance with the timetable to be set forth by the planning
commission at the preliminary plat stage. Landscaping and fencing on individual
lots includes the following requirements:
1.   Front Yard Landscaping:
a.   Front yard landscaping with trees, sod, and sprinkler systems will be
installed by the developer, prior to occupancy. At a minimum, the developer
will provide for two (2) 1.5-inch caliper trees per lot.
b.   Side and rear yard landscaping is required, however, materials are at the
discretion of the individual lot owner.
2.   Fencing Standards:
a.   Parameter rear yards:
(1)   Main road (12400 - 12450 S.): Decorative block wall.
(2)   South and east: Six foot (6') vinyl privacy fence.
(3)   West side: Existing fence to remain.
b.   Interior side and rear yards (maximums):
(1)   Along pathways: Three foot (3') open board or picket.
(2)   Ten feet (10') behind pathways: Six foot (6') vinyl privacy fence.
(3)   Other: Six foot (6') vinyl privacy fence.
c.   Street frontage:
Front yard: Three foot (3') maximum of open board or picket.
Side street: Six feet (6') maximum beyond ten feet (10') of solid vinyl.
D.   Open Space Standards And Features: Fox Gate Farms consists of several
integrated open space areas. All open space areas, interior to the development,
are to be owned and maintained by the Fox Gate Farms Homeowners' Association
for their exclusive use. Those areas are as described below:
Area 1 - Entryway:                      
Area:                                  500 square feet (10 feet x 50 feet)
Landscaping:                           Sod and decorative plantings
Features:                              Subdivision marquee
Area 2 - North road:                    
Area:                                  11,600 square feet (220 feet x 53 feet
                                       at widest points)
Landscaping:                           Sod with five 1.5-inch shade trees
Features:                              Concrete walking path; open air pergola;
                                       benches; decorative lamppost
Area 3 - Kidney shape at NE corner:     
Area:                                  1,200 square feet (80 feet x 18 feet at
                                       widest points)
Landscaping:                           Sod with four 1.5-inch columnar shade
                                       trees
Features:                              Decorative lamppost
Area 4 - Pathway between lots 12 - 13,  
20 - 21:
Area:                                  25 foot wide easement
Landscaping:                           Sod with six 1.5-inch caliper shade
                                       trees
Features:                              Winding concrete pathways
Area 5 - Pathway between lots 13 - 16,  
17 - 20:
Area:                                  30 foot wide easement
Landscaping:                           Sod and eleven 1.5-inch caliper shade
                                       trees
Features:                              2 park type sitting benches
Area 6 - South road:                    
Area:                                  13,700 square feet (260 feet x 53 feet
                                       at widest points)
Landscaping:                           Sod with 6 shade trees
Features:                              Concrete walking path; decorative
                                       lamppost at each end
Area 7 - South road intersection:       
Area:                                  30 foot width
Landscaping:                           Sod with three 1.5-inch caliper shade
                                       trees
Features:                              Decorative lamppost
 
E.   Pedestrian Paths And Access: In order to encourage walking throughout the
neighborhood, pathways are required as shown on the schematic development plan.
Details of those plans shall be as illustrated in the development and design
standards.
F.   Streets: The street system will be maintained as a private road system.
Roadway dimensions vary from twenty five feet (25') to forty feet (40'), with
minimum asphalt width to be approved by the city engineer and the fire marshal.
Road base and pavement thickness must meet city standards. (Ord. 484, 8-6-2002)
ARTICLE B. CORNER CANYON VISTA
SECTION:
9-17B-000: Location Of District
9-17B-010: Purpose
9-17B-020: Permitted Uses
9-17B-030: Conditional Uses
9-17B-040: Development Standards
9-17B-050: Density Allowances
9-17B-060: CCRs
9-17B-070: Street Cross Section
9-17B-080: Open Space Dedication
9-17B-090: Amenities
9-17B-100: Signage
9-17B-110: Compliance
9-17B-120: Amendments
9-17B-000: LOCATION OF DISTRICT:
The Corner Canyon Vista residential special district zone is located at
approximately 14800 Mike Weir Drive. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-010: PURPOSE:
The RSD - Corner Canyon Vista zone is established to provide a residential
environment within Draper City that is characterized by a low overall
residential density with single-family detached dwellings providing a
compatible transition between neighboring residential, open space, and natural
areas. Significant features of the development include open space preservation,
trailhead accommodation, and a tie in to the local street network. (Ord. 623,
2-8-2005)
9-17B-020: PERMITTED USES:
Churches and places of worship.
Home occupations, per chapter 34 of this title.
Public parks.
Single-family residential dwellings. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Government services. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Subdivision plat review is required for each portion or phase of the
development according to the requirements and standards of title 17 of this
code. Approval of this RSD acknowledges acceptance of the schematic development
plan as satisfying Draper City's requirements for concept subdivision plan
review. Developer may request that preliminary and final plats be processed and
reviewed concurrently by the city. City staff may, upon a finding that the
submitted preliminary and final plats do not substantially deviate from the
approved build-out plans and that there are no significant engineering issues
to be resolved, process such plats and bring them to the planning commission
and city council for review concurrently. Permitted or conditional uses
requiring site plan approval under the terms and provisions of this title shall
comply with provisions of chapter 9-5-090 of this title, as amended, regarding
site plan review.
The development standards listed below shall apply to any development within
the RSD, in addition to all requirements of the Draper City ordinances:
A.   Lot Area And Dimension Requirements (For Single-Family Residential
Dwellings):
1.   Minimum lot size: Thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet.
2.   Minimum frontage: Fifty feet (50').
3.   Minimum width: Eighty feet (80') (measured at required front setback).
B.   Minimum Setback Requirements:
1.   Front:
a.   To be varied between twenty feet (20') and thirty feet (30') throughout
the development as designated on the final plat.
b.   Garages shall not protrude into the front setback greater than the extent
of the main building or covered porch area.
2.   Rear: Twenty feet (20').
3.   Side: Total of twenty feet (20'), eight feet (8') minimum on one side.
4.   Corner lots: Second front setback equals twenty feet (20') minimum.
C.   Accessory Building Setback: Per section
9-10-040 of this title.
D.   Main Building Height: Maximum thirty five feet (35') in height (except as
provided in subsection K of this section).
E.   Accessory Building Height: Maximum twenty feet (20') in height.
F.   Building Locations: To be located in areas away from slopes and set back
from natural formations.
G.   General Site Design And Architectural Standards:
1.   Building heights (for single-family residential dwellings):
a.   No single height and plane vertical facade shall exceed twenty five feet
(25') in height. "Breaks" in vertical facades needed to meet this twenty five
foot (25') limit shall be offset at least four (4) horizontal feet.
2.   Architectural standards (for single-family residential dwellings):
a.   Roof Pitches: All roofs shall have a sloped roof of no less than six to
twelve (6:12) and no greater than twelve to twelve (12:12).
b.   Massing: "Massing" is defined as the combination of different
architectural forms to create a more diverse and interesting design. Massing
shall be employed to create a varied, three- dimensional appearance (flat
rectangular buildings are not allowed).
c.   Stepping: Building foundations and building sites should be stepped into
the hillside where practical. Exposed foundation wall shall not exceed four
feet (4') above finished grade at any point.
d.   Site Layout: Staggering setbacks between twenty feet (20') and thirty feet
(30') are encouraged so as to break up street screen.
3.   Driveways:
a.   Driveway approaches to single-family lots at the curb line shall be no
less than twelve feet (12') and no more than twenty feet (20') in width,
measured from the back of sidewalk (can flare out to a maximum of 26 feet at
the street).
b.   Prepared driveway grades shall not exceed fourteen percent (14%).
c.   Seven (7) lots within the development shall have side or rear loading
garages. Side load garages are encouraged on corner lots, and when feasible,
within the development.
H.   Ridgeline Standards: The following standards will apply to the lots and
lot area numbered 26 through 31 on the schematic concept plan for Corner Canyon
Vista Subdivision, which have been designated ridgeline lots. This designation
shall be placed as a note on the recorded plat.
1.   Massing:
a.   Each building shall contain both single- and two-story elements and use
two (2) or more architectural forms in combination to create shadows and vary
the outward appearance.
b.   Architectural forms should be combined perpendicular to one another or
staggered to create variety, and features such as gables, dormers, and porches
shall be used to divide larger facades and create variety.
2.   Rooflines:
a.   Rooflines shall be varied in height and orientation.
b.   Each building shall have multiple roof elements. Long continuous roof
areas shall not be used, unless broken liberally by dormers, gables, or other
architectural elements.
3.   Materials And Colors:
a.   Materials and colors used will have a significant effect on the appearance
of the viewshed toward the ridgeline. The colors used must be native to the
hillside area and allow the buildings to blend in with the ridgeline. Exterior
materials on building facades visible along ridgelines shall be natural or
natural in appearance such as, but not limited to, stone, brick stucco,
shingles, logs, and/or horizontal wood siding and shall be medium to dark earth
tones.
b.   White, shades of white and bright colors are not permitted on roofs,
building facades, or fences visible along ridgelines.
4.   Windows And Glass: Windows shall be limited to thirty five percent (35%)
of any building elevation. Highly reflective and mirrored glass and window
films shall not be used.
5.   Landscaping:
a.   Retention of native vegetation in yard areas adjacent to ridgelines is
encouraged. Landscaping plant materials installed in yard areas adjacent to
ridgelines are encouraged to be similar in appearance to native vegetation.
b.   Fences, gazebos, decks, and other improvements installed in yards adjacent
to ridgelines shall be dark earth tones and/or shall be screened with
appropriate vegetation.
6.   Lighting: Outside lighting visible along ridgelines shall be unobtrusive,
illuminating only the area immediately adjacent to buildings. Light sources
must be shielded and directional, pointing downward toward the ground.
I.   Landscaping:
1.   Park Strip Landscaping:
a.   Rambling Road: Park strips within the Rambling Road right of way shall be
landscaped by the developer as directed by the city. Developer to establish a
homeowners' association (HOA) to maintain the park strips within the Rambling
Road right of way and any entry monument landscaping that may be installed by
developer.
b.   Within Subdivisions: Park strips within subdivisions adjacent to detached
single-family residences shall be landscaped in accordance with city ordinance
requirements. The street tree plan, approved by the Draper City tree commission
with the final plat, shall specify the number, species, and caliper of trees to
be installed by the homeowner prior to occupancy of any dwelling.
2.   Single-Family Dwelling Landscaping: All front yard landscaping, including
required street trees, shall be installed at the time of occupancy, or bonded
for in winter months, in an amount approved by the city zoning administrator.
This requirement shall also be referenced in the CCRs recorded with this
subdivision development.
3.   License: All park, commercial, institutional, and multi-family sites shall
be landscaped per a licensed landscape architect's plans approved by the city,
per Draper City ordinances.
4.   Topsoil Preservation: Existing topsoil will be stockpiled and utilized to
cover manufactured slopes.
5.   Compatible: Plant materials shall be compatible with the native vegetation
so as to not cause any adverse impact to the native vegetation.
J.   Fencing:
1.   Front Yards: Fencing shall not extend into any front yard.
2.   Height: The maximum fence height is six feet (6') from finished grade.
3.   Area Of Nondisturbance: No fencing shall encroach into the area of
nondisturbance as shown on the plat.
K.   Height Exception: The main building for churches and places of worship
developed within the RSD shall not exceed ninety feet (90') in height measured
in accordance with the definition of building height as set forth in section
9-3-040 of this title, as amended, and including the exceptions set forth in
section
9-27-120 of this title, as amended, regarding church spires, towers or
belfries. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-050: DENSITY ALLOWANCES:
The total number of primary dwellings within the zone shall not exceed an
average of 1.24 units per gross acre or a total of sixty two (62) lots. (Ord.
623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-060: CCRs:
Developer shall prepare CCRs for the subdivision development which shall
reference compliance with all approved RSD development standards. (Ord. 623, 2-
8-2005)
9-17B-070: STREET CROSS SECTION:
The approved fifty foot (50') street cross section shall be shown on the
conceptual schematic plan drawing accepted for Corner Canyon Vista. (Ord. 623,
2-8-2005)
9-17B-080: OPEN SPACE DEDICATION:
Developer shall dedicate a minimum of 17.25 acres of natural open space to the
city as designated on the schematic development plan. Dedication of open space
shall be executed in a form approved by the city attorney, which specifies the
limitations on future development within the dedicated natural open space
areas. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-090: AMENITIES:
Developer shall work with the city parks department to install a basic
trailhead area. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-100: SIGNAGE:
Developer shall comply with all Draper City sign ordinances. Proposals to
develop entry signage within the public right of way are subject to city
approval by the zoning administrator and general service director, based on the
typical maximum size allowed for subdivision entry monuments, and any required
agreements for encroachment into the city right of way. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-110: COMPLIANCE:
Developer shall develop preliminary and final plats which conform to the
accepted conceptual schematic development plan, these standards, and all
conditions of approval set by the city council. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
9-17B-120: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to these standards or the accepted concept plan shall be processed
by the city per the standard zone text amendment process. (Ord. 623, 2-8-2005)
ARTICLE C. SOUTH FORK ESTATES
SECTION:
9-17C-000: Location Of District
9-17C-010: Purpose
9-17C-020: Permitted Uses
9-17C-030: Development Standards
9-17C-000: LOCATION OF DISTRICT:
The South Fork Estates residential special district zone is located generally
on the southeast corner of the intersection at 300 East and South Fork Drive.
(Ord. 653, 9-6-2005)
9-17C-010: PURPOSE:
The RSD - South Fork Estates zone is established to provide a residential
environment within Draper City that is characterized by a moderate density
development with single-family detached dwellings, in turn providing a
compatible transition between neighboring residential areas. Significant
features of the development include a one-half (1/2) acre of developed open
(linear park) space, a bike trail through that linear park that connects to the
bike trail on the Draper City Irrigation Canal, and lots that back onto the
Draper City trail system. (Ord. 653, 9-6-2005)
9-17C-020: PERMITTED USES:
All uses listed as "P" under R3 in section
9-10-090,
table 9-10-1 of this title.
Churches.
Parks. (Ord. 653, 9-6-2005)
9-17C-030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Subdivision plat review is required for each portion or phase of the
development according to the requirements and standards of title 17 of this
code. Approval of this RSD acknowledges acceptance of the schematic development
plan as satisfying Draper City's requirements for concept subdivision plan
review. Developer may request that preliminary and final plats be processed and
reviewed concurrently by the city. City staff may, upon a finding that the
submitted preliminary and final plats do not substantially deviate from the
approved build-out plans and that there are no significant engineering issues
to be resolved, process such plats and bring them to the planning commission
and city council for review concurrently.
The development standards listed below shall apply to the development as a
whole, in addition to all requirements of Draper City ordinances. In addition,
specific development standards shall be as follows:
A.   Lot Standards:
1.   Lot area and dimensions:
a.   Minimum lot size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b.   Minimum width: Fifty feet (50') (at setback).
c.   Minimum depth: One hundred feet (100'). (Cul-de-sac: Lots 90 feet.)
B.   Building Setback Standards:
1.   Standard lots:
a.   Front: Twenty feet (20').
b.   Rear: Fifteen feet (15').
c.   Side: Five feet (5').
2.   Corner lots:
a.   Front of home: Twenty feet (20').
b.   Second front setback: Fifteen feet (15').
c.   Side: Five feet (5').
C.   General Site Design And Architectural Standards:
1.   Building Heights: Heights of buildings shall not exceed the following
criteria:
a.   Main buildings shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty feet (20') as measured per this
code.
b.   No building shall be constructed less than one story.
2.   Garages: Two (2) car garage minimum shall be required with each
residential unit. Three (3) car garages are encouraged.
3.   Coverage Area: The total primary and accessory unit lot coverage at ground
level shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of the total lot area. The
minimum finished floor space of rambler units shall be one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) square feet and two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet
for two- story units.
4.   Architectural Standards:
a.   Roof Pitches: All roofs shall have a sloped roof of no less than six to
twelve (6:12).
b.   Materials: A combination of stucco, brick, and rock/stone shall be used
for each home.
(1)   When brick is used, a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the
building shall be brick.
(2)   When rock/stone is used, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the
building shall be rock/stone.
(3)   Vinyl and other types of siding are not allowed.
(4)   Darker earth tones should be used to complement existing features and
landscaping.
(5)   Asphalt shingles shall be used on all roofs.
c.   Miscellaneous:
(1)   The use of porches and bay windows is encouraged to add dimension and
variety.
(2)   Air conditioning units are not allowed on roofs or in windows.
(3)   Large satellite dishes or other obtrusive hardware shall be screened from
view with appropriate landscaping.
5.   Fencing: All fencing along Bangerter Parkway shall be a precast Ashler
slate masonry wall, with Ashler slate stone columns, and shall be stained
(exhibit B of this section). Fencing along the north side of the development
shall be split rail (exhibit A of this section). Fencing along the south
property line atop the retaining wall shall not exceed four feet (4') in
height, and shall have a wrought iron appearance, but be constructed of
aluminum components so that it will resist corrosion (exhibit C of this
section). This will maximize value and minimize maintenance for the long term
livability and safety of the project. The property owner of lot 24 shall be
required to erect a split rail fence or delineator between the emergency access
road and the bike trail. Property owners may not construct additional fencing
behind project fencing or otherwise hang shielding of any type on project
fencing (defined as the fences shown on exhibit D of this section). All fence
locations shall be governed by the South Fork Estates fencing site plan
(exhibit D of this section). For lots 1 and 26, fencing shall be no taller than
three feet (3') in the clear view area (identified on exhibit D of this
section). The South Fork Estates HOA shall be required to maintain the wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-80.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-82.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-84.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-86.png]
 
6.   Lighting: All public street lighting shall meet Draper City streetlight
standards and comply with Rocky Mountain Power requirements.
7.   Landscaping: The following standards shall apply to the landscaping within
the project:
a.   A street tree plan for all public streets shall be submitted and approved
at the time of final plat.
b.   Residential landscaping:
(1)   Front yard landscaping shall be required on all residential lots.
(A)   Underground irrigation system shall be required.
(B)   A minimum of one tree per front yard (exclusive of park strip trees
required) shall be planted.
(C)   Corner lots shall plant an additional tree in the street side yard.
(D)   Street side yards to the rear property line shall be landscaped on corner
lots.
(E)   A minimum of five (5) 5-gallon shrubs shall be planted in each front
yard. Additional shrubs are required for street side yards on corner lots.
8.   Maintenance:
a.   All park strips within the project (including 300 E.) shall be maintained
by the homeowners' association ("HOA") and/or adjacent homeowner.
b.   Trail easement landscaping shall be maintained by the HOA.
c.   Open space shall be owned and maintained by the HOA (including
landscaping, playground equipment, etc.).
D.   Density Allowances: The total number of primary dwellings within the zone
shall not exceed an average of 2.11 units per gross acre or a total of eighteen
(18) lots.
E.   Compliance: Developer shall develop preliminary and final plats which
conform to the accepted conceptual schematic development plan, these standards,
and all conditions of approval set by the city council.
F.   Amendments: Amendments to these standards or the accepted concept plan
shall be processed by the city per the standard zone text amendment process.
(Ord. 653, 9-6-2005; amd. Ord. 714, 9-25-2006; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020)
ARTICLE D. VALLE DI VILLA/VALLE DI VILLA EAST
SECTION:
9-17D-010: Purpose
9-17D-020: Permitted Uses
9-17D-030: Conditional Uses
9-17D-040: Architectural And Development Standards
9-17D-050: Open Space/Landscape Treatments
9-17D-060: Roadways, Streets And Landscape Treatments
9-17D-070: Fencing
9-17D-080: Homeowners' Association
9-17D-090: Exhibits
9-17D-010: PURPOSE:
The Valle di Villa project is a master planned, architecturally controlled
residential development. The RSD zoning requirements allow for and permit
flexibility in terms of planning, site design and development through the
ability to customize the zoning and development standards to achieve singular
and unique development opportunity. The Valle di Villa project seeks to utilize
this RSD zone to enhance and create an upscale residential development on a
very prestigious, well located sixty two (62) acre parcel of property. The
Valle di Villa RSD is located at approximately 12150 South where 2000 East
Street abuts the southwest corner of the property. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A and 1A, of this article.)
Subdivision plat review is required for each portion or phase of the
development according to the requirements and standards of title 17 of this
code. Approval of this RSD acknowledges acceptance of the schematic development
plan as satisfying Draper City's requirements for the concept subdivision plan
review and approval. Preliminary and final plats will be processed and reviewed
concurrently by the city. Upon a finding that the submitted preliminary and
final plats do not substantially deviate from the approved build-out plans,
that there are not significant engineering issues to be resolved.
Section
9-17D-090, exhibits A through M of this article, define the development
standards of the project. An integral portion of the Valle di Villa RSD zone is
the ability and flexibility to plan for single-family residential lots of
various sizes which appeal to a diversity of different types of homebuyers and
family profiles. This lot size diversity allows for buyers of differing family
sizes and age variations to live in an architecturally controlled neighborhood
environment where not all of the lots and houses are virtually the same size
and price range, as are commonly found in other zoning classifications within
the city. (Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-020: PERMITTED USES:
Dwelling, single-family.
Model home/sales office.
Model homes. (Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory apartments.
Detached conservatories/greenhouses.
Home occupation.
Permanent storage sheds, detached garage structures, workshops, etc. (Ord. 546,
11-18-2003)
9-17D-040: ARCHITECTURAL AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Density Requirement: The density of the development is 1.83 units per acre
(112 units/61 acres), which is consistent with the adjacent neighborhoods to
the east and south of the development. The Draper City general plan designates
this area as "low density residential", which is not to exceed 2.0 units per
acre.
B.   Lot Size: An area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet,
or 0.275 acre, shall be provided and maintained for each dwelling and uses
accessory thereto as a minimum for the development. Varying larger lot sizes
shall also be provided. The average lot size for the entire one hundred twelve
(112) lots in the development is approximately eighteen thousand six hundred
(18,600) square feet. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibit A of this article for lot sizes.)
C.   Frontage: The minimum width of any lot for a dwelling shall be eighty feet
(80'), measured thirty feet (30') from the front property line.
D.   Front Yard Setback Requirements:
1.   All residential structures shall be set back thirty feet (30') from the
front property line. Lots having an overall slope in excess of ten percent
(10%) may, notwithstanding other provisions of this code to the contrary, be
developed with a front setback of twenty five feet (25'). Garages or the garage
portion of the main structure, may extend to a setback line of twenty five feet
(25'), providing that they are side entry type garages.
2.   On corner lots, the front setback shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30')
and twenty five feet (25'), respectively, regardless of which way the structure
faces.
E.   Side Yard Requirements: All dwelling structures and other main buildings
shall be set back from each side property line a distance of at least ten feet
(10').
F.   Rear Yard Requirements: All dwelling structures and other main buildings
shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty
feet (20').
G.   Natural Lots: Lots 1 - 24, 68, 86 - 89 and 109, 100, 111 and 112 (refer to
section
9-17D-090, exhibit 1A of this article) shall be considered natural lots. These
lots which contain natural existing vegetation (oakbrush) are to submit, prior
to construction, an inventory of the existing vegetation in an effort to retain
and protect as much of this natural vegetation as possible. The existing
natural trees and vegetation which occur along all side and rear lot lines are
to be preserved to a minimum distance of five feet (5') as measured from either
side of the lot property lines. Efforts will be made to sensitively establish
and preserve these areas so that they remain as natural in appearance as
possible, favoring meandering lines where vegetation must be removed, versus
straight cut lines. All side and rear yard setbacks lines are to be measured
from the lot property lines. In lots that contain thirty percent plus (30%+)
slope areas, the vegetation in these sloped (30 percent plus) areas is to be
left undisturbed. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A and 1A of this article.)
H.   Garages: Attached two (2) or three (3) car garages are required for all
dwelling units within the development. A minimum of twelve (12) lots will have
side loaded garages.
I.   Height Of Buildings: No residential dwelling or building shall be higher
than thirty five feet (35') as measured from average finish grade to the
midslope of the main structure's roofline. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibit E of this article.)
J.   Height Of Accessory Buildings: In that all accessory buildings are
considered as "conditional uses", each will be evaluated separately. However,
in any case, twenty feet (20') will be the maximum height of this type of
structure, as measured and shown in section
9-17D-090, exhibit E of this article. (Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
K.   Rooflines And Pitches: Rooflines shall be varied in pitch, height and
orientation to provide visual interest. The majority of all roof pitches on
each individual home shall be sloped at not less than six to twelve (6:12) and
no greater than twelve to twelve (12:12) in order to provide such visual
interest. Long, continuous rooflines shall not be allowed. Rooflines should be
varied to include dormers, gables, hip roofs, etc. Asphalt architectural grade,
twenty five (25) year shingles, cedar shake shingles; tile and/or masonry and
slate shingles are standard through the development. (Ord. 601, 9-14-2004)
L.   Windows: High quality cladded wood windows or vinyl windows are allowed.
Highly reflective or mirrored glass shall not be used. Decorative window
treatments such as surrounds, shutters, or nicely detailed lintels and sills
are encouraged.
M.   Building Materials: Exterior building materials shall include stone or
brick along with other high quality exterior siding products, such as stucco
and hardy board shingles, as approved by the architectural control committee.
Asphalt architectural grade, twenty five (25) year shingles, cedar shake
shingles, tile and/or masonry and slate shingles are standard through the
development.
N.   Architectural Theme: Varied high quality architectural styles are expected
and encouraged throughout the development. While not singular in terms of one
particular architectural style, the overall project theme utilizes battered
stone pillars and textured walls along the Highland Drive corridor and the
extensive use of stone facing and wrought iron railing treatments on the arched
bridge across the Bear Canyon drainage channel. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits C and D of this article.) (Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-050: OPEN SPACE/LANDSCAPE TREATMENTS:
A.   Bear Creek Preservation Area: To be preserved on the site is a naturally
occurring drainage channel extending into the property from the Pheasant Hills
PUD Subdivision to the south and ending at the boundary of the Hidden Valley
Golf Course to the west. The channel is to be largely undisturbed such that the
native vegetation and existing trees will remain to protect the natural scenic
beauty of this open space area. The thirty percent (30%) side slopes into the
drainage channel are to remain as undisturbed as much as possible. No yard or
formal landscape features or development will be allowed on the thirty percent
(30%) slope areas, except as necessary for the Highland Drive extension and
bridge, as described in subsection
9-17D-060A of this article. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A, B and D of this article.)
B.   Bear Creek Trail: An asphalt path/trail extending from the walkway system
on the east side of Highland Drive and the north side of the bridge structure
over the drainage channel will provide pedestrian/bicycle access to the channel
heading east to the Pheasant Hills area en route to Pioneer Road and the Corner
Canyon area. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits D, L and M of this article.)
C.   Thirty Percent Slope/Vegetation Preservation: The native vegetation and
existing trees in this area are to be preserved to the extent practicable.
Grading within this area is expected to be minimal extending from the thirty
percent (30%) slopes down and into the channel itself on both sides. This will
minimize the potential of erosion and soil loss and preserve the natural
character of this open space amenity. Notwithstanding these conditions, the
channel will be disturbed to extend Highland Drive across the open space
drainage channel. A bridge across the drainage channel is proposed and all
efforts to revegetate and mitigate the channel disturbance will be made. (See
section
9-17D-090, exhibit D of this article.)
D.   Fencing In Preservation Area: Only black wrought iron fencing with a flat
top rail and flat posts will be allowed at the rear lot lines and side lot
lines of lots that back onto this open space corridor, including the area up to
the thirty percent (30%) slope line. This fencing will extend up those side lot
lines to the beginning of the thirty percent (30%) slope line, and is intended
to be as visually unobtrusive as possible. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A and 1A of this article.)
E.   Stormwater Detention Open Space: The area west of the Highland Drive
bridge structure is to be used for a stormwater detention basin for the
development. This triangular shaped property currently terminates at the fence
line along Hidden Valley Golf Course. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A and 1A of this article.)
F.   Pedestrian Circulation Trails: As illustrated in section
9-17D-090, exhibits A, C, D, F, G, I, J, L and M of this article, the Valle di
Villa development features an extensive pedestrian circulation system which
links together the various open space elements of the project. Section
9-17D-090, exhibits I and J of this article illustrate where the interior
pedestrian paths intersect the roadways. These roadway nodes include specialty
concrete paving area, benches, wrought iron fencing and high quality landscape
elements. These paths connect the various areas of the development one to
another such that all can safely access the gazebo park area and Bear Creek
Trail area easily.
G.   Gazebo/Park Area: As shown in section
9-17D-090, exhibits A, H, K and L of this article, a uniquely designed gazebo
with specialty landscaping, benches and pedestrian lighting is included in the
public open space area. This formal park area is approximately one-half (1/2)
acre and is adjacent to the Bear Creek open space preservation area and the
open space detention area west of the Bear Creek Bridge. The location of this
park and open space area, which is near the entrance to the project from
Highland Drive, is very visually pleasing and enhances the feeling of the open
area. It is also connected to the generously landscaped Highland Drive
pedestrian walks and the interior trail circulation system of the project.
(Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-060: ROADWAYS, STREETS AND LANDSCAPE TREATMENTS:
A.   Highland Drive Extension: The extension of Highland Drive is to be
constructed by the developer to a width of forty two feet (42') as measured
from the back of curb to the back of curb. This roadway is referred to as a
"modified collector road" and will accommodate one lane of traffic in each
direction and a center turn lane. Also, the developer will install a five foot
(5') meandering sidewalk on each side of the Highland Drive extension through
the thirty two foot (32') remainder areas of the one hundred six foot (106')
right of way dedication. A six foot (6') masonry wall will be constructed along
the right of way/property line along both the east and west sides of the
Highland Drive corridor. The walls will feature battered stone columns and
textured walls. The thirty two foot (32') right of way areas on either side of
the modified collector roadway will be generously bermed and landscaped along
the entire length of the corridor. Efforts will be made to establish the
majority of the trees and shrubbery closely adjacent to the right of way walls
themselves to help attenuate noise generated by Highland Drive and to help
preserve this landscape buffering vegetation the event that Highland Drive is
widened in the future. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A, B, C, D and F of this article.)
B.   Typical Local Street: Throughout the development, local streets will be
constructed with a forty eight foot (48') total dedicated width with a roadway
section of thirty feet (30') as measured from back of curb to back of curb.
There will be a seven foot (7') utility easement on one side of the road, and a
six foot (6') utility easement/plant strip with a five foot (5') sidewalk on
the opposite side. (See section
9-17D-090, exhibits A and G of this article.)
C.   Single-Family Dwelling Landscaping: All front yard landscaping, including
required street trees, shall be installed within six (6) months of occupancy.
(Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-070: FENCING:
No front yard fencing is to be allowed. Masonry, wrought iron and earth tone
vinyl fencing are allowed in the development to a maximum height of six feet
zero inches (6'0"). No fencing will be allowed that has any type of spike or
spear effect on the top rail or fence posts, with the exception of the black
wrought iron as explained in subsection
9-17D-050D of this article. (Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-080: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
A Valle di Villa Homeowners' Association will be formed and maintained in
perpetuity to care for and maintain the publicly accessible open space and
landscape elements and features as designed throughout the development. (Ord.
546, 11-18-2003)
9-17D-090: EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-88.gif]
 
EXHIBIT B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-90.gif]
 
EXHIBIT C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-92.gif]
 
EXHIBIT D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-94.gif]
 
EXHIBIT E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-96.gif]
 
EXHIBIT F
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-98.gif]
 
EXHIBIT G
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-100.gif]
 
EXHIBIT H
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-102.gif]
 
EXHIBIT I
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-104.gif]
EXHIBIT J
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-106.gif]
 
EXHIBIT K
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-108.png]
 
EXHIBIT L
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-110.gif]
 
EXHIBIT M
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-112.gif]
 
(Ord. 546, 11-18-2003)
ARTICLE E. BELLEVUE
SECTION:
9-17E-010: Purpose
9-17E-020: Permitted Uses
9-17E-030: Conditional Uses
9-17E-040: Development Standards
9-17E-050: Open Space/Landscape Treatments
9-17E-060: Roadways, Streets And Landscape Treatments
9-17E-070: Homeowners' Association
9-17E-080: Appendices
9-17E-010: PURPOSE:
The Bellevue project is a master planned architecturally controlled residential
development by the "developer". The residential special district (RSD) zoning
requirements allow for and permit flexibility in terms of planning, site
design, lot size and development through the ability to customize the zoning
and development standards to achieve unique development opportunity. The
Bellevue project seeks to utilize this RSD zone, which provides the flexibility
required to make possible significant project, community and system
improvements and amenities. The Bellevue RSD is located between 13200 South and
Corner Canyon Creek, 300 East and the East Jordan Canal. (See
figure 1 of this section.)
FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5287.png]
 
Subdivision plat review is required for each portion or phase of the
development according to the requirements and standards of title 17 of this
code. Approval of this RSD acknowledges acceptance of the Bellevue concept land
use plan, dated May 27, 2003 (see
figure 2 of this section), as satisfying Draper City's requirements for the
concept subdivision plan reviewed and accepted. Preliminary and final plats
will be processed and reviewed by the city, and accepted upon a finding that
the submitted preliminary and final plats do not substantially deviate from the
approved concept land use plan and this RSD zone text, and that there are not
significant engineering issues to be resolved. The Bellevue RSD concept land
use plan is conceptual in nature and shall be subject to amendment in
accordance with the terms of the Bellevue RSD zone text, so long as the terms
are in accordance with this code governing such amendments.
FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5283.png]
 
An integral portion of the Bellevue RSD zone is the ability and flexibility to
plan for single-family residential lots of various sizes that appeal to a
diversity of various types of homebuyers and family profiles. This lot size
diversity allows for buyers of differing family sizes and age variations to
live in an architecturally controlled neighborhood environment where not all of
the lots and houses are virtually the same size and price range, as are
commonly found in other zoning classifications within the city.
Figures 1 through
21, as incorporated in this article, define the development standards of the
project. Section
9-17E-080, appendices A, B, and C of this article are incorporated at the end
of this article. (Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
9-17E-020: PERMITTED USES:
Church, synagogue or other place of worship.
Dwelling, single-family.
Elementary school.
Home occupation, standard.
Model home/sales office.
Model homes (subject to title 17 of this code). (Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
9-17E-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory apartments, guesthouse.
Detached conservatories/greenhouses.
Home occupation, extended/advanced. (Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
9-17E-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Density Requirement: The maximum number of lots shall be three hundred
forty three (343). The property survey identified the parcel as having one
hundred thirty six (136) acres. The density of the development is 2.52 units
per acre (343 units per 136 acres, excluding school), which is well within the
guidelines of the density element of the general plan of Draper City. The
density is also compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
B.   Lot Size: An area of not less than nine thousand seven hundred (9,700)
square feet, or 0.22 acre, shall be provided and maintained for each dwelling
and uses accessory thereto as a minimum for the development. Varying larger lot
sizes shall also be provided. Largest lot sizes are greater than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or 0.46 acre. The average lot size for the entire
development is approximately twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. (See
figure 3 of this section for lot sizes and distribution.)
C.   Frontage: The minimum width of any lot for a dwelling shall be eighty feet
(80'), measured at the front setback line. While this standard represents the
minimum lot width, the majority of the lots in the development have a lot
frontage of at least ninety feet (90'). This increased lot width allows for the
construction of larger homes.
D.   Front Yard Setback Requirements:
1.   All residential structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty three
feet (23') from the front property line. In order to provide an element of
visual relief, front setback variations are to be encouraged, ranging between
twenty three (23) and thirty feet (30') minimum.
2.   On corner lots, the front setback shall be a minimum of twenty five feet
(25').
E.   Side Yard Requirements: All dwelling structures and other main buildings
shall be set back a distance of at least eight feet (8') on one side and a
total of at least eighteen feet (18') combined both sides from the side
property lines. Garage side shall be the larger dimension, and shall be a
minimum of ten feet (10'). Side yard setback requirement for a corner lot,
adjacent to a street, shall be a distance of at least twenty feet (20') from
the side property line at such street.
F.   Rear Yard Requirements: All dwelling structures and other main buildings
shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty
feet (20').
G.   Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit as required by this code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5281.png]
 
H.   Height Of Buildings: Height shall be measured according to the code as
currently adopted by the state of Utah at the time of application for building
permit. (Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
I.   Rooflines And Pitches: Rooflines shall be varied in pitch, height and
orientation to provide visual interest. The majority of all roof pitches on
each individual home shall be sloped at not less than six to twelve (6:12) and
no greater than twelve to twelve (12:12) in order to provide such visual
interest. Long, continuous rooflines shall not be allowed. Rooflines should be
varied to include dormers, gables, hip roofs, etc. Asphalt architectural grade,
twenty five (25) year shingles, cedar shake shingles; tile and/or masonry and
slate shingles are standard through the development. (Ord. 602, 9-14-2004)
J.   Windows: High quality cladded wood windows or vinyl windows are allowed.
Highly reflective or mirrored glass shall not be used. Decorative window
treatments such as surrounds, shutters, or nicely detailed lintels and sills
are encouraged.
K.   Building Materials: Homes in the Bellevue neighborhood will use high
quality exterior finishes to include stone, brick and stucco combinations,
hardy board siding, raw timber, copper detailing, shutters and other high
quality exterior siding products as approved by the architectural review
committee (ARC) 1 . Aluminum siding shall be allowed only for soffit and
fascia. Additional architectural design features such as porches, bays,
cantilevers, columns, balconies, landscaped window wells, gridded windows and
soffit crowns will be included throughout the development to provide variety
and relief on all sides of the building. Sophisticated architectural lines,
steep roof pitches and dramatic entries will be used to make a statement on the
craft of the building.
L.   Added Visual Character: Homes sitting on corner lots identified in the
list below shall include added elements of architectural relief on sides that
are exposed to the road. Examples of such architectural relief may, at the
developer's option, include stucco "pop outs", bays, box windows, hip roofs
side entry garages, and the use of different colors. If a home on a corner lot
requiring added visual character has brick or stucco wainscots, that element
will be carried around the side of the home that fronts the street. Elements
will be applied per plan. The following lots (as shown in section
9-17E-030, figure 2 of this article) are identified as lots requiring added
visual character: 1, 20, 41, 52, 54, 64, 68, 74, 86, 106, 114, 141, 149, 150,
166, 184, 195, 202 and 203. (Actual lot numbers may change by preliminary plat,
but shall be cross referenced back to this document.)
FIGURE 4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5279.png]
 
M.   Basements: Basements shall be permitted within the development, provided
they comply with Draper City's engineering standards and criteria for
construction of basements.
N.   Repeat Plan Limitations: No two (2) homes shall have the same elevation on
adjoining lots.
O.   Project Theme: Varied high quality architectural styles are expected and
encouraged throughout the development. While not singular in terms of one
particular architectural style, the overall project theme utilizes a rustic
alpine style. The characteristics of this style, which are reflected in the
design of the entry feature (
figure 5 of this section), bridges and walls (
figures 6,
7 and
8 of this section), include the look of rough cut stone and timbers. Precast,
faux stone walls, textured and colored, will be installed along Lone Rock
Drive, 300 East and 13200 South. In addition, themed lighting, benches,
pedestrian friendly trails (section
9-17E-060,
figure 21 of this article) will also be included along Lone Rock Drive. All
entry features within the proposed right of way require approval by Draper
City, and will be maintained by a homeowners' association. The planting design
will accentuate this style through random, informal plantings.
FIGURE 5
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.png]
 
Entry sign
FIGURE 6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5275.png]
 
Typical wall
FIGURE 7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5273.png]
 
P.   Project Lighting: Decorative downlighting will be used along Lone Rock
Drive and at the Community Park. The Draper City standard light fixture will be
used along all local streets. The developer is willing to work with the city to
find an appropriate alternative with similar cost to the current standard.
Q.   Fencing: No front yard fencing is to be allowed, unless otherwise approved
by the ACC. If approved, no fence can exceed three feet (3') in height in a
front yard. Masonry, precast, wrought iron, wood and vinyl fencing, and other
high quality materials as approved by the ARC are allowed in the development,
back and side yards, to a maximum height of six feet zero inches (6'0") for
security and privacy. At the south side of 13200 South, and at the east sides
of 300 East and Lone Rock Drive fencing shall consist of precast concrete, six
feet (6') in height, with a faux stone architectural treatment, color and
texture to highlight the thematic elements of the development. The roadside
shall also be landscaped, per the adopted Draper City street tree plan, with
additional shrubs, trees, vines/ivy to provide visual relief and interest along
the fence. (See
figures 7 and
8 of this section.) A street tree plan has been submitted to the city as part
of the concept acceptance process (see section
9-17E-060,
figure 20 of this article).
 FIGURE 8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5271.png]
 
Pre cast concrete wall along Lone Rock Drive
R.   Additional Documentation: Geotechnical, hydrological, traffic and other
engineering reports will be submitted with the preliminary plat if required by
this code or if required to deal with a specific project issue. (Ord. 520, 5-
27-2003)
 
Notes
  1. An architectural review committee will be created and maintained by the
1 homeowners' association. Details of the ARC will be contained in the CC&Rs
  which will be recorded with all phases of the Bellevue project.
9-17E-050: OPEN SPACE/LANDSCAPE TREATMENTS:
The developer shall work together with the city parks and trails committee to
provide design recommendations and further details to the planning commission
and city council for approval during the preliminary plat process for the
elements described below:
A.   Bellevue Park: As shown in
figure 9 of this section, developer will dedicate property to Draper City for
the Bellevue Park. This formal park area is approximately 4.45 acres, including
the trail connection to the east. The location of this park makes it readily
accessible - walkable, from each of the surrounding neighborhoods through the
network of trails, sidewalks, pedestrian crosswalks and bicycle lanes. Draper
City shall be responsible for long term maintenance of the park at its expense.
The developer shall dedicate the park area to the city in phase with the
adjoining lots. In addition to dedicating the underlying land to the city for
the park, at no cost to the city, the developer, as part of the RSD designation
shall construct the trails along Lone Rock Drive and 13200 South adjacent to
the park. Also, developer shall pay for the first two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00) of Bellevue Park improvements. Furthermore, the developer desires
to see a fully developed park as soon as is practical and is therefore willing
to advance the costs of any additional park amenities and improvements that
Draper City shall request, subject to a reimbursement agreement for any costs
over and above the initial two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Final
park design shall be reviewed and approved by Draper City during the
preliminary plat process.
FIGURE 9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5269.png]
 
B.   Fort Street Parkway: A pedestrian friendly trail connection to Fort Street
will be constructed at the time 13200 South is tied into Fort Street. The
developer shall provide at its cost the underlying land to the city for the
parkway, as well as the basic initial amenity package. This amenity package
shall be designed by the developer, and shall include the following: grading,
basic landscaping and irrigation system, asphalt trail, pedestrian crossing,
lighting and benches. Draper City shall be responsible for maintenance of the
land and amenities at its cost. The Fort Street Parkway adds approximately 1.5
acres of open space.
C.   Corner Canyon Creek Pocket Park: The developer shall provide approximately
0.4 acre of park/open space at the southwest corner of the project as shown in
figure 10 of this section. The developer shall provide the underlying land as
well as grading and initial amenities including a tot lot type playground,
asphalt trails, benches, landscaping and irrigation. This area provides a
recreational area for families with smaller children who may desire an
alternate to Smith Fields Park. In conjunction with the trail connection to the
elementary school, this park provides an important open space link between
Smith Fields Park, the elementary school and the Corner Canyon Creek facility.
A secondary use of the park is stormwater detention. In addition, a portion of
the elementary school property is to be used for detention. Additional small
detention areas, to be identified during preliminary plat may also be
necessary. Maintenance responsibilities shall be split as follows: Bellevue HOA
shall maintain the park, landscape, irrigation, benches and any playground
equipment at its expense; Draper City shall maintain the storm drain
components, as well as the public trail at its expense.
 FIGURE 10
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5267.png]
 
Corner Canyon Creek Pocket Park
D.   Pedestrian Circulation Trails: As illustrated in
figure 11 of this section, the Bellevue development features an extensive
pedestrian circulation system which links together the various open space
elements of the project. Where the interior pedestrian paths intersect the
roadways, pedestrian crossings will be constructed. (See
figure 12 of this section.) These roadway crossings include specialty concrete
or asphalt paving areas (i.e., stamped asphalt, and/or concrete pavers) to
provide traffic calming effects, as well as benches, wrought iron or vinyl rail
fencing and high quality landscape elements. Final design shall be reviewed and
approved by Draper City. These paths connect the various areas of the
development one to another such that all can safely access the park areas, the
school, and Corner Canyon Creek, as well as destinations such as Smith Fields
Park outside of the project area. The Bellevue homeowners' association shall
maintain interior trail connections, (as shown in
figure 11 of this section and depicted in section
9-17E-060,
figure 21 of this article). Publicly accessible trails and bridges (as shown in
figure 11 of this section) such as those at Corner Canyon Creek, 13200 South,
300 East, Lone Rock Drive, Fort Street parkway and the city park shall be
maintained by Draper City.
 FIGURE 11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5265.png]
 
Open space plan and pedestrian circulation trails
FIGURE 12
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5263.png]
 
Typical pedestrian trail road crossings
(Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
9-17E-060: ROADWAYS, STREETS AND LANDSCAPE TREATMENTS:
All development/improvements shall be consistent with title 17 of this code,
unless otherwise approved under this RSD zone text. Nonproject improvement
reimbursements for roads, utilities, parks, trails, etc., shall be finalized at
the preliminary and final plat stages, in accordance with this document,
including section
9-17E-080, "Appendices", of this article, and in accordance with Draper City
ordinance and Utah state statute.
A.   13200 South: Shown on the Draper City master transportation plan as a
"major collector", with proposed total right of way width and landscape and
trail treatments according to
figures 13,
14 and
20 of this section. An asphalt trail, eight feet (8') wide, runs along the
north side of the road from 300 East to 700 East, at which point it will cross
to the south side, through the proposed Bellevue Park, connecting to Fort
Street through the proposed Fort Street Parkway. A meandering sidewalk will be
located on the south side of 13200 South, from 300 East to 700 East, and shall
be five feet (5') wide (
figure 13 of this section). A twelve (12) to thirteen foot (13') wide park
strip area, landscaped and irrigated shall be constructed between the back of
curb and the fence/wall. Final plans and sections shall be reviewed and
approved by the Draper City engineer based on the proposed road sections shown
in this document. 13200 South shall be constructed and open to traffic from 700
East to Fort Street prior to issuance by the city of the two hundredth
certificate of occupancy for homes in the Bellevue RSD. The bridge over the
East Jordan Canal, as indicated on the city's master transportation plan, shall
be constructed with the city and developer sharing the cost equally as is set
out in section
9-17E-080 of this article, "appendix C".
FIGURE 13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-138.gif]
 
FIGURE 14
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-140.gif]
 
FIGURE 15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-142.gif]
 
B.   300 East: Major collector status. The developer will construct and
dedicate a twenty four foot (24') dedicated roadway width (centerline to back
of curb as shown above) for the installation of 300 East for Draper City. An
extended trail, park strip, and fence - twenty three feet (23') wide from back
of curb, will be constructed on the east side of 300 East from 13200 South to
Corner Canyon Creek. (See
figures 15 and
20 of this section.) The trail will be an eight feet (8') wide, meandering
asphalt path. Landscaping and fence are described elsewhere. Final plans and
sections shall be reviewed and approved by the Draper City engineer based on
the proposed road sections shown in this document. The developer shall
coordinate with the Draper City engineer to construct and dedicate 300 East as
indicated in section
9-17E-010,
figure 2 of this article to accommodate the design and construction by the city
of a roundabout at the intersection of 13200 South and 300 East. Developer
shall construct an additional access road to 300 East in the southwest quadrant
of the Bellevue development (see section
9-17E-010,
figure 2 of this article). The final alignment and location shall be determined
during the preliminary plat process by Draper City engineering, in consultation
with the traffic engineer and the updated traffic study.
FIGURE 16
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5261.png]
 
Lone Rock Drive roundabout
FIGURE 17
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5259.png]
 
Perspective view of Lone Rock Drive (looking north)
    C.   Lone Rock Drive Minor Collector Status: This street, which provides a
connection between 500 East and 700 East, is proposed to have a seventy six
foot (76') right of way. A roundabout is proposed at the location shown on the
concept plan. The street will be constructed with a forty foot (40') paved
roadway (back of curb to back of curb) and will include a five foot (5') walk
and 7.5 foot park strip on the west side, and an eight foot (8') asphalt path
within a 23.5 foot landscaped area on the east side. (See
figures 16,
17,
18 and
20 of this section.) The proposed roundabout design and final plans and
sections shall be reviewed and approved by the Draper City engineer based on
the proposed road sections shown in this document. Lone Rock Drive shall be
constructed and open to traffic from Bellevue's southern property line to 13200
South prior to issuance by the city of the one hundredth certificate of
occupancy for homes in the Bellevue RSD. The bridge on Lone Rock Drive over
Corner Canyon Creek, as indicated on the city's master transportation plan,
shall be constructed with the city and developer sharing the cost equally as is
set out in section
9-17E-080 of this article, "appendix C". The developer will advance the costs
for the traffic bridge over Corner Canyon Creek as indicated on the city's
transportation master plan subject to a reimbursement agreement.
FIGURE 18
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-148.gif]
 
FIGURE 19
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-150.gif]
 
    D.   Typical Local Street: Throughout the development, local streets will
be constructed with a fifty five foot (55') total dedicated width, with a
roadway section of thirty feet (30') as measured from back of curb to back of
curb. This slight road narrowing from the Draper City standard is to provide a
traffic calming effect. There will be a 7.5 foot park strip and five foot (5')
sidewalk on each side of the road. Street trees have been selected from the
Draper City street tree plan which is approved for the 7.5 foot park strip.
(See
figure 20 of this section.) Public utility easements are contained within the
park strip on both sides of local streets, as well as behind the sidewalks.
(See
figure 19 of this section.) This local street cross section will be expanded to
approximately forty feet (40') adjacent to the elementary school to provide on
street parking. Final plans and sections shall be reviewed and approved by the
Draper City engineer based on the proposed road sections shown in this
document.
FIGURE 20
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5257.png]
 
E.   Public Parks, Trails And Open Space: A landscape plan approved by the city
for each phase of the development shall be required before final plat approval
of that phase of the development. Water conservation shall be encouraged
through the use of xeriscape landscape techniques, designed by a landscape
architect and reviewed and approved by the city, particularly on public parks,
trails (see
figure 21 of this section) and open space to be maintained by Draper City.
Developer shall retain the right, at its sole discretion and cost, to add
private trails and/or a private park or other open space (not in place of the
public park as set out in the concept plan) to the accepted concept plan during
either the preliminary or final plat process. Developer shall not be required
to pursue an amendment to the accepted concept plan or RSD zone text so long as
the lot count does not increase and major road alignment does not change
significantly by so doing.
FIGURE 21
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5255.png]
 
Typical interior trail connections
F.   Single-Family Dwelling Landscaping: Each single-family lot shall be
properly and completely landscaped within nine (9) months of the date of
closing on the first sale of the dwelling unit constructed thereon. The trees
will be planted as indicated in
figure 20 of this section. Each new home will plant trees in the park strip
fronting the lot per the approved street tree planting plan. An automatic
sprinkler system is required on each lot. Street trees shall be installed for
each lot prior to occupancy of the home; otherwise a bond must be posted in
accordance with title 17 of this code. (Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
9-17E-070: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
A Bellevue homeowners' association will be formed and maintained in perpetuity
to care for and maintain interior trails, entry features, private open space,
and underdrain system, if any, as well as to enforce the architectural and
restrictive covenants within the community. (Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
9-17E-080: APPENDICES:
    APPENDIX A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5253.png]
 
   APPENDIX B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5251.png]
 
   APPENDIX C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5249.png]
 
(Ord. 520, 5-27-2003)
CHAPTER 18
COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICTS (CSD)
SECTION:
9-18-010: Establishment Of (CSD) Commercial Special District Zones
9-18-010: ESTABLISHMENT OF (CSD) COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT ZONES:
A.   Establishment Of CSD Zones: Each CSD zone is intended to allow a master
planned, architecturally designed development where customized zoning
requirements apply in order to permit flexibility and initiative in site
development. The following requirements shall apply to the establishment of any
CSD zone:
1.   Each CSD zone shall be at least ten (10) acres in size.
2.   To establish a CSD zone, a petition shall be submitted for a text and
zoning map amendment as provided in section
9-5-060 of this title. The following materials shall be included:
a.   Proposed zone name and location;
b.   Proposed zone text which shall include:
(1)   Permitted, conditional, and accessory uses;
(2)   Proposed development standards, including the following:
(A)   Land use standards establishing mix of land use types, location, and
density;
(B)   Lot standards establishing requirements for lot area and dimensions;
(C)   Building setback standards for front, side and rear yards;
(D)   Design standards addressing building height, building orientation, common
and private open space, natural resource protection, architectural design; and
(E)   Landscaping and buffering standards.
(F)   Requirement for compliance with standards in this code covering
development standards that are not being modified by the proposed CSD language.
Chapters in this title that shall be included are chapters 20, 22, 23, 25, and
32. Titles 7, 8, 11, 12, 16, and 18 of this code shall also be referenced.
(3)   Proposed process for approval of development in the CSD zone;
c.   A schematic development plan which shows the following:
(1)   Location of proposed uses;
(2)   Height, location and bulk of buildings;
(3)   Location, arrangement and configuration of open space and building
setbacks;
(4)   Location and design of off street parking areas; and
(5)   Number, size and location of all signs.
3.   In considering a petition for a CSD zone, the proposed zone text and
zoning map amendments may be modified by the city to meet the intent and
requirements of this subsection A and may include regulations and standards
other than those proposed by the petitioner.
4.   A proposed CSD text and zoning map amendment and schematic development
plan shall be approved only if, in the opinion of the approving authority,
development proposed on the property will:
a.   Conform to applicable provisions of the city's general plan, any
applicable master plan, particularly provisions which establish density
limitations;
b.   Conform to applicable chapters of this title; and
c.   Better preserve and enhance the property and neighborhood by integrated
planning and design than would be possible under other zoning regulations of
this title.
5.   Upon approval, each CSD zone shall be given a unique name following the
designation "CSD-" and shall be independent of any other CSD zone.
6.   After approval of a CSD zone and a schematic development plan, and prior
to the issuance of any building permits, a site plan shall be submitted as
provided in section
9-5-090 of this title. Applications for subdivision approval, conditional use
permits, and any other needed permits shall be submitted as needed to implement
the schematic plan.
7.   Amendments to an approved schematic development plan shall be obtained
only by following the procedures required for first approval set forth in this
subsection A.
(Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
ARTICLE A. DRAPER PEAKS COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18A-010: Purpose
9-18A-020: Permitted Uses
9-18A-030: Conditional Uses
9-18A-040: Proposed Development Standards
9-18A-050: Landscape Standards
9-18A-060: Parking Design
9-18A-070: Signage
9-18A-080: Procedures
9-18A-090: Exhibits
9-18A-010: PURPOSE:
The Draper Peaks Commercial Special District is an area approximately sixty
(60) acres in size, located at the convergence of the City's two (2) gateway
entrances along 12300 South and Interstate 15. With its high level of
visibility to residents and visitors alike, architectural integrity and quality
design controls are crucial to implementing the City's goals and objectives.
The Draper Peaks Commercial Center is a master planned mixed use project with
multiple architecturally compatible buildings, located along Draper City's
major commercial corridor of 12300 South. The project will incorporate the
community's design goals for commercial and residential development in all
aspects. The existing Draper Crossing project, built in 1997, is also within
the special district zone boundaries. While the zone regulations will have less
impact within this portion of the district, as buildings are renovated the
architectural design elements of the district will be enforced. Design cohesion
will take time but will be incrementally implemented in the Draper Peaks
portion of the district. The special district zone also incorporates property
along Factory Outlet Drive from 12300 South to 12150 South. (Ord. 611, 11-2-
2004)
9-18A-020: PERMITTED USES:
Bank or financial institution.
Bar establishment.
Business equipment rental and supplies.
Business service.
Daycare, general.
Department store.
Health and fitness facility.
Laundry or dry cleaning, limited.
Medical and dental clinic.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Multi-family residential buildings.
Office, general.
Personal care service.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Reception center.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Repair service.
Restaurant without drive-through facility.
Retail, general.
(Ord. 949, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1328, 6-5-2018; Ord.
1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18A-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Restaurants or retail with drive-through facilities.
Secondhand store, with no outside storage and no drop off items during hours
that the business is closed.
Vehicle rental.
Vehicle repair. (Ord. 949, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord. 1085, 3-4-2014)
9-18A-040: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Commercial: The Draper Peaks commercial special district will provide
design guidelines for the buildings, landscaping, parking, housing and signage
located within the district boundaries. The Draper Peaks project is a master
planned mixed use development containing approximately sixty (60) acres of
developed and undeveloped land along the 12300 South arterial corridor. The
master plan provides for commercial and residential development in designated
areas of the district in accordance with the development standards set forth
herein. The commercial phase of new construction along the north side of 12300
South has five (5) pad sites along the frontage, four (4) multi-tenant
buildings on either side of a central entrance boulevard and approximately one
hundred eighty thousand (180,000) square feet of retail space in several
buildings along the rear of the site as shown on the site plan, section
9-18A-090, exhibit A of this article. All commercial buildings within the
district shall comply with the following development standards:
1.   All buildings shall share a similar architectural theme as depicted in
drawings incorporated in section
9-18A-090, exhibit B of this article, including stacked ledge stone. Design
elements shall be used to add interest on all visible sides of buildings.
2.   Where an elevation of a building faces 12300 South or Factory Outlet Drive
but has no entrance onto such roads, a minimum of ten percent (10%) of said
wall shall be glass or other architectural element of interest.
3.   No one building shall be larger than one hundred twenty thousand (120,000)
square feet.
4.   The minimum front setback shall be twelve feet (12').
5.   For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of commercial space, there
shall be five (5) parking stalls.
6.   No building shall be taller than fifty five feet (55').
7.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure
or parapet wall.
8.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry enclosure designed
to be compatible with overall project architecture.
9.   Outdoor storage and display is prohibited.
B.   Residential Component: The residential component is located north of the
commercial phase on the north side of the proposed east-west local street,
12150 South. The property will be developed into high density housing, up to
twenty (20) units per acre. The location, within a block of the UTA transit
stop and the commercial core, is ideal for this type of housing product. A
detailed site plan will be required for planning commission review and
approval. Development of the residential component within the district shall
comply with the following development standards:
1.   All buildings shall share a similar architectural theme as depicted in
drawings incorporated in section
9-18A-090, exhibit E of this article, including stacked ledge stone, hip roof,
knee braces.
2.   No building shall be taller than forty five feet (45').
3.   Incorporate a minimum of one indoor and two (2) outdoor amenities within
the design.
C.   Draper Crossing: The Draper Crossing portion of the commercial special
district on the south side of 12300 South was built in 1997. The district
guidelines and development standards will regulate the renovation of the
existing center. While development and design standards have already been
adopted for the Draper Crossing project, the CSD standards will serve to
supplement these guidelines to ensure architectural similarities along this
critical corridor. As such, buildings shall incorporate design elements as
shown in section
9-18A-090, exhibit B of this article when renovated through a building permit.
(Ord. 611, 11-2-2004; amd. Ord. 1405, 10-8-2019)
9-18A-050: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A.   Commercial: The Draper Peaks commercial center and future phases will be
landscaped with sensitivity to its desert environment. Drought tolerant trees,
shrubs, grasses and perennials will complement the earth tone desert
architecture with year round color. A desert rock water feature along the
center boulevard shall be constructed. Decorative light fixtures, tree grates
and outdoor furniture shall be constructed to further enhance and enliven this
boulevard. Another critical component of the proposed landscaping plan is the
planting of over sixty (60) shade trees within tree diamonds throughout the
parking lot. On the western perimeter, trees shall be planted every thirty feet
(30') on center in a ten foot (10') landscaped buffer. A landscaped buffer
shall be installed on the eastern perimeter, approximately twenty feet (20')
wide by two hundred forty feet (240') long and shall include at least twelve
(12) trees. The landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the landscape
plan as shown in section
9-18A-090, exhibit C of this article.
B.   Residential: The residential component will be landscaped in drought
tolerant landscaping species compatible with the commercial component,
incorporating the trellis element where possible. The landscaping plan will be
submitted along with the residential site plan to be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission. The residential project will be required to satisfy
the typical forty percent (40%) landscaping required by chapter 32 of this
title.
C.   Draper Crossing: The Draper Crossing portion of the Commercial Special
District has existing mature landscaping installed in accordance with the
design guidelines. As plant material is replaced, drought tolerant species will
be installed. All new landscaping plans submitted for approval will utilize the
revised standards shown in section
9-18A-090, exhibit C of this article.
D.   Factory Outlet Drive: Property to be developed along Factory Outlet Drive
shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscaping requirements for the
commercial component along 12300 South. Landscaping plans shall be submitted to
the Planning Division for review and approval in accordance with the
landscaping standards set forth herein. (Ord. 611, 11-2-2004)
9-18A-060: PARKING DESIGN:
Commercial development within the Draper Peaks Special District will require
five (5) parking stalls for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of retail or
restaurant space. Each stall must measure at least nine feet (9') wide by
eighteen feet (18') long, with ADA accessible stalls provided in accordance
with established standards. Parking lot lighting shall provide adequate
illumination and shall be no taller than thirty five feet (35'). Pedestrian
corridors shall be identified by a change in color and/or texture of pavement
material. Tree diamonds measuring five by five (5 x 5) shall be installed
throughout the parking areas. The residential component will utilize surface
parking. The number of stalls required will be based on a parking analysis to
include the number of bedrooms within the project and any special population
effects. Parking must be located within the project, hidden from the
surrounding street network to the greatest extent practical. (Ord. 611, 11-2-
2004)
9-18A-070: SIGNAGE:
A.   General Requirements For All Signs:
1.   Wall signs may be installed by individual businesses based on two (2)
square feet per linear foot of building.
2.   All signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property
line and shall be located outside of any public utility easement, whichever is
greater.
3.   All signs must be reviewed and approved by the Draper Peaks' Architectural
Control Committee, but generally shall be consistent with section
9-18A-090, "Exhibits", of this article.
4.   The location of all signs must be approved by the City Engineer to ensure
clearance of sight distance requirements. All sign locations shall also conform
to the clear view area requirements in the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publication, "A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets".
5.   As sign changes are made, the signage must be consistent with section
9-18A-090, "Exhibits", of this article.
6.   Any tenant of the Commercial Special District may locate on any pole or
pylon sign within the district boundaries as approved by the owner.
B.   Draper Peaks: The following regulations shall apply to signs located
within the Draper Peaks portion of the Commercial Special District. The
entrance into Draper Peaks is identified by an overhead arcade sign, spanning
between the two (2) buildings located at the 210 East street entrance into the
shopping center.
1.   Pole, Pylon Or Tower Sign:
a.   One (1) pole, pylon or tower sign shall be permitted on the 12300 South
project frontage.
b.   The sign may be a multi-tenant sign, designed to be architecturally
compatible with the Draper Peaks design theme.
c.   The sign shall be no taller than thirty five feet (35') and no wider than
twenty five feet (25').
2.   Monument Signs: Pad sites along 12300 South and Factory Outlet Drive may
install individual signage subject to the following:
a.   The sign shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with the
Draper Peaks design theme.
b.   The maximum size allowed for the entire sign, including base and
decorative features, is thirty two (32) square feet.
3.   Shingle Signs:
a.   One (1) pedestrian oriented shingle sign may be installed per business
along the center boulevard that is an extension of 210 East.
b.   Shingle signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above
the pavement.
C.   Draper Crossing:
1.   Pole, Pylon Or Tower Signs:
a.   A total of four (4) pole, pylon or tower signs may be permitted in the
following locations:
(1)   One (1) near the exit ramp at the southern boundary of the district;
(2)   Two (2) signs along the 12300 South frontage; and
(3)   One (1) additional sign may be constructed at a location to be approved
by the Zoning Administrator based on their determination that the proposed sign
meets the general requirements of this section.
b.   All may be multi-tenant signs for any of the tenants in the Draper
Crossing Shopping Center.
c.   The sign near the exit ramp is limited to a maximum height of forty one
feet (41') to assist with freeway visibility.
d.   All other signs are limited to thirty five feet (35') in height.
2.   Directory Signs:
a.   Two (2) directory signs, consistent in design and size with exhibit G,
section
9-18A-090 of this article shall be allowed adjacent to 12450 South.
b.   These signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in overall height and seven
feet (7') in width and shall be placed in the areas identified on exhibit H,
section
9-18A-090 of this article.
c.   Signs may have external illumination sources but shall not be internally
illuminated.
D.   Electronic Message Display Signs: A new pole, pylon or tower electronic
message display sign is permitted or an existing pole, pylon or tower sign may
be upgraded to an electronic message display sign provided the following are
met:
1.   Shall conform to the maximum height and maximum width of the shopping
center in which it is located.
2.   All signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property
line and shall be located outside of any public utility easement, whichever is
greater.
3.   All electronic message display signs shall comply with subsection
9-26-090D of this title.
4.   The electronic message display sign may be multi-tenant sign for any of
the tenants in that shopping center. (Ord. 1271, 7-11-2017)
9-18A-080: PROCEDURES:
Approval of the Commercial Special District text shall constitute conceptual
site plan approval for the first commercial phase located on the north side of
12300 South, exclusive of property along Factory Outlet Drive. Future site plan
approvals within this first commercial phase can then be accomplished with a
staff level review. All other development within the district, including
development of the residential component, development and/or redevelopment of
property along Factory Outlet Drive and 12150 South, and the redevelopment or
amendments to the development within the Draper Crossing portion of the
Commercial Special District shall require site plan approval in accordance with
City ordinances. Except as otherwise provided herein, all other procedural
requirements, such as applications for subdivision approval, conditional use
approvals, and any other permits shall be processed in accordance with the
Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. (Ord. 611, 11-2-2004)
9-18A-090: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-162.jpg]
 
(Ord. 549, 12-9-2003)
    EXHIBIT B
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-164.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-166.jpg]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-168.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-170.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-172.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-174.jpg]
 
(Ord. 558, 1-27-2004)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-176.jpg]
 
(Ord. 549, 12-9-2003)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-178.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1029, 10-2-2012)
ARTICLE B. DAHLE RETAIL CENTER COMMERCIAL
SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18B-010: Purpose
9-18B-020: Permitted Uses
9-18B-030: Schematic Development Plans
9-18B-040: Proposed Development Standards
9-18B-050: Landscape Standards
9-18B-060: Parking Design
9-18B-070: Lighting
9-18B-080: Signage
9-18B-090: Loading Dock Screening
9-18B-100: Procedures
9-18B-110: Exhibits
9-18B-010: PURPOSE:
The Dahle commercial special district (the "Dahle CSD") is hereby created to
facilitate commercial development in the West Bangerter area. The area is
characterized by large vacant parcels with freeway frontage and visibility and
ample access to frontage roads. It is approximately thirty nine (39) acres in
size. Given the site's prominence, the city anticipates a substantial retail
presence within the Dahle CSD that forwards the community's economic
development goals. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
9-18B-020: PERMITTED USES:
Bank or financial institution.
Daycare, general.
Department store.
Health and fitness facility.
Laundry or dry cleaning, limited.
Medical and dental clinic.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Office, general.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Restaurant without drive-through facility.
Restaurants or retail with drive-through facilities.
Retail, general. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1575,
1-10-2023)
9-18B-030: SCHEMATIC DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
Development within the Dahle CSD shall be substantially in accordance with a
schematic development plan as shown in section
9-18B-110, exhibit A of this article, or a schematic development plan that
combines any substantial elements of such exhibits. Development within the
Dahle CSD may be in phases. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
9-18B-040: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Principal Building: A single building with a floor area in excess of
one hundred eighty thousand (180,000) square feet shall be designated as the
"principal building" within the Dahle CSD. The principal building shall be
located within the "building envelope" on lot 1 of the Dahle CSD as shown in
section 9-18B-110, exhibit A of this article.
   B.   Major Building: A single building with a floor area in excess of one
hundred forty thousand (140,000) square feet shall be designated as the "major
building" within the Dahle CSD. The major building shall be located within the
"building envelope" on lot 2 of the Dahle CSD as shown in section 9-18B-110,
exhibit A of this article.
   C.   Building Height: Maximum building height for all buildings shall be
forty five feet (45'), except that the principal building and the major
building may have additional architectural features, including, without
limitation, cornices, crenellations, and towers, up to fifteen feet (15') above
such forty five foot (45') height. Notwithstanding anything else contained
herein, the major building may have the architectural features shown in section
9-18B-110, exhibit C of this article.
   D.   Building Design: For the principal building and the major building, a
design consistent with each user's corporate determined architectural style
shall be permitted. For the principal building and the major building, tilt-up
type construction shall be permitted with no required added architectural
materials, such as brick, rock, or other masonry. Once the principal building
and major building have been completed, future design changes to the principal
building and the major building may be approved by the zoning administrator and
the city engineer only, as provided in section 9-18B-100 of this article.
   E.   Dumpsters: Dumpsters containing wet garbage shall be enclosed within a
decorative masonry enclosure designed to be compatible with the adjoining
building. This does not apply to enclosed compactors or dumpsters and tractor
trailers used only for recycling dry wood, glass and paper products.
   F.   Outdoor Storage, Display: Permanent outdoor storage and display is
prohibited, except that the users of the principal building and the major
building may each have up to four (4) temporary outdoor promotions, displays or
sales events each year, separate and apart from each other and/or occurring at
the same or different times, each such display lasting up to twenty one (21)
days, to be located contiguous to their respective buildings and/or in their
parking lots.
   G.   Setbacks: The principal building shall be set back from property lines
by at least thirty feet (30') on all sides. All other buildings shall be set
back from property lines by at least twenty feet (20').
   H.   Buffers: No buffers between land uses on properties outside of the
Dahle CSD are required.
   I.   Detention Areas: All detention areas shall have three to one (3:1) or
flatter slopes regardless of who maintains.
   J.   Commercial Loading Space: For the principal building and major
building, one commercial loading space per every fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet of use is required.
   K.   Lot Size, Frontage: No minimum lot size or frontage is required. (Ord.
1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
9-18B-050: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A.   Generally: The Dahle CSD shall require landscaping with sensitivity to its
low precipitation environment, and the amount of parking required in a large
scale commercial development. Drought tolerant trees, shrubs, grasses and
perennials are encouraged with a goal of year round color. Another critical
component of the proposed landscaping plan is parking lot landscaping, with the
goal of shade and refuge from the heat islands of large parking lots. Portions
of commercial sites developed within the boundaries of the Dahle CSD shall be
required to provide the minimum overall landscape percentage described in
subsection B of this section. Section
9-18B-010 of this article notes that one of the important characteristics of
the Dahle CSD is its freeway frontage and visibility. Accordingly,
notwithstanding anything else in this article, in order to preserve freeway and
frontage visibility of the major building, the landscape buffer that runs north
to south between the principal building and the major building shall be
completely landscaped with shrubs and vegetation that will not exceed a maximum
height of three feet (3').
B.   Landscape Percentages: As the Dahle CSD develops, each phase shall meet
the minimum fifteen percent (15%) overall landscape percentage. This is a
cumulative total which can be calculated as total landscaped area over the
developed site area, it being understood and agreed that, the "developed site
area" shall include both the area of the lot to be developed and the area of
any other additional property made available to the relevant applicant, by
easement or otherwise, for landscaping purposes. By way of example, the
landscape percentage for lot 2 on which the major building will be located is
estimated to have 12.16 percent landscaping based only on the area of lot 2,
but in determining the minimum fifteen percent (15%) overall landscape
percentage required under this provision, the development of lot 2 for the
major building may include and be credited with not only the percentage of
landscaped area located on lot 2 but also an additional ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of area landscaped by the owner of lot 2 in accordance with this
provision, that the owner of lot 8 (the detention basin property adjacent to
lot 2) makes available to the owner of lot 2 by way of easement. Landscaping
within the public right of way shall not be calculated in the overall landscape
percentage.
C.   Specific Requirements: Specific landscaping requirements are:
1.   To mitigate the reduced overall landscaping, more intensive plantings in
certain areas may be required.
2.   Tree diamonds or islands measuring a minimum of twenty five (25) square
feet shall be installed throughout the parking area at a rate of one tree for
every twenty five (25) parking stalls. Tree diamonds or islands at the end of
parking rows and on the perimeter of parking areas are required and shall be
counted in calculating the requirements of this subsection C2. See section
9-18B-110, exhibit B of this article for typical parking area landscape detail.
3.   Screening of parking areas from adjacent public streets shall include two
foot (2') high shrubs or berming, which may be substituted by a screen wall of
equal height. The approved screening location for the major building's loading
docks is shown in section
9-18B-110, exhibit D of this article. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-
10-2023)
9-18B-060: PARKING DESIGN:
A.   Required Parking: For uses greater than one hundred eighty thousand
(180,000) square feet, required parking shall be 2.5 stalls for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of commercial use; for uses equal to or greater
than one hundred forty thousand (140,000) square feet but less than one hundred
eighty thousand (180,000) square feet, required parking shall be 2.83 stalls
for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of commercial use; for uses equal to
or greater than seventy five thousand (75,000) square feet but less than one
hundred forty thousand (140,000) square feet, required parking shall be 4.5
stalls for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of commercial use; for uses
less than seventy five thousand (75,000) square feet, required parking shall be
five (5) parking stalls for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
commercial use, except that for sit down restaurants, the ratio shall be
modified to ten (10) stalls for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
commercial use. However, for any anticipated use, or combination of uses,
modifications to the standards may be authorized, if justified by a parking
study and approved by the planning commission, in accordance with section 9-25-
090 of this title. Such study must present data on the proposed uses, square
footages and floor plans, hours of operation, and shared parking areas within
the sites.
B.   Pedestrian Corridors: Pedestrian corridors shall be identified by a change
in color or scoring of pavement material, or striping with an emphasis on
pedestrian safety. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023; Ord. 1581,
5-16-2023)
9-18B-070: LIGHTING:
Parking lot lighting shall provide illumination without spillage into adjacent
residential areas, as verified by a photometric plan submitted with the site
plan for each lot or phase of development. Site lighting for buildings shall
not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. The lighting source must be
recessed and shielded. Parking lot lighting may remain on after each lot
owner's regular hours of business operations. Notwithstanding anything else
contained herein, the parking lot lighting for the major building and lot 2 may
match the specifications for the currently as built lighting for the principal
building and lot 1. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
9-18B-080: SIGNAGE:
A.   Tower Signs: Signage is very important to the success of the Dahle CSD.
Freeway frontage of more than one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') warrants
special signage consideration. For this reason, the district shall be allowed
one project tower sign not to exceed one hundred feet (100') in height (the
"project tower sign"), two (2) tower signs not to exceed forty feet (40') in
height (the "2 tower signs"), and one tower sign not to exceed twelve feet
(12') in height (the "small tower sign"). These tower signs shall have the
additional features described hereafter:
1.   The project tower sign shall have the following specifications:
a.   It may be up to one hundred feet (100') in height;
b.   It may have up to two thousand (2,000) square feet in area;
c.   It may be multisided with sign panels on each side, but shall be supported
by three (3) integrally designed supports; and
d.   It shall be located on or about the southeast corner of lot 1.
2.   The two (2) tower signs shall have the following specifications:
a.   They each may be up to forty feet (40') in height and be twenty five feet
(25') wide;
b.   They each may be double sided with sign panels on each side;
c.   A total of two hundred (200) square feet of sign panel signage may be
located on each side of each of these two (2) tower signs; and
d.   One of these two (2) tower signs shall be located on or about the
northwest corner of lot 2 and the other of these two (2) tower signs shall be
located on or about the northeast corner of lot 3 in the Dahle CSD as shown in
section
9-18B-110, exhibit A of this article.
3.   The small tower sign shall have the following specifications:
a.   It may be up to twelve feet (12') in height and be 7.5 feet wide;
b.   It may be double sided with sign panels on each side;
c.   A total of fifty (50) square feet of sign panel signage may be located on
each side of this small tower sign; and
d.   It shall be located on or about the northeast corner of lot 5 in the Dahle
CSD as shown in section
9-18B-110, exhibit A of this article.
The project tower sign, the two (2) tower signs and the small tower sign shall
be consistent with the quality of signs typically found in class A shopping
centers and may be multi-tenant. An example of this kind of tower sign is the
tower sign installed within the Draper Peaks CSD. Tower sign locations shall be
generally as shown on the site plan. No digital or reader board signs will be
permitted within the Dahle CSD.
B.   Wall Signs: Wall signs on buildings other than the principal building and
major building may be installed by individual businesses based on 1.5 square
feet per linear foot of building wall, which shall be internally illuminated.
For the principal building and the major building, this ratio will be increased
to 2.0 square feet per linear foot of building wall in total, which total
square footage can be reallocated among building facades by occupants within
the principal building and the major building. Wall signs on the principal
building and the major building may be illuminated in a manner consistent with
the user's corporate determined architectural style, whether internally or
externally illuminated. Wall signs on principal buildings may be electronic
message center signs and shall comply with the standards found in
9-26-090(D)(1) of this title.
C.   Directional, Informational Signs: Within lot 1 and lot 2, directional and
informational signage shall not exceed thirteen feet (13') in height and may be
located throughout the parking and circulation areas of such lots. Within lot 1
and lot 2, signage design consistent with the lot user's corporate determined
architectural style shall be permitted. Separate sign permits are not required
for directional and informational signage, and shall be considered approved as
noted and located on the approved site plan for each phase or lot. Directional
and informational signage shall not be counted as monument or building signage.
D.   Flags, Banners: Decorative flags and banners are also an important
component of the Dahle CSD. These flags and banners contribute to a festive
atmosphere consistent with desirable commercial projects with freeway
visibility in Draper City. Flags and banners may be externally illuminated by
spotlights or similar lights. Poles for flags shall not exceed forty feet (40')
in height and they may vary in circumference and diameter. For the principal
building, a total of twenty four (24) flags and one building mounted banner
shall be allowed so long as the design is consistent with the user's corporate
determined architectural style, and each flag size shall not exceed six feet
(6') wide by eighteen feet (18') tall, and the building mounted banner shall
not exceed thirty feet (30') wide by twenty feet (20') high. For the major
building, a total of twelve (12) flags and one building mounted banner shall be
allowed so long as the design is consistent with the user's corporate
determined architectural style, and each flag size shall not exceed six feet
(6') wide by eighteen feet (18') tall, and the building mounted banner shall
not exceed thirty feet (30') wide by fifteen feet (15') high. There shall be no
limit to the number of national and state flags flown, poles for which can also
be up to forty feet (40') in height and also can vary in circumference and
diameter. With the exception of national and state flags, which may be located
anywhere on a lot, all flags shall be located at an entrance to the Dahle CSD
from a public road or else be located close, within twenty feet (20') or less,
to the facade of the building. Flags and banners shall not be counted as
monument or building signage.
E.   Compatibility: All signage shall be architecturally generally compatible
with the buildings in the Dahle CSD. Final design details shall be submitted
for administrative review and approval with the site plan submittal as provided
in procedures below. No exposed neon signage will be permitted. (Ord. 1020A, 8-
7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023; Ord. 1581, 5-16-2023)
9-18B-090: LOADING DOCK SCREENING:
Screening of all loading docks shall be sensitively treated. If no permanent
masonry wall is constructed to screen any docks, berms and more intensive
landscaping, including evergreens, shall be required. This does not apply to a
single dock used for customer delivery truck purposes only. Notwithstanding
anything else contained herein, the screening of the loading docks for the
major building may be limited to six feet (6') in height and may be placed in
the locations identified in section
9-18B-110, exhibit D of this article. Loading docks may be angled differently
than shown on the exhibit. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
9-18B-100: PROCEDURES:
Commercial site plan approval for sites with buildings greater than one hundred
forty thousand (140,000) square feet within the Dahle CSD may be approved by
the zoning administrator and the city engineer with an administrative level
review, pending compliance with development standards described herein and all
other standard city requirements; provided, that future decorative, ornamental,
color, branding and similar modifications to such buildings greater than one
hundred forty thousand (140,000) square feet shall not require any
administrative or other city review and approval. Requests for waivers or
exceptions not specifically authorized with this Dahle CSD shall follow normal
resolution procedures, including planning commission or city council review, as
applicable. The approval of sites with buildings less than one hundred forty
thousand (140,000) square feet shall follow standard commercial site plan
approval procedures, through the planning commission. All other procedural
requirements, such as applications for minor subdivision approval, conditional
use approvals, appeals, and any other permits shall be processed in accordance
with the Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. (Ord. 1020A, 8-7-
2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
9-18B-110: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   SITE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5319.png]
 
   EXHIBIT B
   TYPICAL PARKING AREA PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-182.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT C
   PERMITTED ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES FOR MAJOR BUILDING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-184.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT D
   APPROVED SCREENING LOCATION FOR THE MAJOR
   BUILDING'S LOADING DOCKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-186.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1020A, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023; Ord. 1581, 5-16-2023)
ARTICLE C. SOUTHWESTERN FURNITURE COMMERCIAL
SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18C-010: Purpose
9-18C-020: Permitted Uses
9-18C-030: Development Standards
9-18C-040: Signage
9-18C-050: Other Regulations
9-18C-010: PURPOSE:
The southwestern furniture commercial special district (CSD) is hereby created
to facilitate commercial development in the West Bangerter area. The area is
characterized by large vacant parcels near the freeway with the potential for
visibility and ample access to frontage roads. It is approximately 3.3 acres in
size. Given the site's location, the city anticipates a substantial retail
presence within the CSD that forwards the community's economic development
goals. (Ord. 894, 5-12-2009)
9-18C-020: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the southwestern furniture CSD:
Department store.
Furniture store.
Health and fitness facility.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Office, general.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Retail, general.
(Ord. 1020, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18C-030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 1612,
adopted 5-14-2023). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
The following development standards are applicable in the southwestern
furniture CSD:
A.   Building Height: Maximum building height is forty five feet (45').
B.   Architecture: For buildings in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet, preference will be given to corporate determined architectural schemes;
for exterior finishes, subsection
9-22-040(F) of this title will apply, as modified below:
1.   The minimum amount of primary materials shall be forty percent (40%) of
all surface materials, not including glass or roofing materials.
2.   Primary materials shall include stucco, EIFS, and exposed concrete.
C.   Dumpsters: Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry
enclosure designed to be compatible with overall project architecture.
D.   Outdoor Storage, Display: Outdoor storage and display is prohibited. (Ord.
894, 5-12-2009; amd. Ord. 1612, 5-14-2024)
9-18C-040: SIGNAGE:
Signage is very important to the success of the southwestern furniture CSD.
A.   Freeway Sign: Visibility of the business presence and signage from the
freeway is a key consideration. For this reason, the district shall be allowed
one freeway visible sign integrated into the overall building architecture, not
to exceed fifty eight feet (58') in height as typically measured for pitched
roofs. This freeway visible sign may have up to one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet in area, and be multisided.
B.   Banner Sign: A banner is also an important component of southwestern
furniture CSD and will contribute to freeway visibility in Draper City. For the
principal building, a total of one building mounted banner shall be allowed.
The building mounted banner shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') wide by twenty
feet (20') high and may be externally illuminated by spotlights or similar
lights. The banner shall not be counted as monument or building signage. (Ord.
1071, 10-15-2013)
9-18C-050: OTHER REGULATIONS:
All development within the southwestern furniture CSD shall be subject to all
city regulations except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 894,
5-12-2009)
ARTICLE D. KARL MALONE AUTO CENTER COMMERCIAL
SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18D-010: Purpose
9-18D-020: Permitted Uses
9-18D-030: Conditional Uses
9-18D-040: Extent Of CSD
9-18D-050: Schematic Development Plans
9-18D-060: Development Standards
9-18D-070: Landscape Standards
9-18D-080: Signage
9-18D-090: Procedures
9-18D-100: Exhibits
9-18D-010: PURPOSE:
The Karl Malone Auto Center commercial special district (CSD) is an area
approximately 27.06 acres in size, located at the southwest corner of 11400
South and Interstate 15. The Karl Malone Auto Center CSD is a master planned
retail project designed as an automobile center to include the sale of new and
used vehicles, auto repair, collision repair, auto rental and sales of auto
related products and services. The project will incorporate the community's
design goals for commercial development. (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-020: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise allowed by state law, the following uses are considered
permitted uses within the CSD in area A and area B:
Ancillary commercial/retail.
Automotive collision repair.
Automotive self-service station.
Automotive service and repair.
Business or financial services.
Car wash.
Dealership, new (autos, trucks, RV, ATV, boat, sales and service).
Dealership, rental (autos, trucks, RV, ATV, boat, sales and service).
Dealership, used (autos, trucks, RV, ATV, boat, sales and service).
Equipment sales and service.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Restaurants.
Retail, general.
Wireless telecommunication tower.
In area B, the permitted uses shall be the permitted uses in the CBP zone, in
addition to those listed above.
(Ord. 1020, 8-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18D-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Unless otherwise allowed by state law, the following uses are considered
conditional uses within the CSD in area A and area B:
Medical/health care office.
Professional office.
In area B, the conditional uses shall be the permitted uses in the CBP zone, in
addition to those listed above. (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-040: EXTENT OF CSD:
The standards outlined in this article shall apply to all properties within the
boundaries of the CSD which are shown in section
9-18D-100, exhibit A, "CSD Boundaries", of this article. (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-050: SCHEMATIC DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
Development within the CSD shall be substantially in accordance with the
schematic development plan shown in section
9-18D-100, exhibit B, "Schematic Site Plan", of this article, or a similar
schematic development plan that reflects the spirit of the plan shown in
section
9-18D-100, exhibit B of this article. Development within the CSD will be in
phases. (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Architectural Theme: All buildings shall share a similar architectural
theme as depicted in section
9-18D-100, exhibit C, "Architectural Theme", of this article, and shall reflect
the design elements of the existing dealership buildings.
B.   Architectural Design And Materials:
1.   Building materials shall be selected which require low maintenance, such
as CMU, stone, cultured stone, metal, stucco or hardiboard.
2.   Unpainted, plain concrete walls are prohibited.
3.   Tilt-up concrete construction is permitted.
4.   Roofs shall not be exposed unless they are part of the decorative or
architectural treatment of the building, such as parapets, columns, etc.
C.   Lot Coverage: Lot coverage by buildings and covered or semienclosed
outbuildings shall not exceed forty percent (40%).
D.   Buffers, Fences, And Walls: As part of the site plan approval process,
special buffers, fences, and/or walls shall be required to provide separations
between public/commercial areas, service, loading, refuse collection, equipment
and/or storage areas.
E.   Building Size: Maximum building size shall be one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet.
F.   Building Height: Maximum building height shall be fifty five feet (55').
Additional height may be permitted as conditional use.
G.   Parking/Vehicle Storage: The minimum number of parking spaces required
shall be four hundred (400) square feet for every four hundred (400) square
feet of public showroom display area for all auto related uses. Spaces may be
used for customer, employee, inventory or service bays. All other uses shall
provide parking as per current city code.
H.   New And Used Car Display: Car displays, arrangement of parking spaces, and
circulation shall be at the dealer's option. However, no car displays shall
block minimum required clear vision areas at driveway intersections or block
lanes for public safety, egress or fire access. These clear vision areas and
emergency access lanes shall be noted on the proposed site plan.
I.   Security For Display Vehicles: To the extent deemed necessary by
individual dealers, curb walls no higher than sixteen inches (16"), closely
spaced concrete bollards, berms, low security fencing and rails may be used.
Design must be compatible with project theme and architectural detailing in
other parts of the site.
J.   Inventory/Parts Storage Areas: Inventory/parts storage areas shall be
provided within buildings or on site behind buildings or in screened areas in
accordance with subsection D of this section. To the extent practical, areas
for storage should be combined with adjacent dealership properties.
K.   Access And Internal Circulation:
1.   Driveway Access: Except where otherwise required for compliance with
applicable codes and for fire lanes, driveways shall be a minimum of twenty
four feet (24') wide and all drives shall have a minimum 12.5 foot radius.
2.   Service Area Access: Service areas shall have sufficient stacking lanes on
site to stack a minimum of one vehicle per service bay. Stacking lanes shall
not block flow of traffic or fire access lanes.
L.   Fences, Screens And Walls:
1.   Fences, screens and walls shall be compatible and architecturally
complementary between two (2) adjoining sites. This may be achieved by use of
similar materials and finishes to the building, landscaping materials, or other
architectural design features.
2.   Location of fences shall be compatible with adjoining property users to
permit the common use of gates and accesses.
3.   Neither chainlink fencing nor plain concrete block fences are permitted
except where not visible from public streets or outdoor sales and display
parking areas, unless adequately screened with landscaping materials.
4.   Ten foot (10') screening walls around auto storage areas shall be
permitted.
M.   Display Pedestals:
1.   The number of display pedestals allowed in the front setback shall be one
pedestal per one hundred feet (100') of street frontage. The total number of
pedestals allowed on the site may be clustered together to achieve more
effective display, sales area, or circulation.
2.   Display pedestals shall be no closer than two feet (2') from a property
line.
N.   Site Lighting: All outdoor lighting shall be in conformance with chapter
20 of this title. (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-070: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A.   Variety: Landscaping shall consist of a variety of trees, shrubs, flowers
and other planted material, and shall be primarily comprised of water wise
landscaping applications of ground covers, rock and mulch.
B.   Water Efficiency: All new landscaping and revisions to existing landscape
shall incorporate water efficient landscape materials.
C.   Public Rights Of Way Minimum: A minimum of six feet (6') width of
landscaping will be required along all public rights of way. A minimum of four
feet (4') width of landscaping will be required as rear and side yard
landscaped areas.
D.   Minimum Required Along Interstate 15: A minimum of six feet (6') width of
landscaping will be required along parcels abutting the Interstate 15 right of
way.
E.   Number Of Trees Within Landscape Easement: Within the required landscape
easement along public rights of way, at least one tree shall be planted for
every seventy five feet (75') of frontage.
F.   Trees Within Parking, Display Areas: Within the internal landscape areas
of parking/display areas, a minimum of one tree shall be planted for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of landscape area.
G.   Common Areas: Landscaping or other side or rear yard barriers or side
yards between adjoining dealership properties may be eliminated if the yard
area is used in conjunction with an adjoining property for common driveways,
display and/or parking. (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-080: SIGNAGE:
Signage is an important component for the success of the Karl Malone CSD sales
activities. All signs shall comply with the Draper City sign ordinance with the
following exceptions:
A.   General Standards:
1.   Location of all ground mounted signs shall be located to meet the
requirements for traffic safety and visibility and shall be located outside the
clear view area.
2.   Illuminated signs shall be internally lighted. Exposed neon is also
permitted as an accent or decorative sign element.
3.   No flat faced box or cabinet type sign with painted copy shall be
permitted.
4.   If signage is integrated with an architectural feature of the building,
such as a backlit element, face or column, or a design element that is cast
into architectural materials, only the portion of the sign that is text or
corporate logo shall be counted toward the total allowed signage area.
5.   Approval of this CSD shall constitute the approval of the master sign
program as shown in section
9-18D-100, exhibits D, "Master Sign Plan", and E, "Sign Theme", of this
article.
6.   All banner signs, inflatables, flags, balloons, animated signs and
temporary signs, as allowed in this text, shall not require an additional sign
permit from Draper City.
B.   Permanent Signage:
1.   I-15 Frontage: A maximum of three (3) pole or monolithic signs as shown in
section
9-18D-100, exhibit D of this article:
a.   One 3-sided pole sign with each face not exceeding twenty five feet (25')
wide by thirty one feet (31') high and a maximum overall sign height not to
exceed seventy five feet (75') above the top of the concrete barrier on the
freeway, with electronic message centers on each face and rock auto display
feature at the base (electronic message centers shall not exceed 50 percent of
a sign face);
b.   One monolithic or pole sign of maximum fifty feet (50') high by fifteen
feet (15') wide; and
c.   One monolithic sign a maximum forty two feet (42') high by fifteen feet
(15') wide.
2.   11400 South And Lone Peak Parkway Frontage: A maximum of seven (7) 2-sided
monument signs as shown in section
9-18D-100, exhibit D of this article, not to exceed ten feet (10') high by ten
feet (10') wide, except where otherwise restricted by power line easement.
3.   Building Signage:
a.   Location: Signs shall be mounted on building facades parallel to and
contiguous with the wall upon which the sign is attached. Signs may be attached
to screen walls or service buildings facing a street.
b.   Quantity: A maximum sign copy area allowance for each facade of a building
facing a public right of way shall be ten percent (10%) of the facade. In the
case that a building fronts a public way on more than one facade, the maximum
sign area allowance shall apply to each facade. A transfer of sign allowance
area between facades on the same building shall not exceed one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of the allowed area for any given facade. Allowed signage
area on a facade may be comprised of one or more individual signs and need not
be contiguous.
c.   Construction: Signs shall be internally illuminated, individual pan
channel or channel lume construction or construction methods with similar
intent. Exposed neon as an accent element, logo or decorative feature is
allowed as part of the sign area allowance.
4.   On Site Directional/Destination And Information Signs: On site signs shall
be located as needed to facilitate internal circulation and destination
identification.
C.   Temporary Signage:
1.   General Standards:
a.   Signs shall not be placed in or over a public right of way.
b.   Signs shall not flash, blink, spin, rotate, block traffic visibility,
constitute a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard, or cause a public nuisance
of any kind.
c.   Signs shall not be attached to telephone poles, trees or security gates.
d.   Signs must be firmly secured.
e.   Signs within a power line easement shall comply with height conditions of
the easement.
f.   Prior to December 15 of each calendar year, property owners within the CSD
shall jointly submit to Draper City a calendar for the coming year of special
promotion periods and holiday promotion periods that establishes "fly dates"
for temporary signs, balloons, and inflatables. Fly dates shall comply with the
provisions for special promotion and holiday promotion periods established in
this section.
2.   Banners:
a.   Flag banners may be placed along frontage streets with a minimum interval
spacing of at least thirty feet (30').
b.   Pole banners may be attached to poles and supports.
c.   Flag banners may be freestanding feather banners with inground supports
and spikes.
3.   Temporary Sign Devices: The following types of sign devices may be used
during the permitted special promotion and holiday promotion periods:
a.   Banners attached to the buildings, not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of
the building facade and no more than one banner per facade, but temporary
building banners shall not be counted toward maximum allowance for permanent
signage;
b.   Vehicle decorations, including antenna flags, balloons, windshield
paintings and hood displays;
c.   Tall balloons designed to attract attention from long distances, including
cloud busters (balloons attached in a series with string or pennant flags) and
hot air balloons;
d.   Carnival tents;
e.   Search or spotlights; and
f.   Inflatable objects for the purpose of advertising a specific product or to
bring attention to a special promotion, such as inflatable mascots, gorillas,
bounce houses, and promotional sponsors.
4.   Special Promotion Periods:
a.   Property owners within the CSD may implement jointly up to twenty one (21)
special promotion periods per calendar year.
b.   Each period may not exceed five (5) consecutive days in length.
c.   Special promotional periods shall not be combined to run consecutively and
must be separated by nine (9) calendar days between each special promotion
period.
d.   A sign permit for temporary signage is not required, provided the signage
meets the requirements of this section.
5.   Holiday Promotion Periods:
a.   Property owners within the CSD may implement jointly up to nine (9)
holiday promotion periods per calendar year.
b.   Unless otherwise noted below, each period may not exceed six (6)
consecutive days in length.
c.   Holiday promotional periods may be combined to run consecutively with
other special promotion periods.
d.   The following days shall be considered holiday promotion periods:
(1)   New Year's Day (January);
(2)   Presidents Day (February);
(3)   Tax season (April, 7 days);
(4)   Memorial Day (May);
(5)   4th Of July (July);
(6)   24th of July (July);
(7)   Labor Day (September);
(8)   Thanksgiving (November); and
(9)   End of year/Christmas (December 15 - December 31). (Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-090: PROCEDURES:
Approval of this commercial special district article shall constitute
conceptual site plan approval for the first phase of the development as noted
in section
9-18D-100, exhibit B of this article. Except as otherwise provided herein, all
other procedural requirements, such as applications for subdivision approval,
conditional use approvals, and any other permits shall be processed in
accordance with the Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. (Ord.
987, 10-4-2011)
9-18D-100: EXHIBITS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-188.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-190.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-192.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-194.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-196.jpg]
 
(Ord. 987, 10-4-2011)
ARTICLE E. DAY DAIRY COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18E-010: Purpose
9-18E-020: Permitted Uses
9-18E-030: Conditional Uses
9-18E-040: Proposed Development Standards
9-18E-050: Landscape Standards
9-18E-060: Parking Design
9-18E-070: Signage
9-18E-080: Procedures
9-18E-090: Exhibits
9-18E-010: PURPOSE:
The Day Dairy Commercial Special District contains approximately twenty eight
(28) acres, located along Draper City's major commercial corridor, 12300 South
between approximately 400 East and 615 East (see section
9-18E-090, exhibit A of this article). The size of the property allows for a
master planned, mixed use project with commercial uses along 12300 South, while
the depth of the property lends itself to residential on the north. An
understanding of the Draper City general plan's goals and objectives are
reflected in the overall district elements, such as land use, architecture
(commercial and residential), signage, site design, and landscape standards.
The Commercial District of the master plan aims to broaden the commercial tax
base of the City while providing commercial amenities to the City residents and
visitors alike, while the Residential District will provide a transition from
the more intense land uses on 12300 South to the less intense, medium density
residential neighborhood to the north. Also, the Residential District will help
support the existing retail along the 12300 South corridor. (Ord. 1371, 2-19-
2019)
9-18E-020: PERMITTED USES:
Bank or financial institution with drive-through.
Bar establishment.
Business service.
Department store.
Health and fitness facility.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical service.
Multi-family residential buildings.
Personal care service.
Restaurant without drive-through facility.
Retail, general.
Other similar uses. (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord.
1503, 10-19-2021)
9-18E-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Restaurants or retail with drive-through facilities.
Small secondhand or thrift store, with no outside storage and no drop off items
during hours that the business is closed.
Vehicle repair, limited. (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
9-18E-040: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards of the Day Dairy Commercial Special District will be
established to help guide the design of the buildings, landscaping, parking,
residential housing, and signage located within the district boundaries. The
master plan provides for commercial and residential development in designated
areas in accordance with the development standards set forth herein:
A.   Commercial/Mixed-Use District: The Commercial/Mixed-Use District is
located along 12300 South and will have three (3) to four (4) pad sites along
the frontage. The northern area contemplates an anchor tenant building,
together with midbox anchors and multi-tenant buildings more or less as shown
on the site plan (see section
9-18E-090, exhibit A of this article) or a mix of residential and commercial
uses in a complementary manner (see section
9-18E-090, exhibit F of this article). All buildings within the commercial/
mixed-use area shall comply with the following development standards:
1.   The architecture shall be the primary tool to create a strong sense of
identity and place throughout the commercial area. All buildings will be
articulated with use appropriate scale, form, materials, and colors carefully
considered and incorporated throughout the development phases;
2.   The rear buildings shall share similar architectural character each
utilizing the same materials, colors, features, forms, and design elements
appropriate to the scale of the various building sizes and depths. Variation of
parapet heights and vertical planes will be incorporated;
3.   The pad buildings shall each utilize the same palette of materials
compatibly configured to allow unique identity reflective of the established
image of the intended user;
4.   Design elements shall be used to add interest and beauty on all visible
sides of the buildings;
5.   No one building shall be larger than one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet;
6.   The minimum front setback shall be twelve feet (12');
7.   For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of commercial space, there
shall be at least seven (7) parking stalls;
8.   No building shall be taller than forty feet (40');
9.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure
or parapet wall or landscaping;
10.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry enclosure
designed to be compatible with the overall project architecture;
11.   Outdoor storage and display is prohibited;
12.   Truck dock areas, where provided, to be shielded with minimum eight foot
(8') high masonry screen walls;
13.   Setbacks from the property lines, structures and rights- of-way will be
flexible to allow for the most creativity in site design;
14.   Residential density shall be 8.07 units to the acre (maximum) on the
gross acreage of the Commercial/Mixed-Use District (see section
9-18E-090, exhibit F of this article);
15.   All residential buildings shall share the same unique architectural
theme, including but not limited to strong roof lines, porches, balconies,
window placement and entries (see section
9-18E-090, exhibit G of this article);
16.   Residential building materials shall consist of accumulation or
clustering of brick, stone, or synthetic stone equal to a gross calculation of
square footage or thirty five percent (35%) or more of all structure sides and
will be evenly proportionated (based on architectural design) throughout each
elevation to provide for the best architectural design. Where residential
buildings back each other on private drive alleys the brick, stone or synthetic
stone requirement will be fifteen percent (15%) or more of the rear elevation;
17.   No residential building shall be taller than forty feet (40');
18.   An indoor exercise facility and two (2) outdoor amenities shall be
provided for the residential units (outdoor amenities may be shared by the
commercial and residential uses like outdoor plazas and eating areas, fire pit
areas);
19.   Residential outdoor amenities shall include family gathering spaces,
courtyards, plazas, playground, BBQ areas, outdoor eating, dog-park and/or
other passive recreation;
20.   A minimum of 2.25 parking spaces per residential unit shall be provided.
Garages and driveways shall be included in parking requirement. 0.25 surface
stalls shall be provided per residential unit. Up to ten percent (10%) of
commercial and residential parking can be shared;
21.   Each separate residential building will be connected by walkways with
shared use of outdoor common facilities;
22.   Parking for residential buildings will be internally oriented away from
public streets and adjoining residential areas or screened with walls or
landscaping where possible;
23.   Residential building setbacks from all perimeter (not interior) property
lines will be twenty feet (20').
B.   Residential District: The Residential District is located north of the
Commercial District on the north side of the proposed east-west local street
(12200 South). The property will be developed into residential housing (2-
level, 6-unit townhomes and 3-level, 24-unit stacked flats), with a density of
seventeen (17) units per acre (see section
9-18E-090, exhibit B of this article). The townhomes are rear loaded and will
face 12200 South to help define the streetscape and create a pedestrian
friendly environment. The stacked flats will be placed in the center to help
create a community core along with the clubhouse, pool and deck area, and other
amenities. The roundabout intersection at 12200 South has been designed to
enhance the walkability of the overall project and to increase the auto and
pedestrian connections, therefore creating a mixed use project. The townhomes
have been placed on the northern boundary along with the neighborhood park to
buffer the existing residential neighborhood. Also, the overall residential
area will buffer the existing residential neighborhood from the commercial area
along 12300 South. Development of the residential area within the project shall
comply with the following development standards:
1.   All buildings shall share the same unique architectural theme which
incorporates strong rooflines, porches, balconies, accented windows and entries
(see section
9-18E-090, exhibits C and D of this article);
2.   Building materials shall consist of accumulation or clustering of brick,
stone, or synthetic stone equal to a gross calculation of square footage of
thirty five percent (35%) or more of all structure sides and will be evenly
proportioned throughout each elevation to provide for the best architectural
design;
3.   There shall be a variety of unit sizes within the design;
4.   No building shall be taller than forty five feet (45');
5.   A community clubhouse with indoor and outdoor amenities shall be provided;
6.   Outdoor uses shall include family gatherings, swimming, playground,
barbecue areas, and/or other passive recreation;
7.   A minimum of two (2) parking spaces per unit shall be provided. A minimum
forty percent (40%) of parking to be enclosed within the primary townhome
structure;
8.   Separate buildings to be connected by internal walkways with shared use of
outdoor common facilities;
9.   Parking to be internally oriented away from public streets and adjoining
residential areas;
10.   All units along the north boundary shall be oriented perpendicular to
residential property to maximize compatibility and shall be a maximum of two
(2) stories;
11.   Setbacks from property lines are as follows: thirty feet (30') from north
property line; thirty feet (30') from east and west property lines; and thirty
feet (30') from the back of curb (northside) of 12200 South Street;
12.   An eight foot (8') precast decorative landscape wall will be installed on
the northern property line of the project; and
13.   A landscape buffer consisting of trees forty feet (40') on center will be
installed within the thirty feet (30') northern setback area of the project
(all deciduous trees will be 3 inch caliper and all evergreen trees will be 12
feet in height). (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
9-18E-050: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
Quality landscape design will be a major component of the Day Dairy master
plan. The overall project will be landscaped with sensitivity to its
environment. A consistent palette of drought tolerant tree types, plant
materials, and ground covers will be incorporated throughout in relation to the
architecture to create a strong and consistent sense of place and identity. The
tree and plant palette will be submitted in conjunction with specific site plan
approval application for each phase. The landscape design shall comply with the
following standards:
A.   Entrances: The landscaping shall define and enhance entrances;
B.   Ornamental Landscaping: Ornamental landscaping shall be strategically
designed to provide intimate outdoor spaces for public amenities and at
pedestrian pathways and entrances;
C.   Water Conservation: The landscaping shall promote water conservation by
the use of water wise, drip irrigation, and drought tolerant plant types;
D.   Residential Area Development Standards: Except as otherwise noted, the
residential area shall adopt the development standards provided in section
9-32-030 of this title;
E.   Parking Areas: Fields of parking shall be landscaped with shade trees to
reduce the heat island effect;
F.   Public Street: The public street (12200 South) between commercial and
residential areas shall be lined with trees on both sides at thirty foot (30')
to forty foot (40') maximum spacing;
G.   Types Of Trees: Tree palette to use a combination of deciduous and non-
deciduous trees and shade and ornamental trees;
H.   Tree Size: Initial tree size shall have a minimum 2.5 inch caliper;
minimum six feet (6') high for non-deciduous trees. (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
9-18E-060: PARKING DESIGN:
The Commercial District within the Day Dairy Commercial Special District will
be configured to reduce the appearance of large parking expanses and be
designed in accordance with the following standards:
A.   Number Of Stalls: A minimum of seven (7) parking stalls for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of retail or restaurant space shall be provided in
commercial areas;
B.   Size Of Stalls: Each stall shall measure at least nine feet (9') wide by
eighteen feet (18') long;
C.   ADA Compliance: ADA accessible stalls and routes from public sidewalks
shall be provided in accordance with established standards;
D.   Lighting: Parking lot lighting in commercial areas shall provide adequate
illumination generally at 1.5 foot-candles throughout; four (4) foot-candles to
be provided at entrances;
E.   Type Of Lighting: Parking lot lighting shall utilize cutoff type fixtures
and be no taller than thirty five feet (35');
F.   Pedestrian Corridors: Pedestrian corridors shall be identified by change
in color and/or texture of pavement material and landscaping;
G.   End Of Parking Aisles: Ends of parking aisles to have minimum eight foot
(8') wide landscape islands;
H.   Continuous Spaces Require Planter Or Island: There shall be no more than
eighteen (18) continuous parking spaces without interruption by an intervening
landscape planter or diamond shaped tree island at intersecting spaces;
I.   Tree Islands: Tree islands, when utilized, shall measure a minimum of five
feet by five feet (5' x 5'). (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
9-18E-070: SIGNAGE:
Signage design and location will be an important component of the Day Dairy
master plan. All freestanding signs shall be designed to incorporate bases or
other architectural elements utilizing the same materials and character
throughout. All signs must be reviewed and approved by the Day Dairy
Architectural Control Committee. In order to direct potential patrons to
specific businesses, and to mitigate possible confusion, monument displays
directional signage shall be allowed at multiple locations throughout the
interior of the property. Allowed signage shall include:
A.   Two (2) pole signs on the 12300 South project frontage.
1.   Sign 1, as shown in section
9-18E-090, exhibit E of this article, shall be located near the central entry.
Sign 2, as shown in section
9-18E-090, exhibit E of this article, shall be located near the 450 East street
entrance.
2.   Pole sign 1 shall be no taller than thirty feet (30') or wider than
fifteen feet (15'). Sign 2 shall be no taller than twenty feet (20') or no
wider than ten feet (10').
3.   Each sign may be a multi-tenant sign, including signage for the Parc At
Day Dairy and any tenant of the Village Shoppes At Day Dairy.
4.   There shall be a minimum ten foot (10') front setback for pole signs,
which will include the ten foot (10') public utility easement from property
line.
5.   Due to the unique positioning of sign 1, clear view calculations for pole
sign 1 shall conform to the clear view area requirements in the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publication,
"A Policy On Geometric Design of Highways and Streets". Since sign 2 is located
in a more traditional location at the corner of the property, the clear view
triangulation shall be calculated as outlined in this Code.
6.   Pole signs may incorporate electronic message displays, provided the
display complies with section
9-26-090 of this title;
B.   A monument sign is allowed for each pad building along 450 East and one
along 12300 South. Monument signs shall also be allowed at each ingress point
into the property, except for those ingress points which contain a pole sign.
Entranceway monument signs shall be for Day Dairy and tenants with no street
frontage. All monument signs shall not exceed seven feet (7') in overall height
and have a minimum front setback of ten feet (10'), which includes the ten foot
(10') public utility easement. All monument signs shall have a uniform,
architecturally compatible design consistent with the Day Dairy design theme
with faces not larger than thirty two (32) square feet. Clear view triangles
for all monument signs shall conform to this Code;
C.   Wall signs may be installed by individual businesses on freestanding and
in-line single-/multi-tenant buildings based on two (2) square feet per linear
foot of building ratio. Such signs shall have individually illuminated letters
or decorative sign cabinets. Where sign cabinets are utilized, they must be
built into the architectural fascia. Signage will be allowed on all sides of
the building that are visible from a street or drive aisle;
D.   Suspended or blade type projecting signs may be provided along pedestrian
walkways and shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above the
pavement; and
E.   Monument signs shall be located at the primary entrances to the
residential area.
F.   Directional signage may be located throughout the parking and circulation
areas of the property. Signs shall not exceed four feet (4') in height and
shall have a sign area of four (4) square feet maximum. Signs can either be
nonilluminated or internally illuminated. Due to the size and nature of the
directional signs, while being subject to the setback requirements, they will
not be subject to the clear view triangle requirements. Signs will be designed
to use materials and design techniques similar to pole and monument signs
through the property, per section
9-18E-090, exhibit E of this article. (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
9-18E-080: PROCEDURES:
Approval of this Commercial Special District text and accompanying exhibits
shall constitute conceptual site plan approval for the commercial and
residential components in accordance with City ordinances. Except as provided
otherwise herein, all other permits shall be processed in accordance with the
Draper City requirements, ordinances, and procedures. (Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
9-18E-090: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-198.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-200.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-202.jpg]
 
    EXHIBIT D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-204.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-206.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-208.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-210.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-212.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-214.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-216.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-220.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-222.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-224.png]
 
(Ord. 1371, 2-19-2019)
ARTICLE F. LIVING PLANET AQUARIUM COMMERCIAL
SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18F-010: Purpose
9-18F-020: Permitted Uses
9-18F-030: Schematic Development Plans
9-18F-040: Development Standards
9-18F-050: Landscape Standards
9-18F-060: Parking Design
9-18F-070: Lighting
9-18F-080: Signage
9-18F-090: Pavilion
9-18F-100: Exhibits
9-18F-010: PURPOSE:
The Living Planet Aquarium Commercial Special District (CSD) is hereby created
to facilitate commercial development along the Lone Peak Parkway area. The
property is characterized by the completed Living Planet Aquarium site and an
adjacent seven-acre parcel to the south, with freeway frontage and visibility
and ample access to frontage roads. The area is approximately 16.5 acres in
size, including a portion of the Rocky Mountain Power corridor. Given the
site's proximity to the freeway, the City anticipates a substantial
entertainment and retail presence within the CSD that forwards the community's
economic development goals. (Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017)
9-18F-020: PERMITTED USES:
Aquarium.
Bank or financial institution.
Bar establishment.
Cinema theater.
Daycare, general.
Hotel.
Live theater/music.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Office, general.
Pavilion.
Reception center.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor and outdoor.
Restaurant without a drive-through facility.
Retail, general.
Retail, general. (Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1328, 6-5-2018; Ord. 1418, 1-
21-2020)
9-18F-030: SCHEMATIC DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
Development within the CSD shall be in accordance with either a schematic
development plan as shown in section
9-18F-100, exhibit B of this article, or a schematic development plan that
combines any elements of such exhibits or combination of permitted uses.
Development within the Living Planet Aquarium CSD may be in phases. (Ord. 1259,
4-18-2017)
9-18F-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Building Height: Maximum building/structure height is one hundred seventy
five feet (175').
B.   Building Design: Building/structure design consistent with the user's
corporate determined architectural style shall be permitted. Concrete masonry
unit construction or concrete tilt-up type construction with decorative reveals
or decorative elements to incorporate LED lighting shall be permitted.
Additional architectural materials, such as brick, rock, stucco, metal or glass
shall be permitted.
C.   LED Lighting: The buildings/structures shall be allowed to incorporate LED
building lighting as an architectural feature.
D.   Setbacks: The buildings/structures shall be set back from property lines a
minimum of five feet (5') on all sides and shall comply with building safety
Code requirements.
E.   Landscape Buffers: No landscape buffers between land uses on properties
outside of the Living Planet Aquarium CSD are required.
F.   Lot Size, Frontage: No minimum lot size or frontage is required.
G.   Architecture, Pedestrian Pathways: The buildings/structures within the CSD
shall complement each other in materials and detailing and shall incorporate
unifying architectural elements to be identified by the architect and approved
by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017)
9-18F-050: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A.   Landscaping Percentage: The property developed within the boundaries of
the Living Planet Aquarium CSD will be required to provide a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the site in landscaping, which includes all landscaped areas,
and parking lot tree diamonds and islands. Hardscape plaza areas or pedestrian
corridors that incorporate decorative pavers, architectural concrete, planters,
trees, benches, or fountains shall be calculated in the overall landscape
percentage.
B.   Power Line Corridor: Landscaping within the Rocky Mountain Power line
corridor shall be shrubs, grass, flowers, and small plants as approved by Rocky
Mountain Power.
C.   Phases: As the CSD develops, each additional phase shall meet the minimum
fifteen percent (15%) overall landscape percentage. This is a cumulative total
which can be calculated as total landscaped area over developed site area.
Landscaping within the public right-of-way shall not be calculated in the
overall landscape percentage.
D.   Specific Requirements: Specific landscaping requirements are:
1.   To mitigate the reduced overall landscaping, more intensive plantings in
certain areas may be required.
2.   Tree diamonds or islands measuring a minimum of twenty five (25) square
feet shall be installed throughout the parking area at a rate of one (1) tree
for every twenty five (25) parking stalls. Tree diamonds or islands at the end
of parking rows and on the perimeter of parking areas are required and shall be
counted in calculating the requirements of this section. This requirement shall
not apply to parking areas within the Rocky Mountain Power corridor. (Ord.
1259, 4-18-2017)
9-18F-060: PARKING DESIGN:
A.   Requirements: Parking requirement shall be three (3) stalls per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of the public occupied building space.
Modifications to the standards may be authorized, if justified by a parking
study and approved by the Planning Commission, in accordance with section
9-25-090 of this title. Such study must present data on the proposed uses,
square footages and floor plans, hours of operation, and shared parking areas
within the sites. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the
requirement under chapter 25, "Parking", of this title for any particular use
is less than specified herein, the lesser requirement in that chapter shall
control and the requirement herein shall not be applicable.
B.   Pedestrian Corridors: Pedestrian corridors shall be identified by a change
in color or scoring of pavement material, or striping with an emphasis on
pedestrian safety. (Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017)
9-18F-070: LIGHTING:
Parking lot lighting shall provide adequate illumination without spillage into
adjacent residential areas, as verified by a photometric plan submitted with
the site plan for each lot or phase of development. Site lighting shall not
exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. The lighting source must be recessed
and shielded. (Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017)
9-18F-080: SIGNAGE:
A.   Permitted Signs: Signage is very important to the success of the Living
Planet Aquarium CSD. Freeway frontage of more than eight hundred fifty feet
(850') warrants special signage consideration. For this reason, the district
shall be allowed two (2) tower signs along the freeway, not to exceed forty
feet (40') in height. The tower signs shall be permitted to have up to two
hundred (200) square feet in area and be multisided. Additionally, the Living
Planet Aquarium CSD shall be permitted to have two (2) double sided monument
signs, not to exceed ten feet (10') in height. The monument signs shall be
permitted to have up to eighty (80) square feet in sign area.
B.   Electronic Message Centers On Tower Signs: The tower signs may incorporate
electronic message centers, providing the electronic message center meets the
provisions of subsection
9-26-090B6 of this title.
C.   Size Of Wall Signs: Size of wall signs shall be calculated based on 2.0
square feet per linear foot of building wall in total, which total square
footage can be reallocated among building facades by occupants within the
building. Wall signs may be illuminated in a manner consistent with the user's
corporate determined architectural style.
D.   Pole Banner Signs: Pole banner signs are also an important component of
the CSD. These flags and banners contribute to a festive atmosphere consistent
with desirable commercial projects with freeway visibility in Draper City. The
number of pole banner signs shall only be limited by the number of permanent
site poles each having two (2) banner signs. These banners are allowed to be
changed out during the year as the aquarium or other buildings/structures
change, or add new exhibits, or as special events and activities take place.
Banner signs shall not be counted as monument or building signage.
E.   Building Banners: Two (2) large building banners shall be allowed so long
as the design is consistent with the user's corporate determined architectural
style. Building mounted banner shall not exceed thirty feet (30') wide and
twenty feet (20') high. Banner signs shall not be counted as monument or
building signage.
F.   Administrative Review: Final signage design details shall be submitted for
administrative review and approval with the site plan submittal. (Ord. 1259, 4-
18-2017)
9-18F-090: PAVILION:
The seven-acre parcel south of the aquarium may contain a large architectural
element that will serve as a pavilion. It may be built of steel and outdoor
fabric with lighting and decorative features. (Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017)
9-18F-100: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-226.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-228.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-230.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-232.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT F
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-234.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT G
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-236.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT H
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-238.jpg] 
 
(Ord. 1011, 6-19-2012; amd. Ord. 1259, 4-18-2017)
ARTICLE G. LONE PEAK COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18G-010: Purpose
9-18G-020: Definitions
9-18G-030: Permitted Uses
9-18G-040: Conditional Uses
9-18G-050: Development Standards
9-18G-060: Parking
9-18G-070: Lighting Design
9-18G-075: Truck Circulation
9-18G-080: Signage
9-18G-085: Site Plan Approval
9-18G-090: Exhibits
9-18G-010: PURPOSE:
The Lone Peak Commercial Special District (LPCSD) is an area approximately one
hundred (100) acres in size, located with frontage along 12300 South and Lone
Peak Parkway. The area is characterized by large vacant parcels with multiple
access points to major City transportation corridors. Given the site's
prominence, the City anticipates a substantial employment and business presence
within the LPCSD that forwards the community's economic development goals. With
its high level of visibility to residents and visitors alike, architectural
integrity and quality design controls are crucial to implementing the City's
goals and objectives. The area is commonly known as the Lone Peak Business
Park. The Lone Peak Business Park is a master planned project with multiple
architecturally compatible buildings fronting along 12300 South, Draper City's
major commercial corridor, and Lone Peak Parkway, Draper City's major
commercial/industrial corridor. The project shall incorporate the community's
design goals for commercial, industrial and retail developments in all aspects.
The Lone Peak Business Park includes the previously constructed Ballard medical
manufacturing and warehouse buildings. Design cohesion shall be incrementally
implemented in the LPCSD. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012)
9-18G-020: DEFINITIONS:
The following specific use definitions apply only to the LPCSD. Except as
otherwise noted herein, all other terms shall conform to this title:
MANUFACTURING (CONTROLLED): An establishment engaged in the manufacture of
finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials,
including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging, and
incidental storage, sales and/or distribution of such products, but excluding
basic industrial processing and manufacturing activities. These uses must not
have any recognizable odor, vibration, or other discernable impacts outside the
building and do not violate any applicable Noise Ordinance of Draper City.
SUPPORTING DAYCARE, GENERAL: An establishment that provides care, protection
and supervision for individuals on a regular basis away from their primary
residences for less than twenty four (24) hours per day and whose primary
source of clients is supporting business employees in the LPCSD.
SUPPORTING PRESCHOOL: An establishment that provides, as a principal function,
educational instruction for preelementary school aged children age three (3) to
six (6) on a regular basis away from their primary residences for less than
twenty four (24) hours per day and whose primary source of clients is
supporting business employees in the LPCSD.
TECHNOLOGY BASED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: An establishment that engages in, as
a principal function, research and development of products or services using
specific or innovative technology based means. This use may include conceptual
design and testing of a product, prototype, just in time, and end user
manufacturing, trials, storage and distribution of the product. Preferred types
of technology based research and development may include, but are not limited
to, medical device and medical product manufacturing, bioscience manufacturing,
technology manufacturing, plastic/resin type injection molding or
thermoforming, information technology and other types of outputs that typically
require highly skilled inputs as component(s) to the end product or service.
WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING, RESTRICTED: An establishment that is primarily
engaged in the storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as
activities involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment.
Uses include major mail distribution centers, frozen food lockers, moving and
storage firms, and warehousing and storage facilities. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012)
9-18G-030: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted uses in the LPCSD. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012)
Agriculture.
Bank or financial institution.
Business equipment rental and supplies.
Business service.
Car wash, commercial vehicles, in conjunction with another permitted use.
Commercial vehicle and equipment rental or sale.
Commercial vehicle and equipment repair, in conjunction with another permitted
use.
Construction sales and service.
Convenience store.
Cultural service.
Franchise Municipal use.
Gasoline service station, but only in conjunction with a convenience store.
Government service.
Higher education facility, private.
Higher education facility, public.
Hotel.
Laundry or dry cleaning, limited.
Laundry services.
Low power radio services facility.
Manufacturing, general.
Manufacturing, limited.
Media service.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical or dental laboratory.
Medical service.
Motel or motor lodge.
Municipal use.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Post Office.
Printing and copying, limited.
Printing, general.
Protective service.
Public utility substation.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Repair service.
Restaurant, fast food, with or without drive-thru.
Restaurant, general.
Retail, general.
Supporting daycare, general, in conjunction with another permitted use.
Supporting preschool, general, in conjunction with another permitted use.
Trade/vocational school.
Transportation service.
Vehicle rental.
Vehicle repair, general, in conjunction with permitted use.
Vehicle sale.
Veterinary service, but only when the use does not include grooming or boarding
services.
Warehouse, self-service storage, in conjunction with another permitted use.
Wholesale and warehousing, limited.
Wholesale and warehousing, general.
Wireless telecommunications facility. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord. 1085, 3-
4-2014; Ord. 1396, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
9-18G-040: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses are allowed in the LPCSD by conditional use permit only:
Auto, truck, RV and equipment storage.
Car wash.
Commercial vehicle and equipment repair, when use is not in conjunction with a
permitted use.
Daycare, general, not in conjunction with a permitted use.
Funeral home.
Garage, public.
Gasoline service station, when not an ancillary use for a convenience store.
Vehicle repair, general, when the use is not in conjunction with a permitted
use.
Veterinary service that includes grooming and boarding services. (Ord. 1016, 6-
5-2012; amd. Ord. 1085, 3-4-2014; Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
9-18G-050: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The LPCSD provides design guidelines for the buildings, landscaping, parking,
lighting and signage located within the district boundaries. The LPCSD is a
master planned mixed use development containing approximately one hundred (100)
acres of developed and undeveloped land along the 12300 South arterial and Lone
Peak Parkway arterial corridors. The schematic site plan of the LPCSD is
depicted in section
9-18G-090, exhibit A of this article. The master plan provides for various
potential retail, office and industrial development uses in designated areas of
the LPCSD in accordance with the development standards set forth in this
section. The conceptual locations of these potential uses are depicted in
section
9-18G-090, exhibit A-1 of this article. The retail phase is located on the
north side of 12300 South. This phase has two (2) pad sites, plus an existing
retail building of approximately sixteen thousand three hundred (16,300) square
feet. The master planned park may also include office uses incorporated into
the retail or industrial phases of the LPCSD so long as they adhere to the use
and design guidelines established herein. North of the retail phase there are
currently five (5) office and warehouse buildings totaling approximately one
hundred ninety two thousand (192,000) square feet. At approximately 12050 South
Lone Peak Parkway there exists one 285,000-square foot manufacturing building
which building, together with the related parcel, shall be referred to herein
as the "manufacturing building" and one 102,000-square foot warehouse building
which building, together with the related parcel, shall be referred to herein
as the "warehouse building". At approximately 331 West 11950 there exists one
(1) one hundred twenty two thousand (122,000) square foot manufacturing
building, which building, together with the related parcel, shall be referred
to herein as the “Manufacturing Building - Wasatch,” and one (1) seventy
thousand (70,000) square foot manufacturing/warehouse building referred to
herein as “Manufacturing/Warehouse Building.”
The balance of the land is currently undeveloped. All buildings within the
LPCSD, other than the manufacturing building and the warehouse building, the
Manufacturing Building - Wasatch and the Manufacturing/Warehouse Building,
shall comply with the following development standards:
A.   Minimum Number Of Required Architectural Design Elements For New
Development Requests: The general architectural design elements and themes for
the new retail, office and industrial development phases of the LPCSD are
attached to this article for reference. Specifically, section
9-18G-090, exhibits B1, B2 and B3 of this article portray the preferred design
elements for new retail and new office development uses. Section
9-18G-090, exhibits C1, C2, C3 and C4 of this article portray the preferred
design elements for new industrial development uses. Each new retail, office or
industrial development request shall incorporate at least five (5) distinct
design elements defined for that proposed use as presented in these exhibits.
1.   Retail/Office Phase:
a.   Design elements similar to the previously constructed retail buildings
shall be used to add interest on newly constructed buildings.
b.   Where an elevation of a building faces 12300 South, a minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the wall facing 12300 South shall be made up of or covered
with an element of interest. Examples of elements of interest include, but are
not limited to: concrete masonry units, ledge stone, rock, brick, brick veneer,
architectural grade concrete, or other unique elements needed to conform to a
user's specifically established architectural design standards in other
markets.
c.   Preferred design elements for retail include:
(1)   Decorative EIFS detail.
(2)   EIFS or metal cornice trim.
(3)   Powder coated painted steel canopy.
(4)   Offset in plane at main entry.
(5)   Offset height at main entry.
(6)   Decorative score joint or imbeds in exposed exterior concrete.
(7)   Fabric or metal awning.
(8)   Raised exterior planter.
(9)   Decorative art elements.
(10)   Architectural grade exposed exterior concrete.
(11)   Over fifty percent (50%) glass wall facing at least one (1) street,
measured horizontally.
(12)   Brick veneer.
(13)   Architectural grade exterior wall mounted light fixtures at main
entries.
(14)   Exterior siding, rain screen, cladding.
(15)   Shipping container elements or finished to appeal as shipping
containers.
d.   Preferred design elements for office include:
(1)   Architectural metal paneling.
(2)   Architectural cement paneling.
(3)   Ceramic tile cladding or architectural concrete finish.
(4)   Decorative canopy at lobby entry.
(5)   Architectural grade exterior wall mounted light fixture.
(6)   Architectural concrete.
(7)   Multi-story glass.
(8)   Masonry or brick veneer.
(9)   Decorative metal trim.
(10)   EIFS field.
(11)   Exterior siding, rain screen, cladding.
(12)   Shipping container elements or finished to appear as shipping
containers.
e.   No building shall be larger than one hundred sixty thousand (160,000)
square feet.
f.   The minimum front setback from the property line shall be thirty feet
(30').
g.   No building shall be taller than one hundred twenty feet (120').
h.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure
or parapet wall.
i.   Dumpsters shall be kept within a decorative masonry or concrete enclosure
designed to be compatible with the overall project architecture.
j.   Outdoor storage and display shall be considered on a conditional use
basis.
2.   Industrial Phase:
a.   Design elements shall be used to add interest on the front and side of
buildings with particular sensitivity to maintaining efficient business
operations. The design themes may also accommodate other unique elements needed
to conform to a user's specifically established architectural design standards
in other markets.
b.   Where an elevation of a building faces a major road but has no entrance
onto such road, a minimum of five percent (5%) calculated on linear footage of
the building wall shall be glass or other architectural elements of interest.
c.   Maximum lot coverage shall be fifty percent (50%).
d.   The minimum front setback shall be twenty feet (20') measured from back of
street curb.
e.   No building shall be taller than sixty feet (60'), measured from the
finished grade. Finished grade calculations and elevations shall not be
calculated from any applicable truck dock well elevations that penetrate deeper
than the typical finished grades. Instead, elevations shall be calculated from
the remaining finished grade of the site, e.g., a car parking stall elevation.
f.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure
or parapet wall.
g.   Dumpsters shall be screened from view by concrete screen walls
incorporated within the truck courts or enclosed within a concrete or masonry
enclosure designed to be compatible with the overall project architecture.
h.   Outside storage, where allowed, shall be located no closer than one
hundred fifty feet (150') from any street (with the exception of the Shasta
building located at 264 West which shall be no closer than eight feet (18')
from curb back of street) and shall be contained within a secured minimum eight
foot (8') vinyl coated chainlink fence with vinyl slats or masonry, metal, or
concrete wall, designed to visually occlude the stored items from the street.
i.   Industrial Preferred Design Elements:
(1)   Offset in Primary Wall Height.
(2)   Offset in Primary Wall Plane.
(3)   EIFS Trim.
(4)   Aluminum Storefront Window System.
(5)   Masonry Veneer.
(6)   Decorative Canopy.
(7)   Spandrel or Frosted Glass in Aluminum Storefront System Above Finished
Ceiling Elevation.
(8)   Powder Coat Painted Steel Canopy at Primary Building Entrance.
(9)   Pre Finished Metal Fascia Trim on Top of Wall.
(10)   Recessed Header Reveal Painted Contrasting Color.
(11)   Architectural Grade Exterior Wall Mounted Light Fixture at Primary
Building Entrance.
(12)   Textured Concrete Tilt Panel Using Form Liner.
(13)   Shipping container elements or finishes to appear as shipping
containers.
(14)   Decorative Reveal at Head of Aluminum Storefront Windows Painted
Contrasting Color.
(15)   Decorative Reveal at Top of Wall Panel Painted Contrasting Color.
(16)   Decorative Reveals Formed in Concrete Tilt Panel.
(17)   Glass Elements Above Finished Ceiling Height.
(18)   Insulated Glass in Aluminum Store Front System.
(19)   Concrete Tilt Panel.
(20)   Standing Seam Metal Roofing at Primary Building Entrance.
(21)   Overbuilt Element at Entry.
(22)   Hollow Metal Door and Frame Painted to Match Building Elevation.
B.   Landscape Standards: The LPCSD shall be landscaped as follows:
1.   Adaptability: Plant materials shall be selected for their adaptability to
the Great Basin environment.
2.   Low Water Usage: Selected plant materials shall have low water usage
attributes.
3.   Plant Materials To Complement: Selected plant materials shall complement
the proposed architecture by adding emphasis to primary points of public access
to buildings, by providing shade to commonly used paths for pedestrians and to
contrast larger continual planes of the buildings.
4.   No Interference: Plant materials shall not interfere with anticipated
large vehicles using roads and service bay areas.
5.   Additional Landscaping Emphasis: Additional landscaping emphasis shall be
added to the LPCSD's highly visible traffic corridors connecting to either
12300 South or Lone Peak Parkway and lessened emphasis will be required on
landscaping adjacent to primarily industrial and warehouse uses are
geographically removed from these major roads.
6.   Plants Lists: Plants shall be selected, with consideration given to
specific microclimatic conditions, including sun, shade, solar aspect, the size
and growth habit of selected species at maturity and the overall landscape
design concept.
7.   New Phases: Each new LPCSD phase shall meet a minimum ten percent (10%)
overall landscape percentage exclusive of the previously constructed Lone Peak
Business Park phases 1 and 2 and the previously constructed two hundred eighty
five thousand (285,000) square foot manufacturing building and the adjacent one
hundred thousand (100,000) square foot warehouse building. This ten percent
(10%) overall minimum landscape percentage is calculated as total landscaped
area over developed site area. To mitigate the reduced overall landscaping,
more intensive plantings in certain areas shall be required.
8.   Future Development: Future development requests shall exceed the City's
minimum tree caliper requirements by one inch (1") to support both the City's
and the property owners' goals of high quality landscape designs and themes
throughout the LPCSD.
9.   Detention Basin: Parcels adjacent to the railroad tracks along the western
edge of the LPCSD or the Draper City stormwater detention basin in the
southwest corner of the LPCSD shall be credited up to fifty percent (50%) of
that parcel's required landscape for erosion resistant grasses contained within
the detention basin.
10.   Plans: Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department for review and approval in accordance with the landscape standards
set forth in this section.
11.   Lone Peak Parkway:
a.   Because the traffic corridor is a major branding element for the LPCSD,
additional care shall be given to high quality and quantity landscaping
adjacent to Lone Peak Parkway. Landscape design standards shall provide a
minimum twenty foot (20') landscape buffer between street and parking or
buildings measured from curb back to curb back or building. The landscape to be
incorporated into future development requests will incorporate design elements
previously constructed for the Lone Peak Business Park phase 2 pads directly
adjacent to Lone Peak Parkway.
b.   Areas shall be landscaped with a combination of lawn, columnar trees,
shrubs, decorative grasses and rock ground cover as defined previously in this
section.
12.   Interior Streets: Interior streets shall include a five foot (5') minimum
landscape buffer on both sides of the street measured from curb back to curb
back or building, between street and parking or buildings. All outside areas
shall be landscaped with a combination of lawn or artificial turf, columnar
trees, shrubs, decorative grasses and rock ground cover incorporated in this
LPCSD text.
13.   Buildings: Buildings shall include a five foot (5') minimum landscape
strip located between building front and adjacent sidewalk or parking area. All
outside areas shall be landscaped with a combination of lawn or artificial
turf, columnar trees, shrubs, decorative grasses and rock ground cover
incorporated in this LPCSD text.
14.   Outdoor Art: Landscaping may include outdoor art or sculptures that are
culturally enriching and socially acceptable. It is the intent that the artwork
add to the theme and esthetic experience of the Lone Peak Business Park and not
as propaganda or for marketing. All outdoor art shall be of a type and in a
location that will not be a distraction or impede the view of those accessing
the rights-of-way. All outdoor art shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in height.
(Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord. 1396, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1426, 4-7-2020; Ord.
1565, 10-4-2022)
9-18G-060: PARKING:
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following ratios:
A.   Parking For Retail Buildings: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet
of retail space, there shall be four (4) parking spaces. ADA accessible stalls
will be provided in accordance with established standards.
B.   Parking For Office Buildings: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet
of office space, there shall be three (3) parking spaces. ADA accessible stalls
will be provided in accordance with established standards.
C.   Parking For Industrial Buildings: For every one thousand (1,000) square
feet of industrial space, there shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space.
ADA accessible stalls will be provided in accordance with established
standards. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord. 1426, 4-7-2020)
9-18G-070: LIGHTING DESIGN:
A.   Parking Lot And Truck Court Lighting: Parking lot and truck court lighting
shall provide adequate illumination and where light poles are used shall be no
taller than thirty feet (30').
B.   Automobile Parking Lots: Automobile parking lots shall be lit by wall
mounted light fixtures on the building or by light poles. Design approval
submittals shall determine the fixture type, color and mounting height of
fixtures. Light poles used for automobile parking lot lighting shall not be
taller than thirty feet (30'), measured from the driving surface to the fixture
lens. They shall be located in landscape areas adjacent to the parking areas.
C.   Truck Court Lighting: Truck court lighting shall be lit from wall mounted
light fixtures on the building. Future design approval submittals will
determine the fixture type, color and mounting height. In any event, the
mounting height shall not exceed the height of the building parapet wall.
D.   Design: Both pole mounted and building mounted light fixtures shall be of
a design to not allow direct light to escape above the ninety degree (90°)
plane of the fixture lens. Preferred parking lot light pole colors shall be
stainless steel and/or silver, grey, or white as approved by the planning
review staff.
E.   Spillage: Light is prohibited from spilling off site onto adjacent land
parcels that abut the perimeter of the LPCSD. However, to ensure efficient
operation and safety of citizens, visitors and businesses within the LPCSD, the
City shall allow light spillage to occur in commonly shared truck courts that
straddle separate parcels within the LPCSD. In order to accommodate the unique
commercial design constraints and uses contained within the LPCSD, the district
may include appropriate lighting designs up to a maximum of twenty four (24)
foot-candles directly beneath the light source and uniformly drop to zero (0)
at any property line, and may include light fixtures up to four hundred watts
(400 W) or equivalent in LED. (Ord. 1016, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord. 1396, 6-18-2019;
Ord. 1426, 4-7-2020)
9-18G-075: TRUCK CIRCULATION:
Truck circulation is an important aspect due to the turning radius of trucks
pulling fifty three foot (53') trailers and double trailers. With the turning
radius being so wide and as not to block traffic or cross medians in order to
navigate into and out of truck courts from the access roads, the following will
be allowed:
A.   The maximum width of an approach from any street will be fifty feet (50')
measured from curb face to curb face where the approach enters a truck court.
The minimum curb radius at the approaches will be fifteen feet (15') measured
from the curb back with a maximum curb radius of twenty four feet (24')
measured from curb back. Two (2) truck approaches shall not be placed adjacent
to each other regardless of lot boundaries and shall have a maximum truck
approach of one and one half (1.5) per lot. Where possible two (2) separate
lots will share a single truck approach.
B.   The maximum width of an approach from any street will be thirty six feet
(36') at any approach entering an automobile only parking lot with a minimum
approach width of twenty six feet (26'). The minimum curb radius at the
approaches will be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') measured at curb back.
C.   All fifty foot (50') wide approaches shall be spaced at minimum of two
hundred feet (200') from each other. (Ord. 1426, 4-7-2020)
9-18G-080: SIGNAGE:
A.   Scope: Signage is an important branding design component and business need
for all uses located within the LPCSD. With the LPCSD comprising approximately
one hundred (100) acres and being approximately two thousand four hundred feet
(2,400') deep by approximately two thousand four hundred feet (2,400') wide, it
is critical to identify the entrances to the LPCSD along 12300 South and the
Lone Peak Parkway. The LPCSD shall permit identification of tenants located
deep within the LPCSD from these primary commercial intersections and will
ensure efficient traffic flow and minimize visitor confusion.
B.   Pylon Signs: A maximum of seven (7) pylon signs may be erected. One pylon
sign will be located at the intersection of 12300 South 265 West, one at the
future intersection of 12200 South Lone Peak Parkway, and one at the
intersection of approximately 12000 South Lone Peak Parkway as conceptually
outlined in section
9-18G-090, exhibit B of this article. The remaining two (2) pylon signs shall
also adhere to the master signage guidelines of the LPCSD and must be approved
by the Zoning Administrator for all appropriate safety issues. These pylon
signs shall be a maximum of thirty feet (30') tall (in addition to the three
feet (3') base) and no wider than ten feet (10') and shall identify the
business park as well as up to ten (10) major tenants located within the park.
Each pylon sign may be multi-tenant signs designed to be architecturally
compatible with the LPCSD.
C.   Monument Signs: Single or multi-tenant monument signage shall be allowed
in the following locations:
1.   Lone Peak retail at 196 West 12300 South;
2.   Lone Peak Business Park phase 1 at approximately 12250 South Lone Peak
Parkway;
3.   Lone Peak Business Park east at approximately 12217 South Lone Peak
Parkway;
4.   Lone Peak Biotech Business Park at approximately 12200 South Lone Peak
Parkway;
5.   Approximately 11950 South Lone Peak Parkway;
6.   Each subdivided lot within the LPCSD shall be allowed a monument sign on
each street frontage. The height of each monument sign shall not exceed twelve
feet (12') and the overall sign area shall not exceed sixty four (64) square
feet. Monument signs taller than thirty inches (30') shall not be in the public
right-of-way or in the clear view triangles described in Section
9-27-080 of this code.
D.   Previously Constructed Or Existing Signage: All previously constructed or
existing multi-tenant monument signage within the LPCSD shall be allowed a
maximum of thirty (30) square feet of tenant advertising area and excludes the
sign's architectural supports and design elements.
E.   Additional Monument Signs: Pad sites along 12300 South may install
additional monument signs along 12300 South, designed to be architecturally
compatible with the LPCSD's design theme as outlined in section
9-18G-090, exhibit D1 of this article and be no larger than thirty two (32)
square feet of tenant advertising area. This maximum square footage allocation
excludes the sign's architectural supports and areas not designed for tenant's
advertising area.
F.   Additional Directional/Informational Signage:
1.   Additional tenant directional/informational signage may be installed to
direct traffic, customers and truck drivers to individual tenant locations
within the LPCSD. The maximum area of business name or logo on directional/
informational signage shall be one square foot. The maximum area of the
directional/informational signs shall be ten (10) square feet. Cabinet and
temporary A-frames signs shall be permitted.
2.   All pylon signs and monument signs shall be generally consistent with
section
9-18G-090, exhibits D, D1 and D2 of this article. All pylon signs must also be
approved by the Zoning Administrator to ensure clearance of sight distance
requirements and compliance with these regulations. Any tenant of the LPCSD may
locate on any pylon or pole sign within the LPCSD boundaries.
G.   Wall Mounted Sign Design Guidelines: Wall mounted signage shall be allowed
and shall incorporate the following design criteria:
1.   The letters shall be individually cut from up to three inch (3") plastic
or aluminum and/or painted directly on the exterior of the building. Individual
pan channel letters mounted on a raceway shall be permitted.
2.   Blade signs (projecting signs mounted on a building facade and protruding
out perpendicular to the building face) shall be allowed at or near any feature
entry of a building. Blade signs must:
a.   Be at least eight feet (8') above ground level at the lowest point;
b.   Protrude no further than four feet (4') from the face of the building, and
c.   Not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in total area.
3.   Signage will be allowed on all sides of the building, including but not
limited to the name and/or logo of the owner of the building.
4.   Where a tenant or building occupant has more than one entry, multiple
signs will be allowed to define different divisions of the company and employee
entries.
5.   Wall signs may be installed by individual businesses based on two (2)
square feet per linear foot of building, or in the case of a multi-tenant
building, two (2) square feet per linear feet of leased premises.
H.   Undeveloped Lot Signage: Future development lots shall also be allowed one
lot identification sign. The lot identification sign shall be no taller than
three feet (3') and no wider than two feet (2'). The lot identification sign
shall include the Lone Peak Business Park logo and the individual lot.
I.   Temporary Signage: Draper City's normal temporary signage ordinances and
procedures outlined in section
9-26-080 of this title shall also apply to this district.
J.   Pole Signage: One pole sign will be located in the vicinity of 12300 South
and 222 West, as conceptually outlined in section
9-18G-090, exhibit B of this article. This pole sign will be a maximum of forty
feet (40') tall and no wider than ten feet (10') and shall identify up to two
(2) tenants located within the park.
K.   Menu Boards: Menu boards, including digital menu boards, shall be allowed
for drive-thru restaurants and fast food facilities.
L.   Clearance Signs: Drive-through facilities shall be allowed one clearance
sign per drive through lane which will not exceed four (4) square feet.
M.   Archway Sign: Archway signs not to exceed twenty four feet (24') clearance
will be allowed at 265 West 12300 South provided it is not installed in a
public right-of-way. The city engineer shall have the final approval on the
location of the archway sign.
N.   L Shaped Signs: L shaped signs will be allowed on street frontage to
identify the business park. The L shaped signs shall not exceed twenty five
feet (25') in height from the top of the pedestal base. L shaped signs will be
constructed similarly to the archway sign in section M (exhibit D), with a
maximum horizontal member of six feet (6').
O   Electronic Message Centers: The signs allowed above may incorporate
electronic message centers, providing the electronic messages centers comply
with Draper City Code section
9-26-090(D). (Ord. 1210, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 1396, 6-18-2019; Ord. 1426, 4-7-
2020; Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
9-18G-085: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
Approval of this Commercial Special District text and accompanying exhibits
constitutes conceptual site plan approval of the office, industrial, commercial
and retail components in accordance with City ordinances. Site plans for
development in the LPCSD may be approved by the Draper City Zoning
Administrator and may be forwarded to the Planning Commission by the Zoning
Administrator subject to the findings in section 9-5-090(H) of this title.
Except as otherwise provided herein, permits shall be processed in accordance
with the Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. All other
development standards set forth in Draper City Code that are not modified
herein, shall apply, including chapters 20, 22, 23, 25, and 32 of this title 9
and titles 7, 8, 11, 12, 16 and 18. (Ord. 1396, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 1426, 4-7-
2020; Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
9-18G-090: EXHIBITS:
    EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5231.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
   EXHIBIT B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5229.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
    EXHIBIT C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5227.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
   EXHIBIT D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5225.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
   EXHIBIT E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5223.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5221.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5219.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5217.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5215.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5213.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5211.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5209.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5207.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5205.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1565, 10-4-2022)
ARTICLE H. DRAPER POINTE MIXED USE COMMERCIAL
SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18H-010: Purpose
9-18H-020: Permitted Uses
9-18H-030: Development Standards
9-18H-040: Landscape Standards
9-18H-050: Parking Standards
9-18H-060: Lighting Standards
9-18H-070: Signage Standards
9-18H-080: Architectural Review Committee
9-18H-090: Procedures
9-18H-100: Exhibits
9-18H-010: PURPOSE:
The Draper Pointe Mixed Use Commercial Special District contains approximately
76.71 acres, as seen in section 9-18H-100, exhibit A of this article. It is
bordered by 200 West on the east, Galena Park Boulevard on the north and
Bangerter Highway on the south. The 13490 South Street runs through the
project. The size of the property allows for a master planned, mixed use
project, with land uses such as office, residential, general commercial,
including retail shops, and a hotel, personal and business services, and
office/warehouse. The Draper City general plan's goals and objectives are
reflected in the overall design of the project, by incorporating a mix of land
uses, quality architecture, efficient site design and abundant landscaping. The
Commercial District of the master plan aims to broaden the commercial tax base
of the City while providing amenities to the City residents, such as an
improved Galena Park Boulevard, 13490 South and Vista Station Boulevard, and
pedestrian access to Utah Transit Authority FrontRunner Station. The
Residential District will provide needed support for the retail and office in
the surrounding areas and the hotel will in turn support the office/business
uses. (Ord. 1155, 5-26-2015; amd. Ord. 1651, 5-20-2025)
9-18H-020: PERMITTED USES:
Bank or financial institution with drive-through.
Bar establishment.
Business equipment rental and supplies.
Business service.
Cashing services.
Church or place of worship.
Convenience store.
Cultural service.
Daycare, general.
Department store.
Dwelling, multiple-family.
Franchise Municipal use.
Gasoline service station.
Government service.
Grooming service.
Health and fitness facility.
Higher education facility, private.
Higher education facility, public.
Hotel.
Laundry or dry cleaning, limited.
Laundry services.
Media services.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical or dental laboratory.
Medical services.
Office, general.
Office, warehouse.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Post Office.
Preschool.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Repair service.
Research service.
Restaurant, fast food.
Restaurant, general.
Retail, general.
Secondhand or thrift store, small.
Tattoo establishment.
Trade/vocational school.
Veterinary service.
Wireless telecommunications facilities. (Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015; amd. Ord. 1328,
6-5-2018; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1651, 5-20-2025)
9-18H-030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards of the Draper Pointe Mixed Use Commercial Special
District will guide the design of the buildings, landscaping, parking, access
and private streets, and signage located within the district boundaries. The
Master Plan provides for office, residential, general commercial, including
retail shops, hotel, personal and business services, and office/warehouse
development in designated areas in accordance with the development standards
set forth in this article.
A.   Development District: Based on land use, each building shall comply with
the following development standards for each corresponding district:
1.   Office:
a.   The architecture shall be the primary tool to create a strong sense of
identity and place throughout the Office District. All buildings will be
articulated with use appropriate scale, form, materials, and colors carefully
considered and incorporated throughout the development phases.
b.   All building facades shall have the same character each utilizing the same
materials, colors, features, forms, and design elements appropriate to the
scale of the various building sizes and depths. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit D of this article.)
c.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EIFS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
d.   More than one material shall be required on all building facades.
e.   Buildings shall have a minimum of forty percent (40%) high efficiency
glazing.
f.   Buildings shall use a minimum of fifty percent (50%) primary material.
g.   Buildings shall have notable entry features which could include:
(1)   An arch or canopy over entry doors;
(2)   Colors or materials that highlight the entry; and
(3)   Entry doors and lobby that extend beyond or are recessed behind the main
footprint of the building.
h.   No building shall be taller than twelve (12) stories, not including the
mechanical penthouse.
i.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure,
parapet wall, or line of sight.
j.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split face CMU or
honed CMU enclosure.
k.   The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be ten feet (10').
2.   Retail:
a.   Each retail building shall utilize the same palette of materials
compatibly configured to allow unique identity reflective of the established
image of the intended user. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit E of this article.)
b.   The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be five feet (5').
c.   Buildings shall be single story.
d.   More than one material shall be required on all building facades.
e.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
f.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split face CMU or
honed CMU enclosure.
3.   Hotels:
a.   No building shall be taller than five (5) stories in height.
b.   The minimum front setback shall be ten feet (10').
c.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
d.   More than one material shall be required on all building facades. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit F of this article.)
e.   Buildings shall use a minimum of fifty percent (50%) primary material.
f.   Buildings shall have notable entry features which includes:
(1)   An arch or canopy over entry doors.
(2)   Colors or materials that highlight the entry.
(3)   Entry doors and lobby that extend beyond or are recessed behind the main
footprint of the building.
g.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure,
parapet wall, or line of sight.
h.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split face CMU,
or honed CMU enclosure.
i.   Projections or recesses in the facade plane shall be required every thirty
feet (30'). Projections or recesses must have a minimum depth of two feet (2').
j.   Every hotel building elevation that faces a public street or internal main
private street or public open space shall have a porch, balcony, private patio
or window.
4.   Residential:
a.   Density: A minimum density of twenty five (25) dwelling units per acre and
a maximum density of fifty six (56) dwelling units per acre shall be applied to
each residential district.
b.   Maximum Height: Each residential building shall not exceed a maximum of
five (5) stories in height.
c.   Setbacks: Building setbacks from property lines are as follows:
(1)   Ten feet (10') from all exterior property lines.
(2)   Parking shall be allowed in setback areas.
d.   Architectural Theme: All buildings in a residential district shall share
the same unique architectural theme, including, but not limited to, colors,
materials, rooflines and entries. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit G of this article.)
e.   Materials: Building materials shall consist of at least three (3)
materials, including an accumulation or clustering of brick, stone or synthetic
stone equal to a gross calculation of square footage of fifteen percent (15%)
or more of each structure side.
f.   Porch, Balcony, Patio, Window: Every multi-family building elevation that
faces a public street or internal main private street or public open space
shall have either a porch, balcony, private patio or window.
g.   Variety Of Floor Plans: There shall be a variety of floor plans and unit
sizes within each project district.
h.   Roof Materials: Multi-family buildings shall have roofs clad in asphalt
shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, or similar material. A
combination of materials may be used.
i.   Roof Styles: Any pitched roof covering the main body of the structure
shall be hip style, monopitch style, shed style, or shall have symmetrical
gables. Roofs are allowed to be flat.
j.   Roof Forms: Roof forms shall be designed to emphasize the residential
units when possible and shall denote building elements and functions, including
primary pedestrian entrances.
k.   Projections Or Recesses: Projections or recesses in the facade plane shall
be required every thirty feet (30'). Projections or recesses shall have a
minimum depth of two feet (2').
l.   Internal Walkways: Each separate building will be connected by internal
walkways with shared use of outdoor common areas.
m.   Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access
points, entryways, public gathering nodes, parking areas, and public sidewalks.
n.   Sidewalks: Residential project areas shall install sidewalks on both sides
of all private streets with a width of at least four feet (4'):
(1)   The planning commission may modify the above requirement by eliminating
the sidewalk or a portion of the sidewalk on one side of the street upon
finding that:
(A)   The second sidewalk or portion of the sidewalk does not facilitate safe
and appropriate pedestrian connectivity;
(B)   Ample pedestrian circulation has been provided and is otherwise
satisfied;
(C)   The purpose and intent of the development standards set forth in chapter
32 of this title are met.
(D)   The granting of this modification is intended to be utilized in limited
circumstances where design and site layout adequately provide pedestrian
circulation within the project and second sidewalk or portion thereof is
unnecessary and/or undesirable.
o.   Community Clubhouse: A community clubhouse with indoor and outdoor
amenities shall be provided for the entire residential district.
p.   Amenities:
(1)   Projects for fewer than fifty (50) dwelling units shall provide an
amenities package appropriate for the project size and location.
(2)   Multiple-family projects shall include at least one amenity per fifty
(50) units from the following list:
Barbecue area;
Community garden;
Courtyard with benches;
Entrance feature;
Outdoor fireplace/pit;
Shade structure;
Spa with decking;
Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor);
Tot lot/play structure;
Water feature;
Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of this
guideline.
(3)   Projects of fifty one (51) to one hundred (100) dwelling units shall
include the following amenities in addition to those above:
(A)   A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social area,
no less than one thousand (1,000) gross square feet in gathering space; or
(B)   A minimum of one outside social function area, no less than one thousand
(1,000) gross square feet in gathering space.
(4)   Projects of one hundred one (101) or more dwelling units shall include
the following amenities in addition to those above:
(A)   A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social area,
no less than one thousand (1,000) gross square feet in gathering space; and
(B)   A minimum of one outside social function area, no less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet in gathering space.
5.   Office/Warehouse:
a.   All uses shall be entirely within an enclosed building.
b.   Architectural design shall be the primary method for establishing a
distinct identity and sense of place within the Office/Warehouse District.
Buildings must be articulated with use-appropriate scale, form, materials, and
colors.
c.   Front and side building facades must share a consistent character,
utilizing complementary materials, colors, features, forms, and design elements
appropriate to the building's size and depth.
d.   Rear building facades, which face truck drive aisles for access to roll-up
doors, must be finished with material complementary to the other sides as
approved by Draper City staff. The roll-up doors shall include transparent
glass panel inserts.
e.   Primary building materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panels, brick, stone, Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS),
concrete, Glass Fiber Reinforced Concrete (GFRC), tile, or similar material
approved by Draper City staff.
f.   Front, side and rear facades must incorporate more than one of the
abovementioned materials.
g.   Corner towers, which are wider and taller projections, shall be used to
accentuate building corners and add visual interest to the front and sides.
h.   Optional individualized design features may also be included to accentuate
a user's identity, logo and color scheme.
i.   Prominent entry features are required and must include at least one of the
following:
(1)   An arch or canopy over entry doors;
(2)   Complementary colors or materials that accentuate the entry; and
(3)   Entry doors with vestibules and/or lobbies that extend beyond or are
recessed within the building's exterior footprint.
j.   Building must incorporate a minimum of twenty percent (20%) high-
efficiency glazing.
k.   Preferred design elements for Office/Warehouse include:
(1)   EFIS details.
(2)   EFIS or metal cornice trim.
(3)   EFIS trim.
(4)   Aluminum storefront window system.
(5)   Architectural grade exterior wall-mounted light fixture at the main
building entrance.
(6)   Concrete tile panel.
l.   No building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height, measured from the
finished grade.
m.   Horizontal or vertical facade variations must occur at least every fifty
feet (50') using at least two of the following;
(1)   Surface plane variations, such as pop-outs, bays, and recesses;
(2)   Surface pattern variations, such as arches, banding, and paneling;
(3)   Distinctive treatments of windows, doors, and eaves, including molding or
framing; or
(4)   Distinctive changes in materials and colors.
n.   Wall extensions must screen truck docks and meet the following conditions:
(1)   Walls shall be at least twelve feet (12') in height.
(2)   Wall finishes shall match the articulation, materials and colors of the
building side wall.
(3)   Landscaping, including shrubs and trees, shall be placed in front of the
wall for screening.
o.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view using complementary
material, colored enclosure, or a parapet wall.
p.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split face CMU or
honed CMU enclosure.
q.   Secondary pedestrian entrances shall feature overhangs, lighting and
enhanced landscaping.
6.   Vertical Mixed Use (Retail/Restaurant Under Office):
a.   Outside storage is prohibited.
b.   All lots, structures, and uses shall be in accordance with the following
standards.
(1)   No minimum or maximum lot width.
(2)   Minimum front yard setback is ten feet (10').
(3)   No building shall exceed two (2) stories, excluding the mechanical
penthouse.
(4)   Minimum distance between buildings is twenty feet (20').
c.   Mixed-Use Design Required: Buildings must include retail, service
commercial, restaurant space, personal services and business services or
similar uses listed in Section 9-18H-020: Permitted Uses on the first floor and
office space or similar uses listed in Section 9-18H-020: Permitted Uses on the
second floor.
d.   Site Design:
(1)   Position buildings to face 13490 South.
(2)   Ensure cross-access for vehicles and pedestrians between adjacent
properties.
(3)   Enclose dumpsters within decorative masonry, split face CMU, or honed CMU
structures.
e.   Main entrances must feature at least three (3) of the following:
(1)   Entry doors and lobby that extend beyond or are recessed behind the
building's exterior footprint.
(2)   Unique architectural features;
(3)   Individualized design features that accentuate a user's identity, logo
and color scheme.
(4)   Distinct but complementary building materials or colors;
(5)   Increased use of windows or glass;
(6)   Pedestrian amenities such as patios, porches, special paving treatments,
seating areas, or awnings; or
(7)   Increased landscaping.
f.   Facade Articulation: All buildings must include horizontal and vertical
façade articulation. Flat facades, single wall heights, and monotone color
schemes are not permitted.
g.   Façade Variations: Implement horizontal or vertical facade variations at
least every thirty feet (30') using a minimum of two (2) of the following:
(1)   Surface plane variations, such as pop-outs, bays, or recesses;
(2)   Surface pattern variations, such as arches, banding, or paneling;
(3)   Distinctive treatment of windows, doors, and eaves with molding or
framing; or
(4)   Distinctive changes in building materials and colors.
h.   Height And Roofline: Varied roofline and parapet heights are required to
avoid continuous, single-height roofline expanses. Buildings must:
(1)   Limit rooflines and parapets to no longer than fifty feet (50') without
height variations.
(2)   Use similar materials and colors on visible backs of false fronts,
parapets, or cornices for consistency.
(3)   Screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment and similar systems. Any portion
of this equipment that is not fully shielded must be painted the color of the
roofing or parapet materials.
i.   Screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment and similar systems. Any
unshielded portions must match the color of the roofing or parapet materials.
j.   Each elevation must include a minimum of three (3) colors to enhance
visual interest.
k.   Ensure that at least twenty percent (20%) of the building features high-
efficiency glazing to improve energy efficiency and aesthetics.
l.   Pedestrian-Friendly Design: Enhance pedestrian activity and social
interaction by:
(1)   Designing principal walkways to be at least six feet (6') wide for side-
by-side walking.
(2)   Providing shaded seating and gathering areas.
(3)   Separating pedestrian paths from vehicles by at least five feet (5')
using low evergreen hedges, walls, or other approved pedestrian features.
m.   Buildings must have a clearly articulated pedestrian-scale base between
four (4') and six feet (6') in height to enhance the pedestrian experience.
B.   Private Streets Within Development District: A roadway within the
development district may be designated as a private road, provided the roadway
meets the following standards:
1.   Private roads may be permitted to access hotel, multi-family, retail, and
office uses.
2.   Each private road shall have a minimum of twenty six foot (26') wide,
drivable surface.
3.   All private roads shall be finished with asphalt or concrete. Gravel roads
shall not be permitted.
4.   Parking shall be permitted adjacent to and accessing onto both sides of
the private street, including ninety degree (90°) parking. No parking shall be
permitted within the twenty six foot (26') minimum private street area.
Turnarounds, such as cul-de- sacs or hammerheads, meeting the Fire Department
requirements, are required whenever a private road is longer than one hundred
fifty feet (150'). No parking shall be permitted in a turn- around.
5.   A sidewalk adjacent to the private street shall not be required if a
sidewalk is located closer than three hundred sixty feet (360') from the
private street and reasonably connects the two (2) areas connected by the
private street.
6.   The maximum length of a private road shall be one thousand five hundred
(1,500) linear feet.
7.   Driveways, drive aisles and parking drives may intersect with private
roads without being considered private streets themselves.
8.   Additional fire hydrants along the private road shall not be required if
such fire hydrants would not be required if the road was considered a drive
aisle or driveway.
9.   Maintenance of the private road in the development district shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the private road or shared between the parties
using the road for shared access pursuant to an easement agreement.
10.   No street lights are required on the private road beyond what would be
required if the private road were considered a drive aisle or driveway. (Ord.
1151, 4-21-2015; Ord. 1196, 3-15-2016; Ord. 1284, 10-17-2017; Ord. 1298, 12-19-
2017; Ord. 1651, 5-20-2025)
9-18H-040: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
Landscape design is a major component of the Draper Pointe Mixed Use Commercial
Special District. The overall project shall be landscaped with sensitivity to
its environment. A consistent palette of drought tolerant tree types, plant
materials, and ground covers shall be incorporated throughout in relation to
the architecture to create a strong and consistent sense of place and identity.
The tree and plant palette shall be submitted in conjunction with specific site
plan approval application for each phase. The landscape design shall comply
with the following standards:
A.   Purpose: Landscaping shall define and enhance primary public entrances
into each district.
B.   Design: Ornamental landscaping shall be strategically designed to provide
intimate outdoor spaces for public amenities and at pedestrian pathways and
entrances.
C.   Water Conservation: Landscape design shall promote water conservation by
the use of water wise, drip irrigation, and drought tolerant plant types.
D.   Buffer: A landscaping buffer around the office park shall be provided to
obscure parking fields from street view.
E.   Data Drive: Data Drive shall be lined with trees on both sides. Forty foot
(40') maximum tree spacing shall be required for this corridor.
F.   Tree Palette: The tree palette for each district shall be a combination of
deciduous and nondeciduous trees and shade and ornamental trees.
G.   Initial Tree Size: The initial tree size shall have a minimum two inch
(2") caliper and be a minimum six feet (6') high.
H.   Minimum Percentage: The minimum landscape percentage for the office park
shall be twenty percent (20%) inclusive of all phases. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit H of this article.)
I.   Berms: Landscaping berms measuring three feet (3') in height shall be used
around the perimeter of the office park to help minimize the visual impact of
the parking field.
J.   Parking Screening: Parking shall be screened with landscaping when
possible.
K.   Common Open Space: Residential common open space shall be not less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the project area.
1.   Open space may be either in the form of urban hardscapes, enclosed common
spaces buildings or landscaped softscapes.
2.   Open space areas shall be available to everyone residing in the boundaries
of a development.
3.   Open space may include pathways and outdoor amenities.
4.   Open space excludes private balconies, decks, patio areas, vehicle
parking, streets, and public sidewalks.
5.   Open space shall be distributed throughout the entire project.
L.   Plan Submitted: All multi-family, office/warehouse and vertical mixed use
projects shall submit a landscaping plan in accordance with chapter 23,
"Landscaping And Screening", of this title.
1.   Landscaping shall be used as a land use buffer where appropriate.
2.   To minimize the noise impacts of truck traffic on the nearby residential
units, a landscaped buffer of twenty-five feet (25') in width shall be planted
along the shared boundary of the office/warehouse and residential areas based
on the following criteria:
a.   Evergreen hedges such as Emerald Green Arborvitae and shrubs such as
Wintergreen Boxwood or similar varieties approved by the Planning Division
shall be planted at a four foot (4') foot minimum height and spaced at ten feet
(10') on center along the length of the landscaped area.
b.   Evergreen trees such as Norway Spruce, kindred spirit, or similar
varieties approved by the Planning Division shall be planted at a minimum
height of six feet (6') and spaced twenty feet (20') on center along the length
of the landscaped area.
3.   Detention basins shall be adequately landscaped and maintained.
4.   Drought tolerant landscaping is highly encouraged. (Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015;
Ord. 1651, 5-20-2025)
9-18H-050: PARKING STANDARDS:
Each parking area will be configured to reduce the appearance of large asphalt
areas and be designed in accordance with the following standards:
A.   Office Buildings: The range of parking for office buildings shall be a
minimum of 3.5 stalls and a maximum of six (6) stalls per one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
B.   Retail Uses: Retail uses shall have the range of parking be a minimum of
3.5 stalls and a maximum of ten (10) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square
feet.
C.   Stall Size: Parking stalls shall be eighteen feet (18') in length and nine
feet (9') in width.
   D.   Compact Stalls: Compact parking stalls may be provided. Such stalls
shall not be less than sixteen feet (16') in length and eight and one-half feet
(8 1/2') in width. A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the overall parking may
be in compact spaces.
E.   Landscape Islands: Landscape islands shall measure eight feet (8') in
width and eighteen feet (18') in length and shall be placed at either end of
parking rows longer than fifteen (15) stalls.
F.   Hotel Parking: Hotel parking shall be a minimum of one stall per room.
G.   Residential Requirements: The parking requirement for each residential
district shall be as follows:
1.   1.0 stall per one bedroom unit;
2.   1.75 stalls per two (2) bedroom unit;
3.   2.0 stalls per three (3) bedroom unit;
4.   A minimum of one covered parking space per unit shall be provided,
including garages or carports.
H.   Office/Warehouse Parking Provisions:
1.   The provisions for "Deviations From Strict Compliance For Parking," as
outlined in Section
9-25-090, are applicable.
2.   Parking requirements must adhere to the formulas specified in
Table 9-25-1.
I.   Vertical Mixed Use (Retail/Restaurant Under Office) Parking Provisions:
1.   The provisions for "Deviations From Strict Compliance For Parking," as
outlined in Section 9-25-090 shall apply.
2.   The parking formulas found in
Table 9-25-1 shall be used to determine the appropriate number of parking
spaces required.
3.   Developers are encouraged to implement "Shared Use Parking" strategies as
permitted by Draper City Code Section
9-25-050(C). This approach helps prevent over-parking by allowing different
users to share parking facilities at different times, optimizing space usage
and reducing unnecessary pavement. (Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015; amd. Ord. 1651, 5-20-
2025)
9-18H-060: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
A.   Illumination: Parking lot lighting in commercial areas, including Office/
Warehouse and Vertical Mixed Use (Retail/Restaurant Under Office), shall
provide adequate illumination at a minimum 0.5 foot-candle and maximum of four
(4) foot-candles.
B.   Fixture Type: Parking lot lighting in commercial and office areas,
including Office/Warehouse and Vertical Mixed Use (Retail/Restaurant Under
Office) shall utilize cutoff type fixtures.
C.   Height: Parking lot lighting in commercial and office areas shall not be
taller than thirty feet (30'). (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit I of this article.)
D.   Data Drive: Data Drive shall have decorative black streetlights. Spacing
shall be no more than two hundred fifty feet (250') on center. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit I of this article.)
E.   Residential Areas; Plan Required: All residential areas shall submit a
lighting plan that illustrates lighting accommodation for automobile and
pedestrian networks.
1.   Exterior lighting along streets shall be pedestrian in scale with a
maximum height of fourteen feet (14'). (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit I of this article.)
2.   Low level bollard lighting is encouraged for illumination of internal
pedestrian pathways. (Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015; amd. Ord. 1651, 5-20-2025)
9-18H-070: SIGNAGE STANDARDS:
Signage design and location shall be an important component of the Draper
Pointe Mixed Use Commercial Special District. All signs shall be reviewed and
approved by the Draper Pointe Mixed Use Commercial Special District
Architectural Review Committee. Signage shall comply with the following
standards:
A.   General Standards:
1.   Monument Signs: Each monument sign shall have a uniform, architecturally
compatible design consistent with the Draper Pointe Mixed Use Commercial
Special District design theme with faces not larger than one hundred (100)
square feet. Monument signs shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and
fourteen feet (14') in width. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit J of this article.)
2.   Wall Signs: Wall signs may be installed by individual businesses/buildings
on freestanding and in-line single-/multi- tenant buildings and on hotels.
Signs shall have individually illuminated letters or decorative sign cabinets.
Where sign cabinets are utilized, they shall be built into the architectural
fascia.
3.   Combined Total Of Wall Signs: The combined total of all wall signs
(digital and non-digital) shall not exceed a maximum ratio of two (2) square
feet of sign for each linear foot of building length on any one elevation.
4.   Suspended, Blade Type Projecting Signs: Suspended or blade type projecting
signs are allowed provided they are not more than thirty (30) square feet of
sign area. Each elevation will be allowed one suspended or blade type sign.
Suspended or blade type signs may be provided along pedestrian walkways and
shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above the pavement.
5.   Tower Signs: One tower sign shall be allowed for each hotel. The sign may
be a multi-tenant sign and shall be no taller than forty feet (40') with a
maximum sign area of two hundred (200) square feet.
6.   Vista Station: Vista Station monument signs shall be installed at specific
locations throughout the project. (Section
9-18H-100, exhibit J of this article.)
7.   Location: The location of all signs must be approved by the City Engineer
to ensure clearance of sight distance requirements. All sign locations shall
also conform to the clear view area requirements in the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publication, "A Policy On
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets".
8.   Utility Easements: All monument and tower signs shall be located outside
of any public utility easement.
B.   Commercial, Office And Retail Uses: Commercial, office and retail uses
shall be allowed the following:
1.   One monument sign is allowed per office building and one monument sign is
allowed at the entrance to each office district.
2.   Wall signs shall be allowed on hotel, office and retail buildings per the
following:
a.   Nonelectronic wall signs shall be allowed at a ratio of two (2) square
feet for every one linear foot of building length.
b.   Electronic (digital) wall signs shall be allowed at a ratio of one-half
(1/2) square foot for every one linear foot of building length.
3.   Wayfinding signs shall be allowed in the project. The overall height shall
not exceed eight feet (8') and the area of the sign shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet.
4.   Flags or banners placed on light poles shall be at least seven feet (7')
above the pavement.
5.   Tower or pylon signs for hotels may also be electronic message signs. All
electronic message signs shall comply with the standards in subsection D of
this section.
C.   Residential Uses: Each residential use shall be allowed the following
signage:
1.   Two (2) freestanding monument signs per the standards in subsection A of
this section.
2.   Portable banner signs, with a maximum area of fifty (50) square feet shall
be allowed in each residential project.
3.   Flags and A-frame signs shall be allowed during lease times for each
residential project.
4.   Wall signs shall be allowed on residential buildings per the following:
a.   Nonelectronic wall signs shall be allowed at a ratio of two (2) square
feet for every one linear foot of building length.
b.   Electronic (digital) wall signs shall be allowed at a ratio of one-half
(1/2) square foot for every one linear foot of building length.
D.   Electronic Message Centers (EMC): A business which qualifies for an EMC
within the Draper Pointe CSD shall be subject to the following:
1.   Such signs shall display full color messages or images only and the use of
single colored text and images is prohibited.
2.   Each message/advertisement displayed on an EMC shall remain static for a
minimum of eight (8) seconds. Animation, flashing, starburst or other similar
frame effects are prohibited.
3.   Pixel pitch shall be as follows:
a.   EMCs in the CSD, but not directed toward Bangerter Highway shall have a
true pixel pitch between one millimeter (1 mm) and ten millimeters (10 mm) due
to closer proximity of travelers to signs.
b.   EMCs directed toward Bangerter Highway shall have a true pixel pitch
between one millimeter (1 mm) and sixteen millimeters (16 mm) due to higher
speeds and distance between travelers and signs.
c.   No EMC shall utilize a white or solid colored background for greater than
or equal to fifty percent (50%) of the sign area.
d.   All EMCs are required to comply with the following LED sign illumination
requirements:
(1)   All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that
automatically determines the ambient illumination and is programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot- candle measurements. In addition, EMCs
must have a default mechanism to turn off the sign within twenty four (24)
hours of a reported malfunction.
(2)   Sign illumination levels for EMCs shall never, at maximum display
intensity, exceed 0.3 foot-candle over ambient lighting conditions when
measured at the distance based on the formula of square root of area of sign
times one hundred (100). Light cutoff devices shall minimize light above the
sign.
(3)   The illuminance of an EMC shall be measured with an illuminance meter set
to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two (2) decimals. Illuminance
shall be measured with the EMC off, and again with the EMC displaying a white
image. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the EMC at
the distance determined by the total square footage of the EMC as set forth in
this subsection.
(4)   The applicant shall submit a photometric matrix (showing the dispersal in
foot-candles) showing that the sign meets all the requirements of this Code.
(5)   The owner shall be required to submit written certification from the sign
manufacturer that the light intensity shall not exceed the maximum levels
specified above and photocell dimming prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
(Ord. 1274, 8-29-2017)
9-18H-080: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The construction of any building or other structure within the development,
including the design, architecture, exterior elevations, exterior finished and
other architectural attributes will first be approved by the Architectural
Review Committee. The Architectural Review Committee shall have the right to
establish standardized construction guidelines for the development which are
binding on the owners. No building or structure within the development will be
reconstructed, altered, added to or maintained in such a fashion as to alter,
in any material respect, the architectural appearance, character, motif or
functional purpose of such item, unless such alteration is first approved in
writing by the Architectural Review Committee. The Architectural Review
Committee is not responsible for determining compliance with structural and
building codes, solar ordinances, zoning codes or other governmental
restrictions, all of which are the responsibility of the applicable owner. The
Architectural Review Committee shall consist of as many persons, but not less
than three (3), as the declarant, during the declarant control period, or the
owners, following the expiration of the declarant control period, may from time
to time appoint. At least one member shall be a professional in the field of
architecture.
(Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015)
9-18H-090: PROCEDURES:
Approval of this Commercial Special District text and accompanying exhibits
constitutes conceptual site plan approval for the office, commercial, hotel and
residential components in accordance with City ordinances. Except provided
otherwise herein, all other permits shall be processed in accordance with the
Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. (Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015)
9-18H-100: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A - PROJECT AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6292.png]
   EXHIBIT B - SITE PLANS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6294.png]
 
   Office/Commercial/Residential South
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6296.png]
   Residential, Retail And Hotel
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6298.png]
   Office/Commercial/Residential South
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6300.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6302.png]
Office/Warehouse and Vertical Mixed Use (Retail/Restaurant Under Office)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6304.png]
 
   EXHIBIT C
   Land Use Master Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6306.png]
   EXHIBIT D
   Sample Office Buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3730.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3732.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3734.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3736.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3652.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3656.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3654.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3658.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3660.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT E
   Sample Retail Buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3662.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3664.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3666.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3670.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT F
   SAMPLE HOTEL BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3672.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3674.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3676.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3678.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3680.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT G
   SAMPLE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3682.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3684.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4138.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4136.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3690.jpg] 
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3692.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3694.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3696.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3698.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3700.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT H
   SAMPLE OFFICE/WAREHOUSE & VERTICAL MIXED USE BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6310.png]
   Office/Warehouse
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6308.png]
   Vertical Mixed Use
   EXHIBIT I
   LANDSCAPING
   ROW Landscaping
Galena Park
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3702.jpg]
 
"Main East/West Corridor"
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3706.jpg]
 
   Office Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3708.jpg] 
 
    EXHIBIT J
   SITE LIGHTING
   Office Lighting
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3710.jpg]
 
    Residential Lighting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3712.jpg] 
 
    EXHIBIT K
   SIGNAGE
   Office And Hotel Signage
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4142.png]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4140.png]
    200 West
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3714.jpg]
 
    Residential Signage
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3716.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3718.jpg]
 
    Vista Station Signage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3720.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3724.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1151, 4-21-2015; Ord. 1155, 5-26-2015; Ord. 1196, 3-15-2016; Ord. 16561,
5-20-2025)
ARTICLE I. WHITE MOUNTAIN BUSINESS DISTRICT COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18I-010: Purpose
9-18I-020: Development Rights
9-18I-030: Definitions
9-18I-040: General Development Standards
9-18I-050: Special Design Standards
9-18I-060: Permitted Uses
9-18I-070: Conditional Uses
9-18I-080: General Design Guidelines
9-18I-090: Off Street Parking
9-18I-100: General Landscaping/Open Space Standards
9-18I-110: Lighting Design
9-18I-120: Signage
9-18I-130: Development Approvals; Minor Modifications
9-18I-140: Exhibits
9-18I-010: PURPOSE:
The White Mountain business district commercial special district (CSD-WMBD) is
an area 38.68 acres in size, located with frontage along what is planned to
become Lone Peak Parkway. The area is characterized by large vacant parcels
with a secondary access point on Golden Harvest Road and to major city
transportation corridors. Given the site's prominence, the city anticipates a
substantial employment and business presence within the CSD-WMBD that forwards
the community's economic development goals. With its high level of visibility
to residents and visitors alike, architectural integrity and quality design
controls are crucial to implementing the city's goals and objectives. The area
is commonly known as the White Mountain business district. The White Mountain
business district is a master planned project with multiple architecturally
compatible buildings fronting along Lone Peak Parkway, one of Draper City's
major commercial/industrial corridors. The project will incorporate the
community's design goals for commercial, industrial and retail developments in
all aspects. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-020: DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
Approval of this commercial special district text and accompanying exhibits
constitutes conceptual approval of the site plan illustrated in section
9-18I-140, exhibit A of this article, in accordance with city ordinances.
Except as provided otherwise herein, all other permits shall be processed in
accordance with the Draper City requirements, ordinances and procedures. (Ord.
1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-030: DEFINITIONS:
The following specific use definitions apply only to the CSD-WMBD. Except as
otherwise noted herein, all other terms shall conform to this title:
MANUFACTURING (CONTROLLED): An establishment engaged in the manufacture of
finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials,
including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging, and
incidental storage, sales and/or distribution of such products, but excluding
basic industrial processing and manufacturing activities. These uses shall not
have any recognizable odor, vibration, or other discernible impacts outside the
building and shall not violate any applicable noise ordinance of Draper City.
SUPPORTING DAYCARE, GENERAL: An establishment that provides care, protection
and supervision for individuals on a regular basis away from their primary
residences for less than twenty four (24) hours per day, and whose primary
source of clients is supporting business employees in the CSD-WMBD.
SUPPORTING PRESCHOOL: An establishment that provides, as a principal function,
educational instruction for preelementary school aged children age three (3) to
six (6), on a regular basis away from their primary residences for less than
twenty four (24) hours per day and whose primary source of clients is
supporting business employees in the CSD-WMBD.
TECHNOLOGY BASED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: An establishment that engages in, as
a principal function, research and development of products or services using
specific or innovative technology based means. This use may include conceptual
design and testing of a product, prototype, just in time, and end user
manufacturing, trials, storage and distribution of the product. Preferred types
of technology based research and development may include, but are not limited
to, medical device and medical product manufacturing, bioscience manufacturing,
technology manufacturing, plastic/resin type injection molding or
thermoforming, information technology and other types of outputs that typically
require highly skilled inputs as components to the end product or service.
WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING: An establishment that is primarily engaged in the
storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities
involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment. Uses
include major mail distribution centers, frozen food lockers, moving and
storage firms, and warehousing and storage facilities. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-040: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise set forth in the master plan and this article, development
of CSD-WMBD shall adhere to the applicable provisions of this code, including,
without limitations, the supplementary development standards of the city set
forth at chapter 27 of this title. CSD-WMBD may also include office uses
incorporated into the retail or industrial phases of the CSD-WMBD so long as
they adhere to the use and design guidelines established in this article. The
master plan is conceptual in nature and may be modified so long as the
modifications are consistent with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1130,
10-7-2014)
9-18I-050: SPECIAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following narrative is intended to further explicate the concept plan and
illustrations contained in this chapter:
A.   Setbacks:
1.   South: All buildings shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100')
from the south boundary. The southern setback, except for those portions that
are landscaped as noted below, may be used for parking or traffic circulation:
a.   Prior to the construction of any building within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the south boundary, an eight foot (8') tall masonry wall or precast
concrete wall shall be constructed on that portion of the south boundary that
is immediately south of the site improvement area. Also, prior to any occupancy
of such a building enhanced landscaping adjacent to the wall and adjacent to
the building shall be installed. If the temporary certificate of occupancy is
ready during the winter months, the landscaping shall be installed at the
beginning of the next growing season.
2.   East: The minimum front setback for building and parking shall be at least
twenty feet (20') measured from back of street curb.
3.   North: All buildings shall be set back at least sixty feet (60') from the
north boundary.
4.   West: All buildings shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from the
west boundary. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-060: PERMITTED USES:
Bank or financial institution.
Business equipment rental and supplies.
Business service.
Call center.
Commercial vehicle and equipment rental or sale.
Commercial vehicle and equipment repair, in conjunction with a permitted use.
Construction sales and service.
Cultural service.
Franchise municipal use.
Gasoline service station.
Gasoline service station, but only in conjunction with a convenience store
within the WMBD.
Government service.
Higher education facility, private.
Higher education facility, public.
Indoor sporting/recreation events.
Low power radio services facility.
Manufacturing.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical or dental laboratory.
Municipal use.
Office, general.
Post office.
Printing and copying, limited.
Printing, general.
Protective service.
Public utility substation.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Repair service.
Research service.
Retail, general.
Storage units.
Supporting daycare, general, in conjunction with a permitted use.
Supporting preschool, general, in conjunction with a permitted use.
Technology based research and development.
Trade/vocational school.
Transportation service.
Vehicle rental.
Vehicle repair, general, in conjunction with a permitted use.
Vehicle sales.
Wholesale and warehousing.
Wholesale and warehousing, limited.
Wireless telecommunications facility.
(Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18I-070: CONDITIONAL USES:
Auto, truck, RV and equipment storage.
Car wash.
Commercial vehicle and equipment repair, when the use is not in conjunction
with a permitted use.
Funeral home.
Garage, public.
Outdoor storage and display for retail uses.
Outside "laydown" storage of materials and supplies for an industrial,
manufacturing or commercial use.
Vehicle repair, general, when the use is not in conjunction with a permitted
use.
(Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-080: GENERAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The master plan provides for various potential retail, office and industrial
development uses in designated areas of the CSD-WMBD in accordance with the
following design standards:
A.   Entrances: All building entrances shall be clearly articulated to indicate
a transition from the exterior to the interior of the building. Every main
entrance shall have a special emphasis when compared to the other portions of
the building. The total portion of the front elevation shall be made up of
thirty percent (30%) entrance features measured in surface area. This shall be
accomplished through the use of at least three (3) of the following near
entrances:
1.   Prominent Feature: A prominent architectural feature that is unique to the
overall building design;
2.   Materials, Colors: Complementary yet differing building materials or
colors;
3.   Windows, Glass: Increased use of windows or glass;
4.   Pedestrian Amenities: Pedestrian amenities that may include patios,
porches, special paving treatments, seating areas, or awnings; or
5.   Landscaping: Increased landscaping.
B.   Materials: Quality long lasting materials shall be required for all
buildings in order to contribute to the aesthetics of the community over the
long term. Permanence in design and construction will add to the overall value
and sustainability of the community.
1.   Colors: A minimum of three (3) colors per elevation shall be required.
2.   Color Utilization: Color utilization should be sensitive to existing
development within the vicinity and the natural landscape in which the project
is situated.
3.   Primary Materials: Brick, stone, ceramic tile, wood fiber/composite
siding, tilt-up exposed concrete, and concrete masonry units (CMU), are
acceptable primary materials. CMU must be colored and feature decorative or
architectural finishes such as honed, scored, offset or split face. Gray CMU
block is not an acceptable finished building material and shall not be
permitted on any finished building elevation with the exception of minimal
foundation exposure.
4.   Secondary Materials: Secondary materials may include vinyl, stucco, EIFS,
wood siding or metal components. Materials such as awnings, wood timbers and
other similar features will be considered accent and not figured into the
totals of primary and secondary materials.
C.   Building Facade: The building elevations shall be designed and constructed
using the general and conceptual guidelines illustrated in section
9-18I-140, exhibit B of this article.
1.   Entrances: Each building entrance shall have a minimum of two (2) primary
materials. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the building entrances shall be
constructed of any one primary material.
2.   Remaining Surface: Remaining building surface shall be comprised of
primary building materials with variations using reveals, texture, or color.
3.   Calculations Not Included: Doors, glass and roofing materials shall not be
included in the calculations of primary and secondary materials.
D.   Additional Guidelines:
1.   Height: No building shall be taller than sixty five feet (65') measured
from the average of finished grade.
a.   No building shall be taller than thirty five feet (35') in height without
a terraced design which sets back the additional height one hundred fifty feet
(150') from the south property line.
b.   Average finished grade shall be measured six feet (6') out from the
perimeter of the building.
c.   Truck docks shall be excluded from the calculation of the average grade
plane.
2.   Maximum Lot Coverage: Maximum building lot coverage shall be fifty percent
(50%).
3.   Dumpsters: Dumpsters shall be screened from view by concrete or masonry
screen walls incorporated within the truck courts or enclosed within a concrete
or masonry enclosure designed to be compatible with the overall project
architecture.
4.   Outside Storage: Outside storage, where allowed for retail uses, shall be
located no closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any street or one
hundred twenty feet (120') from the south boundary line of the property and
shall be contained within a secured minimum eight foot (8') vinyl coated
chainlink fence with vinyl slats, concrete wall or masonry wall, designed to
visually screen the stored items from the street.
5.   Emergency Access: Any vehicular ingress or egress point to Golden Harvest
Road or Green Clover Road shall include an emergency access gate.
E.   Architectural Review Committee: The CSD-WMBD architectural review
committee shall consist of two (2) representatives of the developer of the
project and one representative to be determined by the tenants. (Ord. 1130, 10-
7-2014)
9-18I-090: OFF STREET PARKING:
A.   Development Parking: Parking within the development shall be provided in
such a manner that provides for a cohesive environment between adjacent
buildings. Placement for parking should be convenient for tenants and not
create an obstruction for truck court traffic.
B.   Number Of Parking Required:
1.   Retail uses: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of retail space,
there shall be a minimum of four (4) parking spaces.
2.   Office uses: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of office space,
there shall be a minimum of four (4) parking spaces.
3.   Warehouse uses: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of warehouse
space, there shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) parking space.
4.   Manufacturing uses: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
industrial or manufacturing space, there shall be a minimum of one parking
space.
C.   Parking Setback: All parking shall be set back from the property line
bordering a street by a minimum of thirty feet (30'). All parking shall be set
back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from a property line bordering a
residential zone.
D.   Parking Area Landscaping:
1.   Landscaping shall be provided at the end of each row.
2.   Rows of adjacent parking shall have landscaping in the form of a six foot
by six foot (6' x 6') diamond every ten (10) linear stalls or a minimum five
foot (5') wide landscape strip.
3.   The maximum number of parking spaces in a row without separation by a
landscaping island shall be twenty (20).
4.   The minimum amount of parking lot landscaping shall be five percent (5%)
which shall be included in any calculation of total open space requirements for
the project and for each phase. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-100: GENERAL LANDSCAPING/OPEN SPACE STANDARDS:
The CSD-WMBD shall be landscaped as follows:
A.   Minimum Percentage: The minimum landscaping/open space required for the
development as a whole will be thirteen percent (13%).
B.   Phases Of Construction: Landscaping/open space for each phase of a
development shall be generally constructed and improved along with the building
being constructed in the phase.
C.   Materials: Plant materials shall be selected for their adaptability to the
Great Basin environment. Selected plant materials shall have low water usage
attributes. All plant materials and trees shall be drought tolerant and
approved for climate zone 5.
D.   Emphasis: Selected plant materials shall complement the proposed
architecture by adding emphasis to primary points of public access to
buildings, providing shade to commonly used paths for pedestrians and
contrasting larger continual planes of the buildings.
E.   Interference: Plant materials shall not interfere with anticipated large
vehicles using roads and service bay areas.
F.   Types, Size Of Trees: All deciduous trees shall be at least two inch (2")
caliper and all evergreen trees shall be at least five feet (5') in height.
Fruit bearing trees are prohibited. A licensed landscape architect is hereby
given the discretion to substitute deciduous trees for evergreen trees based on
soil condition and water table depth.
G.   Landscape Strip: Buildings shall include a five foot (5') minimum
landscape strip located between building front and adjacent sidewalk or parking
area. All outside areas shall be landscaped with a combination of lawn,
columnar trees, shrubs, decorative grasses and rock ground cover.
H.   Front Yards: All front yards are required to be landscaped with thirty
percent (30%) live ground cover, and one tree for each fifty (50) linear feet,
and one shrub for each six (6) linear feet. Decorative grasses and grouping of
plants is encouraged.
I.   Plans Submitted: Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the zoning
administrator for review and approval in accordance with the landscape
standards set forth in this section.
J.   Land Use Buffers:
1.   A minimum thirty foot (30') landscape buffer shall be provided between
this development and adjacent residential uses. The buffer shall be constructed
at the time that adjacent land is developed.
2.   The buffer shall have a minimum eight foot (8') screen wall constructed of
either concrete or masonry. Style and type shall match the architectural
styling of the development.
3.   A minimum two inch (2") caliper shade trees with the potential for thirty
five foot (35') high canopy shall be installed in the buffer. They shall be
spaced a maximum of thirty feet (30') apart along the buffer. Evergreen trees,
a minimum of five feet (5') tall at planting with the potential to grow to
thirty five feet (35') tall, shall be installed thirty feet (30') apart along
the buffer, alternating or staggering with the deciduous trees.
4.   Trees shall be installed at the top of a two foot (2') berm located in the
buffer and shall be as specified or designed as shown in section
9-18I-140, exhibit C of this article.
5.   The landscape buffer on the south boundary will have turf planted
throughout with the appropriate irrigation. Alternatively, landscape plans
prepared by a licensed landscape architect with a different plan may be
approved by the city. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-110: LIGHTING DESIGN:
A.   Parking Lot, Truck Court: Parking lot and truck court lighting shall
provide adequate illumination and where light poles are used shall be no taller
than thirty feet (30').
B.   Illumination: Illumination levels shall be designed to a minimum standard
of one and one-half (11/2) foot-candles at the most remote point. At the
southern property line the minimum foot-candles allowed shall be zero.
C.   Automobile Parking Lots: Automobile parking lots shall be lit by wall
mounted light fixtures on the building or by light poles. Light poles used for
automobile parking lot lighting shall not be taller than thirty feet (30'),
measured from the driving surface to the fixture lens. They shall be located in
landscape areas adjacent to the parking areas.
D.   Truck Court Lighting: Truck court lighting shall be lit from wall mounted
light fixtures on the building. The mounting height shall not exceed the height
of the building parapet wall.
E.   Design: Both pole mounted and building mounted light fixtures shall be of
a design to not allow direct light to escape above the ninety degree (90°)
plane of the fixture lens. Preferred parking lot light pole colors shall be
stainless steel and/or silver or white. Light poles adjacent to Lone Peak
Parkway shall be black.
F.   Spillage: Light is prohibited from directly spilling off site onto
adjacent land parcels that abut the perimeter of the CSD-WMBD. Light spillage
may occur in commonly shared truck courts that straddle separate parcels within
the CSD-WMBD. In order to accommodate the unique commercial design constraints
and uses contained within the CSD-WMBD, the district may include appropriate
lighting designs up to a maximum of twenty four (24) foot-candles directly
beneath the light source and may include light fixtures up to four hundred
(400) watts. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
9-18I-120: SIGNAGE:
Signage design and location shall be an important component of CSD-WMBD. All
signs shall be reviewed and approved by the CSD-WMBD architectural review
committee. Signage shall comply with the following standards:
A.   Monument Signs: Two (2) monument signs shall be allowed per building. Each
monument sign shall have a uniform, architecturally compatible design
consistent with the White Mountain business district commercial special
district design theme with a sign area not larger than ninety eight (98) square
feet. Locations shall be approved by the city to ensure clearance of sight
distance requirements at entries and adequate separation for readability. One
sign per building is allowed along each main access road on the north and south
of the buildings. Monument signs shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and
fourteen feet (14') in width (see section
9-18I-140, exhibit D of this article).
B.   Tower Signs: In addition to monument signs allowed per building, one tower
sign shall be allowed at the entrance to the office park. Signs shall not
exceed six feet (6') in width and sixteen feet (16') in height and shall not
exceed ninety six (96) square feet in sign area. Tower signs shall be at least
fifteen feet (15') from the public right of way and shall meet the sight
distance requirements (see section
9-18I-140, exhibit D of this article).
C.   Wall Signage: Wall signage may be installed by individual businesses/
buildings on freestanding and in-line single-/multi- tenant buildings (see
section
9-18I-140, exhibit D of this article).
1.   Types of wall signage shall be limited to the following:
a.   Individually cut letters or signs from plastic or aluminum;
b.   Painted directly on the exterior of the building;
c.   Individual pan channel letters mounted on a raceway. Pan channel letters
may be illuminated;
d.   Decorative sign cabinets. Where sign cabinets are utilized they shall be
built into the architectural fascia.
2.   Signage shall be allowed on all sides of the building that are visible
from a street or drive aisle (see section
9-18I-140, exhibit D of this article).
3.   Where a tenant or building occupant has more than one entry, multiple
signs will be allowed to define different divisions of the company.
4.   For every one linear foot of building length per tenant, two (2) square
feet of wall signage shall be allowed.
D.   Wayfinding Signs: Wayfinding signs shall be allowed in the project. Height
shall not exceed eight feet (8'). The area of the sign shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet.
E.   Suspended, Blade Type Projecting Signs: Suspended or blade type projecting
signs may be provided along pedestrian walkways and shall maintain a minimum
clearance of seven feet (7') above the pavement (see section
9-18I-140, exhibit D of this article).
F.   Flags, Banners: If flags or banners are placed on light poles, they shall
be at least seven feet (7') above the pavement. (Ord. 1219, 7-5-2016)
9-18I-130: DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS; MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
A.   Review: Site plans for any development in the CSD-WMBD shall be reviewed
by the planning commission as the city's land use authority pursuant to the
processes specified in this code.
B.   Processing: Subdivisions of any property within CSD-WMBD shall be
processed as specified in this code.
C.   Land Use Authority: Other than a subdivision or site plan, the zoning
administrator may act as the land use authority and approve applications for
development permits that comply in all regards with the CSD-WMBD.
D.   Modifications: The zoning administrator may also approve applications for
development approvals that vary from the concept plan so long as such
modifications do not alter the general intent of this CSD-WMBD nor diminish the
sizes of setbacks, the percentages of required landscaping, the parking ratios
for uses or any of the other specific design standards specified in this CSD-
WMBD.
E.   Application: Any application for approval of any such modification shall
submit to the zoning administrator an explanation of how any proposed
modification complies with the general intent of the concept plan and this CSD-
WMBD and any effects that such proposed modification may have on the remaining
portion of the development.
F.   Zoning Administrator Determination Inappropriate: If the zoning
administrator determines for any reason that it would be inappropriate for the
zoning administrator to approve any proposed modification, the zoning
administrator may require the proposed modification to be processed by the
appropriate land use authority as generally provided in this code.
G.   Time Limit For Determination: The zoning administrator shall consider and
decide upon a proposed modification within a reasonable time. (Ord. 1130, 10-7-
2014)
9-18I-140: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   CONCEPT SITE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4186.png]
 
   EXHIBIT B
   BUILDING ELEVATION CONCEPTUAL GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4184.png]
 
   EXHIBIT C
   SOUTHERN BOUNDARY LANDSCAPING PROFILE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4182.png]
 
(Ord. 1130, 10-7-2014)
   EXHIBIT D
   CONCEPTUAL SIGNAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4180.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4178.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4176.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4174.png]
 
(Ord. 1219, 7-5-2016)
ARTICLE J. 11400 SOUTH LONE PEAK PARKWAY COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18J-010: Purpose
9-18J-020: Permitted Uses
9-18J-030: Conditional Uses
9-18J-040: Extent Of CSD
9-18J-050: Schematic Development Plans, Site Plan Approval
9-18J-060: Development Standards
9-18J-070: Landscape Standards
9-18J-080: Signage
9-18J-090: Exhibits
9-18J-010: PURPOSE:
The 11400 South Lone Peak Parkway Commercial Special District (CSD-11400 LPP)
is an area approximately thirty five (35) acres in size, located at the
southwest corner of 11400 South and Lone Peak Parkway. The 11400 South Lone
Peak Parkway CSD is a master planned retail and office project designed as an
automobile center to include the sale of new and used vehicles, auto repair,
collision repair, auto rental, and sales of auto related products and services,
together with office buildings and general office and commercial uses. The
project will incorporate the community's design goals for commercial
development and promote economic development within Draper City. (Ord. 1335, 7-
17-2018)
9-18J-020: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise allowed by State law, the following uses are considered
permitted uses within the CSD:
Auto, truck, RV, equipment storage.
Automotive collision repair.
Automotive self-service station.
Automotive service and repair.
Bank or financial institution.
Business or financial services.
Car wash.
Dealership, new (autos, trucks, RV, ATV, boat, sales and service).
Dealership, rental (autos, trucks, RV, ATV, boat, sales and service).
Dealership, used (autos, trucks, RV, ATV, boat, sales and service).
Equipment sales and service.
Government service.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Municipal uses.
Museum.
Office, general.
Parking lot.
Parking structure.
Professional office.
Restaurants.
Retail, commercial.
Retail, general.
Utility, minor.
Vehicle rental.
Wireless telecommunication tower.
(Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18J-030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Unless otherwise allowed by State law, the following uses are considered
conditional uses within the CSD:
Assisted living facility.
Convenience store.
Dwelling, multiple-family.
Franchise Municipal uses.
Medical/healthcare office. (Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018)
9-18J-040: EXTENT OF CSD:
The standards outlined in this article shall apply to all properties within the
boundaries of the CSD which are shown in section
9-18J-090, exhibit A, "CSD District", of this article. (Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018)
9-18J-050: SCHEMATIC DEVELOPMENT PLANS, SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
Development within the CSD shall be substantially consistent with the general,
conceptual development plan shown in section
9-18J-090, exhibit B, "Conceptual Site Plan", of this article. Development
within the CSD may proceed in phases and shall be consistent with the following
requirements:
A.   Access:
1.   Driveway Access: The access points depicted on the conceptual site plan as
"proposed access point(s)" along Lone Peak Parkway are approved and additional
access points may be added in accordance with City and State processes. All
access points on 11400 South shall require Utah Department of Transportation
(UDOT) approval; provided, that the City approves the continued use of the
existing access point on 11400 South shown on the conceptual site plan. Except
where otherwise required for compliance with applicable codes and for fire
lanes, driveways shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') wide and all
drives shall have a minimum 12.5 foot radius.
2.   Deacceleration Lanes: Two (2) deacceleration lanes shall be installed at
an access point to allow right-in traffic traveling south along Lone Peak
Parkway and a second deacceleration lane to allow right-in traffic traveling
east along 11400 South Street, subject to UDOT approval.
B.   Site Plans:
1.   Independent Development: Each dealership and the office use depicted on
the conceptual site plan may be developed independent of the other and the
precise boundaries of each use will not be set until an overall site plan or
each individual site plan is submitted for approval.
2.   Approval: The general configurations depicted on the conceptual site plan
are approved and site plans which conform to the conceptual site plan shall be
approved in accordance with this article. The Zoning Administrator shall be the
Land Use Authority designated to approve any site plans submitted in this CSD
District, and each site plan approval shall be treated as a separate
administrative approval.
3.   Variations: Site plans for any particular site may vary from the
conceptual site plan, without requiring an amendment of this article, so long
as the site plans comply with applicable City ordinances. (Ord. 1335, 7-17-
2018)
9-18J-060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Architectural Theme: All buildings shall share a similar architectural
theme as depicted in section
9-18J-090, exhibit C, "Architectural Themes", of this article.
B.   Architectural Design And Materials:
1.   Primary building materials shall be selected which require low
maintenance, such as brick, split face concrete masonry units (CMU), aluminum
composite material (ACM) panels, stone, ceramic tile, wood or concrete fiber
composite siding, cultured stone, metal, or hardiboard.
2.   Secondary building materials may include stucco, EIFS and other metals.
3.   Prohibited materials and finishes include corrugated sheet metal, exposed
(unpainted) concrete, vinyl siding and shake shingles.
4.   Tilt-up concrete construction is permitted.
5.   Roofs shall not be exposed unless they are part of the decorative or
architectural treatment of the building, such as parapets, columns, etc.
Varying rooflines and parapets shall be used to add architectural interest and
to avoid the appearance or sense of monotonous roofline expanses.
6.   Building entrances shall be clearly articulated to indicate a transition
from the exterior to the interior of the building.
C.   Lot Coverage: Lot coverage by buildings shall not exceed forty percent
(40%) of each site.
D.   Buffers, Fences, And Walls: As part of the site plan approval process,
special buffers, fences, and/or walls shall be required to provide separations
between public/commercial areas, service, loading, refuse collection, equipment
and/or storage areas.
E.   Building Size: There is no maximum building size based on square footage.
F.   Building Height: Maximum building height measured to the roof plane shall
be fifty six feet (56'), exclusive of parapets and building equipment.
G.   Parking/Vehicle Storage: The minimum number of parking spaces required for
an automobile dealership shall be 2.5 spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of showroom sales floor area, plus two (2) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet for vehicle repair floor area. All other uses shall provide at
least the minimum parking spaces required by this Code.
H.   New And Used Car Display: Car displays, arrangement of parking spaces, and
circulation shall be at the dealer's option. However, no car displays shall
block minimum required clear vision areas at driveway intersections or block
lanes for public safety, egress or fire access. These clear vision areas and
emergency access lanes required driveways shall be noted on the proposed site
plan.
I.   Security For Display Vehicles: To the extent deemed necessary by
individual dealers, curb walls no higher than sixteen inches (16"), closely
spaced concrete bollards, berms, low security fencing and rails may be used.
Design must be compatible with project theme and architectural detailing in
other parts of the site.
J.   Inventory/Parts Storage Areas: Inventory/parts storage areas shall be
provided within buildings or on site behind buildings or in screened areas. To
the extent practical, areas for storage should be combined with adjacent
dealership properties.
K.   Fences, Screens And Walls:
1.   Compatibility: Fences, screens and walls shall be compatible and
architecturally complementary between two (2) adjoining sites. This may be
achieved by use of similar materials and finishes to the building, landscaping
materials, or other architectural design features.
2.   Location: Location of fences shall be compatible with adjoining property
users to permit the common use of gates and accesses.
3.   Prohibited Fencing; Exception: Neither chainlink fencing nor plain
concrete block fences are permitted, except where not visible from public
streets or outdoor sales and display parking areas, unless adequately screened
with landscaping materials. Stamped concrete walls are acceptable when required
by code.
4.   Screening Walls: Ten foot (10') screening walls around auto storage areas
shall be permitted.
L.   Display Pedestals:
1.   Number: The number of display pedestals allowed in the front setback shall
be one pedestal per one hundred feet (100') of street frontage. The total
number of pedestals allowed on the site may be clustered together to achieve
more effective display, sales area, or circulation.
2.   Distance: Display pedestals shall be no closer than two feet (2') from a
property line.
M.   Site Lighting:
1.   Height Of Light Source: The height of any light source shall not exceed
thirty feet (30') to the top of the luminaire or pole.
2.   Night Standards: No lighting of one hundred fifty (150) watts or greater
shall be used after ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M., except for light fixtures
used for security lighting.
3.   Pole Lighting: Pole lighting should only be implemented for parking areas,
automotive sales areas, automotive display areas and other vehicular
circulation features.
4.   Wall Pack Lighting: Wall pack lighting may be used to illuminate building
entrances, parking areas, display areas, and vehicular circulation areas.
5.   Primary Light Poles: The number of primary light poles shall not be
restricted except to the foot-candle maximums listed herein.
6.   Pole Spacing: Light pole spacing shall be determined by a site photometric
plan.
7.   Security Lighting: Security lighting shall be provided to protect persons
and property as well as to allow for proper function of surveillance equipment.
8.   Illumination Intensities: Illumination intensities for auto dealerships
and auto dealership canopies shall be fifty five (55) foot-candles maximum, and
twenty (20) foot-candles maximum average. Office parking lot areas shall have
illumination intensities of five (5) foot-candles maximum, and three (3) foot-
candles maximum average.
9.   After Hour Illumination: After hour illumination intensities for auto
dealerships and auto dealership canopies shall be thirty (30) foot-candles
maximum, and ten (10) foot-candles maximum average. Office parking lot areas
shall have after hour illumination intensities of three (3) foot-candles
maximum, and two (2) foot-candles maximum average.
10.   After Hours Reduction: After hours lighting reduction shall be
accomplished by one of the following:
a.   Every third fixture to shut off by time clock after hours; or
b.   Dimming all fixtures by at least thirty three percent (33%) if LEDs or
similar technology is used.
11.   Staged Lighting: Staged lighting is not required for this project.
12.   Buffering: Any lighting implemented as a part of a plan along a property
line shared with a residential zoning district shall conform to the following.
These requirements shall not apply if property line is adjacent to a public
right-of-way, railway, commercial property, or automotive dealership:
a.   The maximum illumination at any point along the property line shall be one
foot-candle measured at finish grade.
b.   A lighting study shall be provided for this project with illumination
readings spaced no greater than ten feet (10') apart.
N.   Multi-Family:
1.   Location: Any multifamily use shall be limited to "area A" as shown on
section
9-18J-090, exhibit B, of this article.
2.   Density: Building density shall be a maximum of twelve (12) units per
acre.
3.   Building Height: All multi-family buildings shall have a 2-story height
limit.
4.   Applicable Codes: All multi-family development shall be in accordance with
chapter 32 of this title. (Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018)
9-18J-070: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A.   Variety Of Materials: Landscaping shall consist of a variety of trees,
shrubs, flowers, grass and other planted material, and shall be primarily
comprised of water wise landscaping applications of ground covers, rock and
mulch totaling at least fifteen percent (15%) of the CSD District.
B.   Water Efficient Materials: All new landscaping shall incorporate water
efficient landscape materials to the extent feasible.
C.   Width Along Public Rights-Of-Way: A minimum of six feet (6') width of
perimeter landscaping without berms or screening will be required along all
public rights-of-way. A minimum of four feet (4') width of landscaping will be
required as rear and side yard landscaped areas.
D.   Number Of Trees: Within the required perimeter landscape area along public
rights-of-way, at least one tree shall be planted for every one hundred feet
(100') of frontage.
E.   Islands: Within the parking lot landscape areas of parking/display areas,
the landscape area required shall be a landscape island at the end of each
parking row with a minimum of one tree per island.
F.   Uses Not Related To Dealership: Parking lot landscaping for all uses which
are not related to an automobile dealership shall be a minimum of seven percent
(7%) of the parking area. The parking areas may use diamond planters and all
planters shall be configured to allow efficient and safe parking and may be
located at the end of parking rows.
G.   Elimination; Conditions: Landscaping on other side or rear yard barriers
or side yards between properties within this CSD District may be eliminated if
the yard area is used in conjunction with an adjoining property for common
driveways, display and/or parking.
H.   Landscape Requirements When Adjacent To Residential Zone:
1.   A landscape buffer of twenty feet (20') shall be provided between office,
parking lot or commercial uses when located adjacent to a residential zone.
2.   Trees within the buffer area shall be planted at one evergreen tree per
twenty (20) linear feet of frontage adjacent to the residential zone. Trees may
be grouped but in no case shall an adjacent residential property have less than
one buffer tree along its adjoining frontage.
3.   An eight foot (8') high masonry, precast concrete, lightweight precast
fiber reinforced concrete or light weight steel reinforced polyethylene plastic
wall shall be used between abutting commercial, or office land uses and
residential zone.
4.   When the requirements of a land use buffer exceed those of other
requirements along a property line, the land use buffer requirements shall
apply. (Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018)
9-18J-080: SIGNAGE:
Signage is an important component for the success of the sales activities
within the CSD District. All signs shall comply with the Draper City sign
ordinance, with the following exceptions:
A.   General Standards:
1.   Location of all ground mounted signs shall be located to meet the
requirements for traffic safety and visibility and shall be located outside the
clear view area.
2.   Illuminated signs shall be internally lighted. Exposed neon is also
permitted as an accent or decorative sign element.
3.   No flat faced box or cabinet type sign with painted copy shall be
permitted.
4.   If signage is integrated with an architectural feature of the building,
such as a backlit element, face or column, or a design element that is cast
into architectural materials, only the portion of the sign that is text or
corporate logo shall be counted toward the total allowed signage area.
5.   Approval of this CSD shall constitute the approval of the master sign
program as shown in section
9-18J-090, exhibits D, "Master Sign Plan", and E, "Sign Theme", of this
article.
6.   All banner signs, inflatables, flags, balloons, animated signs and
temporary signs, as allowed in this article, shall not require an additional
sign permit from Draper City.
B.   Permanent Signage:
1.   Marquee Sign: The CSD District may have one "marquee sign", or monolithic
sign, which is a sign which complies with the following requirements and
limitations:
a.   One marquee sign may be located in the approximate location shown in
section
9-18J-090, exhibit D of this article;
b.   The maximum height shall not exceed seventy five feet (75') above sidewalk
grade adjacent to the marquee sign;
c.   The maximum sign area shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet per
sign face area and shall have no more than two (2) sign faces;
d.   No more than two (2) electronic changeable message displays may be located
on the marquee sign and each electronic display shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of each sign face area. Electronic message displays shall incorporate
photocell light sensors, with automatic dimming technology. The sign
illumination levels for the electronic display shall never operate at a
brightness intensity exceeding 0.5 foot-candle over ambient lighting conditions
when measured two hundred feet (200') from the sign face; and
e.   Each electronic changeable message display shall be oriented to either
those exiting Interstate 15 or traveling along 11400 South Street.
2.   Dealership Identification Signs: The CSD District may have up to three (3)
"dealership identification signs" in the style of a pole sign, monolithic sign,
or tower sign, each of which is a sign which complies with the following
requirements and limitations:
a.   Each dealership identification sign may be located in the approximate
location depicted in section
9-18J-090, exhibit D of this article;
b.   The maximum height of each dealership identification sign may not exceed
sixty feet (60') measured from the adjacent sidewalk;
c.   The maximum sign area of each dealership identification sign may not
exceed four hundred (400) square feet per each sign face.
3.   Primary Monument Signs: The CSD District may have up to four (4) "primary
monument signs", each of which is a sign which complies with the following
requirements and limitations:
a.   Each primary monument sign may be located in the approximate location
depicted in section
9-18J-090, exhibit D of this article;
b.   The maximum height of each primary monument sign may not exceed sixteen
feet (16') measured from the adjacent sidewalk;
c.   The maximum sign area of each primary monument sign may not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet per each sign face.
4.   Office Monument Signs: The CSD District may have up to three (3) "office
monument signs", each of which is a sign which complies with the following
requirements and limitations:
a.   Each office monument sign may be located in the approximate location
depicted in section
9-18J-090, exhibit D of this article;
b.   The maximum height of each office monument sign may not exceed sixteen
feet (16') measured from the adjacent sidewalk;
c.   The maximum sign area of each office monument sign may not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet per each sign face.
5.   Building Signage: Each building within the CSD District may have building
signage complying with the following requirements and limitations:
a.   Location: Signs shall be mounted on building facades parallel to and
contiguous with the wall upon which the sign is attached. Signs may be attached
to screen walls or service buildings facing a street.
b.   Sign Area: A maximum sign copy area allowance for each facade of a
building facing a public right-of-way shall be ten percent (10%) of the facade.
In the case that a building fronts a public way on more than one facade, the
maximum sign area allowance shall apply to each facade. A transfer of sign
allowance area between facades on the same building shall not exceed one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the allowed area for any given facade.
c.   Construction: Signs shall be any one or a combination of the following:
(1)   Internally illuminated individual pan channel;
(2)   Internally illuminated channel lume;
(3)   Halo illuminated reverse pan channel; or
(4)   Construction methods with similar intent.
6.   On Site Directional/Destination And Information Signs: On site signs shall
be located as needed to facilitate internal circulation and destination
identification.
C.   Temporary Signage:
1.   General Standards:
a.   Signs shall not be placed in or over a public right-of-way.
b.   Signs shall not flash, blink, spin, rotate, block traffic visibility,
constitute a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard, or cause a public nuisance
of any kind.
c.   Signs shall not be attached to telephone poles, trees or security gates.
d.   Signs must be firmly secured.
e.   Signs within a power line easement shall comply with height conditions of
the easement.
f.   Prior to December 15 of each calendar year, property owners within the CSD
shall jointly submit to Draper City a calendar for the coming year of special
promotion periods and holiday promotion periods that establishes "fly dates"
for temporary signs, balloons, and inflatables. Fly dates shall comply with the
provisions for special promotion and holiday promotion periods established in
this section.
2.   Banners:
a.   Flag banners may be placed along frontage streets with a minimum interval
spacing of at least thirty feet (30').
b.   Pole banners may be attached to poles and supports.
c.   Flag banners may be freestanding feather banners with inground supports
and spikes.
3.   Temporary Sign Devices: The following types of sign devices may be used
during the permitted special promotion and holiday promotion periods:
a.   Banners attached to the buildings, not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of
the building facade and no more than one banner per facade, but temporary
building banners shall not be counted toward maximum allowance for permanent
signage;
b.   Vehicle decorations, including antenna flags, balloons, windshield
paintings and hood displays;
c.   Tall balloons designed to attract attention from long distances, including
cloud busters (balloons attached in a series with string or pennant flags) and
hot air balloons;
d.   Carnival tents;
e.   Search or spot lights; and
f.   Inflatable objects for the purpose of advertising a specific product or to
bring attention to a special promotion, such as inflatable mascots, gorillas,
bounce houses, and promotional sponsors.
4.   Special Promotion Periods:
a.   Dealerships within the CSD may implement jointly up to twenty one (21)
special promotion periods per calendar year.
b.   Each period may not exceed five (5) consecutive days in length.
c.   Special promotional periods shall not be combined to run consecutively and
must be separated by nine (9) calendar days between each special promotion
period.
d.   A sign permit for temporary signage is not required provided the signage
meets the requirements of this section.
5.   Holiday Promotion Periods:
a.   Dealerships within the CSD may implement jointly up to nine (9) holiday
promotion periods per calendar year.
b.   Unless otherwise noted below, each period may not exceed six (6)
consecutive days in length.
c.   Holiday promotional periods may be combined to run consecutively with
other special promotion periods.
d.   The following days shall be considered holiday promotion periods:
(1)   New Year's Day (January);
(2)   Presidents Day (February);
(3)   Tax season (April, 7 days);
(4)   Memorial Day (May);
(5)   4th of July (July);
(6)   24th of July (July);
(7)   Labor Day (September);
(8)   Thanksgiving (November); and
(9)   Year end/Christmas (December 15 - December 31).
(Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018)
9-18J-090: EXHIBITS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3738.jpg] 
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3740.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1335, 7-17-2018)
EXHIBIT C
ARCHITECTURAL THEMES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3742.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3744.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3746.jpg]
 
EXHIBIT D
MASTER SIGN PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3748.jpg]
 
EXHIBIT E
SIGN THEME
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3750.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3752.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1174, 11-10-2015)
ARTICLE K. HIGHLINE COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18K-010: Purpose
9-18K-020: Permitted Uses
9-18K-030: Proposed Development Standards
9-18K-040: Landscape Standards
9-18K-050: Parking Design
9-18K-060: Lighting Design
9-18K-070: Signage
9-18K-080: Procedures
9-18K-090: Exhibits
9-18K-010: PURPOSE:
The Highline Commercial Special District contains approximately 72.70 acres
(see section
9-18K-090, exhibit A of this article), is bordered by Highland Drive on the
east, Minuteman Drive on the west and a future Trax line through the middle of
the project, as shown in land use master plan (see section
9-18K-090, exhibit A of this article). The size of the property allows for a
master planned, mixed use project with office, commercial and residential. The
goals and objective of Draper City general plan are reflected in the overall
Highline Commercial Special District elements such as land use (residential,
office, retail and general commercial), architecture for office and retail
uses, signage, site design, and landscape standards. The Commercial District of
the master plan aims to broaden the commercial tax base of the City while
providing amenities to the City residents such as upgraded Porter Rockwell
Trail, walkways around the project, access to the UTA Trax line and an on site
park. The Residential District will provide rooftops to support the retail and
convenient housing for the office workers. (Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016)
9-18K-020: PERMITTED USES:
Apartments.
Bank or financial institution with drive-through.
Bar establishment.
Business service.
Condominiums.
Convenience store.
Cultural service.
Daycare, general.
Department store.
Education facility, private.
Education facility, public.
Franchise Municipal use.
Gasoline service station.
Government office.
Government service.
Health and fitness facility.
Hotel.
Laundry or dry cleaning, limited.
Laundry services.
Media services.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical services.
Municipal use.
Office, general.
Office, lab.
Office, warehouse.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Place of worship.
Post Office.
Preschool.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Restaurant, fast food.
Restaurant, general.
Retail, general.
Townhomes.
Warehouse.
Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1328, 6-5-2018; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18K-030: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards of the Highline Commercial Special District will
guide the design of the buildings, landscaping, parking and signage located
within the district boundaries. The master plan provides for office, retail,
residential and general commercial development in designated areas in
accordance with the development standards set forth in this article.
A.   Commercial District: The Commercial District is located along Highland
Drive and Corporate Way and may have retail pads along Highland Drive. All
buildings within the Commercial District shall comply with the following
development standards:
1.   Office:
a.   Standards:
(1)   The architecture shall be the primary tool to create a strong sense of
identity and place throughout the business park. All buildings will be
articulated with use-appropriate scale, form, materials, and colors carefully
considered and incorporated throughout the development phases.
(A)   Buildings shall be at least four (4) stories tall.
(B)   Buildings shall have relief in the facade created by elements such as
varied floor plates, horizontal or vertical mullions, and unique angles or
composition of primary skin elements.
(2)   All building facades shall have similar character with each using similar
materials, colors, features, forms and design elements appropriate to the scale
of the various building sizes and depths, but shall not be required to be
exactly the same (see section
9-18K-090, exhibit B of this article).
(3)   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, glazing, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar
material as approved by Draper City staff.
(4)   More than one primary material shall be required on all building facades.
(5)   Buildings shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) high efficiency
glazing.
(6)   Buildings shall use a minimum of fifty percent (50%) primary material.
(7)   No building shall be taller than fifteen (15) stories.
(8)   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by
enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight.
(9)   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split face CMU
or honed CMU enclosure.
(10)   The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be ten feet (10').
b.   Office Amenities: The office park will encourage interaction with the
outdoor environment by providing the following items such as:
(1)   Central outdoor gathering area with basketball, picnic area, volleyball,
etc.
(2)   Connecting to the Porter Rockwell Trail.
(3)   Walking and running trails around the office park, including benches and
fitness stations.
(4)   Direct connectivity to the retail area to the east.
(5)   Connection to the future Trax line. (Ord. 1350, 9-4-2018)
2.   Office warehouse:
a.   All buildings will be articulated with use appropriate scale, form,
materials, and colors carefully considered and incorporated throughout the
development phases.
b.   All building facades shall have the same character each utilizing the same
materials, colors, features, forms and design elements appropriate to the scale
of the various building sizes and depths (see section
9-18K-090, exhibit C of this article).
c.   Building primary materials shall consist of concrete, with some accent
materials of metal, stone, EFIS, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
d.   No building shall be taller than four (4) stories, not including the
mechanical penthouse.
e.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view, either by enclosure,
parapet wall or line of sight.
f.   Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split face CMU or
honed CMU enclosure.
g.   The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be ten feet (10').
3.   Retail:
a.   Each will utilize the same palette of materials compatibly configured to
allow unique identity reflective of the established image of the intended use
(see section
9-18K-090, exhibit D of this article).
b.   The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be ten feet (10').
c.   More than one primary material shall be required on all building facades.
d.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
4.   Hotel:
a.   Maximum height of thirteen (13) stories.
b.   More than one material shall be required on all building facades (see
section
9-18K-090, exhibit E of this article).
c.   The minimum front setback shall be ten feet (10').
d.   More than one primary material shall be required on all building facades.
e.   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
B.   Residential District: All residential areas (see exhibit in section
9-18K-090 of this article for site plan) shall comply with the following
development standards:
1.   Architectural Theme: All buildings (see section
9-18K-090, exhibit F of this article) in residential areas shall share a
similar unique architectural theme and elements including, but not limited to,
colors, materials, rooflines and entries.
2.   Materials: Building materials shall consist of at least three (3) types
including an accumulation or clustering of brick, stone or synthetic stone
equal to a gross calculation of square footage of fifteen percent (15%) or more
of all structure sides.
3.   Variety Of Floor Plans: There shall be a variety of floor plans/unit sizes
within each project area.
4.   Community Clubhouse: A community clubhouse with indoor and outdoor
amenities shall be provided for each residential project area (in other words,
owners of separate projects will each need to provide such amenities).
5.   Parking Requirements: Parking requirement for each residential area shall
be within the range of 1.50 per unit to 2.00 per unit, of those a minimum of
one covered parking (garages included) shall be provided.
6.   Parking Stalls: One parking stall for every five (5) units will be a
visitor parking stall.
7.   Walkways: Each separate building will be connected by walkways. The
buildings will share use of outdoor common areas.
8.   Screening: Perimeter parking to be screened with landscaping (5 feet
minimum).
9.   Building Setbacks: Building setbacks from property lines are as follows:
Ten feet (10') from all other exterior property lines. Parking shall be allowed
in setback areas.
10.   Maintenance Buildings: Maintenance buildings and other outbuildings shall
be set back five feet (5') from all exterior property lines.
11.   Density: A minimum density of fifteen (15) units per acre and maximum
density of sixty (60) units per acre shall be applied to each residential area.
12.   Number Of Stories: Each residential building shall be a maximum of ten
(10) stories.
13.   Signs: Each residential area shall be allowed two (2) freestanding
monument signs with a maximum area of forty eight (48) square feet and maximum
height of six feet (6'). Two (2) temporary portable banner signs, each with a
maximum area of fifty feet (50') shall be allowed in each residential project.
Flags and A-frame signage shall be allowed during lease up in each residential
project.
14.   Sidewalks: Residential project areas shall install sidewalks on at least
one side of all private streets. Sidewalks shall be a width of no less than
four feet (4').
15.   Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access
points, entryways, public gathering nodes, and parking areas.
16.   Lighting: All residential areas shall submit a lighting plan that
illustrates lighting accommodation for automobile and pedestrian networks.
a.   Exterior lighting along streets shall be pedestrian in scale with a
maximum height of fourteen feet (14').
b.   Low level bollard lighting is encouraged for illumination of internal
pedestrian pathways.
17.   Landscaping: All multiple-family projects shall submit a landscaping plan
in accordance with chapter 23 of this title.
a.   Landscaping shall be used as a land use buffer where appropriate.
b.   Detention basins shall be adequately landscaped and maintained.
c.   Drought tolerant landscaping is highly encouraged.
18.   Common Open Space: No less than fifteen percent (15%) of the project area
shall be designated for open space uses. Open space may either be in the form
of urban hardscapes, or landscaped softscapes. The following standards shall
apply to all themes:
a.   Open space areas shall be available to everyone residing in the boundaries
of a development.
b.   Open space may include pathways and outdoor amenities and public right of
way sidewalks.
c.   Open space excludes private balconies, decks, patio areas, vehicle
parking, streets.
d.   Open space should be distributed throughout the project.
e.   Open space will include the slope areas of the project.
19.   Residential Amenities: Residential area amenities:
a.   Projects of fewer than fifty (50) dwelling units shall provide an
amenities package appropriate for the project size and location.
b.   Multiple-family projects shall include at least one amenity per fifty (50)
units from the following list:
(1)   Tot lot/play structure.
(2)   Community garden.
(3)   Courtyard with benches.
(4)   Barbecue area.
(5)   Water feature.
(6)   Outdoor fireplace/pit.
(7)   Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor).
(8)   Spa with decking.
(9)   Entrance feature.
(10)   Shade structure.
(11)   Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of this
guideline.
c.   Projects of fifty one (51) to one hundred (100) dwelling units shall
include the following amenities in addition to those above:
(1)   A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social area,
no less than one thousand (1,000) gross square feet in gathering space or a
minimum of one outside social function area, no less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet in gathering space.
d.   Projects of one hundred one (101) or more dwelling units shall include the
following amenities in addition to those above:
(1)   A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social area,
no less than one thousand (1,000) gross square feet in gathering space and a
minimum of one outside social function area, no less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet in gathering space. (Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016)
9-18K-040: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
Landscape design will be a major component of the Highline commercial special
district. The overall project will be landscaped with sensitivity to its
environment. A consistent palette of drought tolerant tree types, plant
materials, and ground covers will be incorporated throughout in relation to the
architecture to create a strong and consistent sense of place and identity. The
tree and plant palette will be submitted in conjunction with specific site plan
approval application for each phase. The landscape design shall comply with the
following standard:
A.   The landscaping shall define and enhance primary public entrances into
each district with entry monuments.
B.   Ornamental landscaping shall be strategically designed to provide intimate
outdoor spaces for public amenities and at pedestrian pathways and entrances.
C.   The landscape shall promote water conservation by the use of water wise,
drip irrigation, and drought tolerant plant types.
D.   Tree palette shall be a combination of deciduous and nondeciduous trees
and shade and ornamental trees.
E.   The initial tree size shall have a minimum two inch (2") caliper and be
minimum six feet (6') high.
F.   The minimum landscape percentage for the office park shall be fifteen
percent (15%) inclusive of all phases.
G.   Landscaping berms measuring two feet (2') in height will be used around
the perimeter of the office park to help minimize the visual impact of the
parking field. Please see section
9-18K-090, exhibit J of this article.
H.   The minimum landscape percentage for commercial and retail parking lots
shall be seven percent (7%). (Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016)
9-18K-050: PARKING DESIGN:
The Commercial District will be configured to reduce the appearance of large
parking expanses and be designed in accordance with the following standards:
A.   The range of parking for office buildings shall be a minimum of four (4)
stalls and a maximum of six (6) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
B.   The range of parking for retail uses shall be a minimum of 3.5 stalls and
a maximum of ten (10) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
C.   Parking stalls shall be eighteen feet (18') in length and a minimum of
nine feet (9') in width.
D.   Landscape islands will measure eight feet (8') in width and eighteen feet
(18') in length and shall be placed at either end of parking rows longer than
twenty (20) stalls.
E.   Hotel parking will be parked at a minimum of 0.75 stalls per room.
F.   Parking diamonds will also be allowed in all parking areas. (Ord. 1215, 9-
6-2016)
9-18K-060: LIGHTING DESIGN:
A.   Parking lot lighting in commercial areas shall provide adequate
illumination at a minimum 0.5 foot-candle and maximum of four (4) foot-candles.
B.   Parking lot lighting shall utilize cutoff type fixtures.
C.   Parking lot lighting shall not be taller than thirty feet (30') (see
section
9-18K-090, exhibit H of this article).
D.   The "main corridor" will have decorative black streetlights. Spacing to be
no more than three hundred feet (300') on center. (Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016)
9-18K-070: SIGNAGE:
Signage design and location will be an important component of the Highline
Commercial Special District. Allowed signage shall include:
A.   Two (2) monument signs will be allowed per building site. Each monument
sign shall have a uniform, architecturally compatible design consistent with
the Highline Commercial Special District design theme with faces not larger
than one hundred (100) square feet. Locations must be approved by the City
Engineer to ensure clearance of sight distance requirements at entries and
adequate separation for readability. Monument signs not to exceed seven feet
(7') in height and fourteen feet (14') in width (see section 
9-18K-090, exhibit G of this article).
B.   All buildings will be able to have building signage. Building signage may
be installed by individual businesses/buildings, hotel, apartment on single-/
multi- tenant buildings. Such signs shall have individually illuminated letters
or decorative sign cabinets. Office building signs shall not exceed six hundred
(600) square feet in size maximum per building facade and residential signs
shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size maximum per building
facade. For any one (1) facade of a building, the maximum sign area for each
one (1) linear foot of building wall shall be one (1) square foot. When the
wall on which the sign is placed is more than two hundred feet (200') from any
public right-of-way, the maximum sign area for each one (1) linear foot of
building wall shall be one and one half (1-1/2) square feet.
C.   Wayfinding signs will be allowed in the project. Height not to exceed
eight feet (8'). The wayfinding sign area will not exceed sixty five (65)
square feet.
D.   Suspended or blade type projecting signs may be provided along pedestrian
walkways and shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above the
pavement.
E.   If flags or banners are placed on the commercial, residential, or retail
areas they will need to be seven feet (7') above the pavement. All flagpoles
will be part of a site plan submittal.
F.   One monument sign shall be allowed for each apartment project.
G.   Overall Highline CSD monument signs (see detail) shall be installed at
specific locations (see section
9-18K-090, exhibit G of this article) throughout the project. Two (2) monument
signs will be allowed per entrance to the Highline CSD. (Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016;
amd. Ord. 1434, 4-21-2020)
9-18K-080: PROCEDURES:
Approval of this Commercial Special District text and accompanying exhibits
shall constitute conceptual site plan approval in accordance with City
ordinances. Site plan approval for the office portion of the CSD may be
approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator upon finding substantial
compliance with the terms of the CSD, or the Zoning Administrator may defer the
review of the application to the Planning Commission. Except provided otherwise
herein, all other permits shall be processed in accordance with the Draper City
requirements, ordinances and procedures. The images and renderings in this
article are conceptual and may be changed.
(Ord. 1350, 9-4-2018)
9-18K-090: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   OVERALL PARCELS
   Zoning Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5140.png]
 
(Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016; amd. Ord. 1511, 11-16-2021)
   Site Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5132.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5130.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5128.png]
 
(Ord. 1350, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 1511, 11-16-2021)
   Pedestrian Connection
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5126.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5124.png]
 
(Ord. 1511, 11-16-2021)
   Amenities Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5122.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5120.png]
 
(Ord. 1511, 11-16-2021)
   EXHIBIT B
   OFFICE GENERAL EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3808.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3810.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3814.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3816.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3818.gif]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3820.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3758.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3760.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3762.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3764.gif]
 
(Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4228.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4226.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4224.png]
 
(Ord. 1350, 9-4-2018)
   EXHIBIT C
   OFFICE WAREHOUSE EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3766.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3768.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT D
   RETAIL EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3770.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3772.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3776.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3778.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT E
   HOTEL EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3780.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3782.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT F
   RESIDENTIAL EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3784.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3786.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3788.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3790.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3792.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3794.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3796.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3800.gif] 
 
   EXHIBIT G
   SIGNAGE EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3802.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT H
   LIGHTING EXAMPLES
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3804.gif]
 
    EXHIBIT I
   MONUMENT LOCATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3806.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT J
   LANDSCAPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3812.gif]
 
(Ord. 1215, 9-6-2016)
ARTICLE L. 136 CENTER COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18L-010: Purpose
9-18L-020: Permitted Uses
9-18L-030: Development Standards
9-18L-040: Landscape Standards
9-18L-050: Parking Design
9-18L-060: Lighting Design
9-18L-070: Signage
9-18L-080: Architectural Review Committee
9-18L-090: Procedures
9-18L-100: Exhibits
9-18L-010: PURPOSE:
The 136 Center Commercial Special District contains approximately 28.09 acres,
located along 200 West and 13800 South as shown in section
9-18L-100, exhibit A of this article. The size of the property allows for a
master-planned, mixed-use office park. The Draper City General Plan's goals and
objectives are reflected in the overall district elements such as land use,
architectural standards, signage, site design and landscape standards. The
Commercial District of the master plan aims to broaden the commercial tax base
of the City while providing amenities to the City residents. (Ord. 1361, 10-2-
2018; amd. Ord. 1450, 8-18-2020)
9-18L-020: PERMITTED USES:
Bank or financial institution with drive-through.
Bar establishment.
Church or place of worship.
Convenience store.
Cultural service.
Daycare, general.
Franchise Municipal use.
Gasoline service station.
Government service.
Health and fitness facility.
Higher education facility, private.
Higher education facility, public.
Hotel.
Laundry or dry cleaning, limited.
Laundry services.
Manufacturing.
Media services.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical services.
Office, general.
Office, warehouse.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Post Office.
Preschool.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Restaurant, fast food.
Restaurant, general.
Retail, general.
Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd. Ord. 1328, 6-5-2018; Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-18L-030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards of the 136 Center Commercial Special District will
guide the design of the buildings, landscaping, parking and signage located
within the district boundaries. The master plan provides for office and retail
development in designated areas in accordance with the development standards
set forth in this article.
A.   Commercial District: The Commercial District is located along 200 West and
may have retail pads along the 200 West frontage. All buildings within the
Commercial District shall comply with the following development standards:
1.   Office buildings:
a.   Architecture: The architecture shall be the primary tool to create a
strong sense of identity and place throughout the business park. All buildings
will be articulated with use appropriate scale, form, materials, and colors
carefully considered and incorporated throughout the development phases.
However, different architectural styles will be considered and allowed in order
to provide variety and identity to this area.
b.   Character: All building facades shall have the same character each
utilizing the same materials, colors, features, forms, and design elements
appropriate to the scale of the various building sizes and depths as shown in
section
9-18L-100, exhibit B of this article.
c.   Building Materials:
(1)   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
d.   Materials Required: More than one material shall be required on all
building facades.
e.   High Efficiency Glazing: Buildings shall have a minimum of forty percent
(40%) high efficiency glazing. Structural building elements, such as elevator
shafts or stairwells, are excepted from this requirement.
f.   Primary Material: Buildings shall use a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
primary material.
g.   Entry Features: Buildings shall have notable entry features which could
include:
(1)   An arch or canopy over entry doors.
(2)   Colors or materials that highlight the entry.
(3)   Entry doors and lobby that extend beyond or are recessed behind the main
footprint of the building.
h.   Building Height: No building shall be taller than four hundred twenty two
feet (422') or approximately thirty (30) floors, not including the mechanical
penthouse.
i.   Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment shall be screened from
view, either by enclosure, parapet wall, or line of sight.
j.   Dumpsters: Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split
face CMU or honed CMU enclosure.
k.   Front Setback: The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be ten
feet (10').
2.   Retail buildings:
a.   Unique Identity: Each will utilize the same palette of materials
compatibly configured to allow unique identity reflective of the established
image of the intended user. Please see section
9-18L-100, exhibit C of this article.
b.   Front Setback: The minimum front setback from the right-of-way shall be
ten feet (10').
c.   Building Height: Buildings shall be single-story. Fuel canopies shall be
no more than twenty-five feet (25') in height.
d.   Materials Required: More than one material shall be required on all
building facades.
e.   Building Materials:
(1)   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
f.   Public address and music systems shall be designed and operated so they
are not discernible at the property line of any lot or parcel containing a
single-family home.
B.   Hotel And Warehouse District: While not included within the concept site
plan, the code allows for hotel and warehousing uses on the property. The
warehousing uses should be located along 13800 South. All buildings within the
hotel and warehouse district shall comply with the following development
standards:
1.   Hotel:
a.   Building Height: Maximum height of twelve (12) stories.
b.   Materials Required: More than one material shall be required on all
building facades. Please see section
9-18L-100, exhibit D of this article.
c.   Front Setback: The minimum front setback shall be ten feet (10').
d.   Primary Material: More than one primary material shall be required on all
building facades.
e.   Building Materials:
(1)   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
2.   Office warehouse and manufacturing:
a.   Architecture: All buildings will be articulated with use appropriate
scale, form, materials, and colors carefully considered and incorporated
throughout the development phases.
b.   Character: All building facades shall have the same character each
utilizing the same materials, colors, features, forms and design elements
appropriate to the scale of the various building sizes and depths. Please see
section
9-18L-100, exhibit E of this article.
c.   Building Materials:
(1)   Building primary materials shall consist of concrete, with some accent
materials of metal, stone, EFIS, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
d.   Building Height: No building shall be taller than four (4) stories, not
including the mechanical penthouse.
e.   Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment shall be screened from
view, either by enclosure, parapet wall or line of sight.
f.   Dumpsters: Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split
face CMU or honed CMU enclosure.
g.   Front Setback: The minimum front setback from right of way shall be ten
feet (10').
C.   To the extent that the text of this Article does not specifically address
a matter or concern related to land use or development, the matter or concern
is governed by applicable provisions of federal and state law, and the
provisions of the Draper City Municipal Code. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd. Ord.
1450, 8-18-2020; Ord. 1507, 11-16-2021)
9-18L-040: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
Landscape design will be a major component of the 136 Center commercial special
district. The overall project will be landscaped with sensitivity to its
environment. A consistent palette of drought tolerant tree types, plant
materials, and ground covers will be incorporated throughout in relation to the
architecture to create a strong and consistent sense of place and identity. The
tree and plant palette will be submitted in conjunction with specific site plan
approval application for each phase. The landscape design shall comply with the
following standards:
A.   The landscaping shall define and enhance primary public entrances into the
campus.
B.   Ornamental landscaping shall be strategically designed to provide intimate
outdoor spaces for public amenities and at pedestrian pathways and entrances as
shown in section
9-18L-100, exhibit F of this article.
C.   The landscape buffer around the park shall be provided to obscure parking
fields from street view.
D.   A landscaping buffer of ten feet (10') of vegetation along 200 West will
provide a vegetative shield of the parking area.
E.   The main corridor that goes east to west through the project shall be
lined with trees on both sides. Forty foot (40') maximum tree spaces shall be
required for this corridor.
F.   Tree palette shall be a combination of deciduous and nondeciduous trees
and shade and ornamental trees.
G.   The initial tree size shall have a minimum two inch (2") caliper and be a
minimum of six feet (6') high.
H.   The minimum landscape percentage for the park shall be twenty percent
(20%) inclusive of all phases.
I.   Landscaping berms measuring three feet (3') in height will be used around
the perimeter of the project to help minimize the visual impact of the parking
field. The landscape berm shall not be required on the eastern boundary of the
zone that abuts Interstate 15 right-of-way from Bangerter Highway to 13800
South. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd. Ord. 1450, 8-18-2020)
9-18L-050: PARKING DESIGN:
The districts will be configured to reduce the appearance of large parking
expanses and be designed in accordance with the following standards:
A.   The range of parking for office buildings shall be a minimum of 3.5 stalls
and a maximum of eight (8) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
B.   Retail uses, to include gasoline service stations and convenience stores,
shall have the range of parking at a minimum of 3.5 stalls and a maximum of ten
(10) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
C.   Hotel uses shall provide at least one stall per room.
D.   Office warehousing and manufacturing uses shall provide at least one stall
per one thousand (1,000) square feet for the warehousing or manufacturing
component. Office components shall meet the office standard.
E.   One tree shall be provided per eight foot by eighteen foot (8' x 18')
island and for double parked rows, two (2) trees will be provided for each
eight foot by thirty six foot (8' x 36') island.
F.   Parking structures will be allowed on the site in order to accommodate the
higher density uses. Parking structures shall meet the following standards:
1.   Parking structures shall include the use of the same or complementary
building facade materials as office buildings and be designed as an integral
component of the site plan and architectural theme. Acceptable complementary
materials added to the concrete parking structure are those that are similar in
durability, color and/or appearance of the office building facades. Parking
structures shall follow the general design of the concept elevations provided
in section
9-18L-100, exhibit I of this article, including architectural style and facade
materials.
2.   Parking structures shall follow best CPTED practices and provide for well
lit and visible pedestrian corridors, visible parking areas, security devices,
and natural surveillance both inside of and outside of the structure.
3.   The use of landscaping and architectural materials, forms, and scale shall
be used to enhance the facility.
4.   Pedestrian pathways shall connect the pedestrian exit from the parking
structure to the buildings it serves.
5.   If a parking structure is placed adjacent to a public right of way, the
building design shall include human scale and detailing along the first floor
to enhance its relationship with the pedestrian. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd.
Ord. 1507, 11-16-2021)
9-18L-060: LIGHTING DESIGN:
A.   Parking lot lighting shall provide adequate illumination at a minimum 0.5
foot-candle and a maximum of four (4) foot-candles.
B.   Parking lot lighting shall utilize cutoff type fixtures.
C.   Parking lot lighting shall not be taller than thirty feet (30'). Please
see section
9-18L-100, exhibit G of this article.
D.   The main corridor shall have black streetlights with a spacing to be no
more than two hundred fifty feet (250') on center. Please see section
9-18L-100, exhibit G of this article.
E.   Canopy lighting shall provide adequate illumination for safe operation,
while providing uniform lighting levels. Fixtures shall be a combination of
directional and down-lighting, or as required to illuminate dispensers and
general under-canopy area.
1.   The average light levels under the auto fuel canopy shall be forty (40)
footcandles measured at the ground.
2.   Minimum light levels to be fifteen (15); maximum light levels to be sixty
(60) footcandles. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd. Ord. 1507, 11-16-2021)
9-18L-070: SIGNAGE:
Signage design and location will be an important component of the 136 Center
commercial special district. All signs shall be reviewed and approved by the
136 Center commercial special district architectural review committee. Allowed
signage shall include:
A.   One monument sign will be allowed per building. Each monument sign shall
have a uniform, architecturally compatible design consistent with the 136
Center commercial special district design theme with faces not larger than one
hundred (100) square feet. Locations must be approved by the city to ensure
clearance of sight distance requirements at entries and adequate separation for
readability. Monument signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height and
fourteen feet (14') in width. Please see section
9-18L-100, exhibit H of this article.
B.   In addition to monument signs allowed per building, two (2) monument signs
shall be allowed to the business park fronting 200 West and one monument sign
along 13800 South. They will follow the same monument guidelines as stated
above.
C.   Wall signage may be installed by individual businesses/buildings on
freestanding and in-line single-/multi- tenant buildings. Such signs shall have
individually illuminated letters or decorative sign cabinets. Where sign
cabinets are utilized, they shall be built into the architectural fascia.
D.   Wall signage shall be allowed at two (2) square feet of wall signage for
every one linear foot of building length.
E.   Wayfinding signs will be allowed in the project. Height shall not exceed
eight feet (8'). The area of the sign shall not exceed one hundred feet (100').
F.   Suspended or blade type projecting signs may be provided along pedestrian
walkways and shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above the
pavement.
G.   Flags shall be allowed along the main corridor for up to one week per
business as permitted through Draper City. Banners shall be allowed subject to
existing Draper code.
H.   One (1) pole signs shall be permitted on the I-15 frontage and one (1)
pole sign shall be permitted on the Bangerter Highway frontage. These signs may
be a multi-tenant sign, shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with
the office park design theme and shall be no taller than thirty five feet (35')
and no wider than twenty five feet (25'). The maximum allowed sign area shall
be no more than two hundred (200) square feet.
I.   The pole sign may have LED lighting subject to subsection
9-26-090D of this title.
J.   Gasoline price signs may be used in conjunction with allowed pylon or
monument signs and shall be included in the area calculation for the sign.
Gasoline price signs may be electronic, but shall have a black background or
face and multi-colored, changeable electronic fuel prices only. No continuous
animation or graphics are permitted.
K.   Awning signs shall be allowed at one (1) square foot of signage for each
linear foot of awning, up to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet per
awning face.
L.   Flag poles shall be permitted on each lot, with a maximum height of forty
(40) feet. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd. Ord. 1450, 8-18-2020; Ord. 1507, 11-16-
2021)
9-18L-080: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The construction of any building or other structure within the project,
including the design, architecture, exterior elevations, exterior finishes and
other architectural attributes will first be approved by the architectural
review committee. The architectural review committee will have the right to
establish standardized construction guidelines for the project which are
binding on the owners. No building or structure within the project will be
reconstructed, altered, added to or maintained in such a fashion as to alter,
in any material respect, the architectural appearance, character, motif or
functional purpose of such item, unless such alteration is first approved in
writing by the architectural review committee. The architectural review
committee is not responsible for determining compliance with structural and
building codes, solar ordinances, zoning codes or other governmental
restrictions, all of which are the responsibility of the applicable owner. The
architectural review committee shall consist of as many persons, but not less
than three (3), as the declarant, during the declarant control period, or the
owners, following the expiration of the declarant control period, may from time
to time appoint. At least one member shall be a professional in the field of
architecture. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016)
9-18L-090: PROCEDURES:
Approval of this commercial special district text and accompanying exhibits
shall constitute conceptual site plan approval for the commercial components in
accordance with city ordinances. Except provided otherwise herein, all other
permits shall be processed in accordance with the Draper City requirements,
ordinances and procedures. (Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016)
9-18L-100: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   PROPERTY AND SITE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4958.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4960.png]
 
   EXHIBIT B
   EXAMPLE OFFICE BUILDINGS
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3842.gif]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3858.gif]
  
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3866.gif]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3868.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3870.gif]
  
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3872.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3874.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3876.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3826.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4962.png]
   EXHIBIT C
   EXAMPLE RETAIL BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3828.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3830.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3832.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3834.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT D
   EXAMPLE HOTEL BUILDINGS
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3726.gif]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3836.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT E
   EXAMPLE OFFICE WAREHOUSE BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3838.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3840.gif] 
 
   EXHIBIT F
   LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3844.gif]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3846.gif]
 
   EXHIBIT G
   SITE LIGHTING
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3848.gif]
 
EXHIBIT H
SIGNAGE
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3850.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4964.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3852.gif]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4966.png]
 
   EXHIBIT I
   EXAMPLE PARKING GARAGE STRUCTURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3856.gif] 
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3860.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3862.gif] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3864.gif]
 
(Ord. 1220, 8-2-2016; amd. Ord. 1361, 10-2-2018; Ord. 1450, 8-18-2020)
ARTICLE M. RESERVED
(Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE N. IRVINE COMMERCIAL SPECIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-18N-010: Purpose
9-18N-020: Permitted Uses
9-18N-030: Development Standards
9-18N-040: Landscape Standards
9-18N-050: Parking Design
9-18N-060: Lighting Design
9-18N-070: Signage
9-18N-080: Architectural Review Committee
9-18N-090: Procedures
9-18N-100: Exhibits
9-18N-010: PURPOSE:
The Irvine Commercial Special District contains approximately 21.72 acres,
located along 440 West and 13800 South as shown in section
9-18N-100, exhibit A of this article. The size of the property allows for a
master planned, mixed use office park that will be completed in phases as shown
in section
9-18N-100, exhibit A2 of this article. The Draper City general plan's goals and
objectives are reflected in the overall district elements such as land use,
architectural standards, signage, site design and landscape standards. The
Commercial District of the master plan aims to broaden the commercial tax base
of the City while providing amenities to the City residents. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-
2018)
9-18N-020: PERMITTED USES:
Bar establishment.
Cultural service.
Daycare, general.
Government service.
Health and fitness facility.
Higher education facility, private.
Higher education facility, public.
Medical cannabis pharmacy.
Medical or dental laboratory.
Medical services.
Office, general.
Office, warehouse.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Preschool.
Printing and photocopying, limited.
Recreation and entertainment, indoor.
Restaurant, fast food.
Restaurant, general.
Retail, general.
Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020; Ord. 1539, 5-3-2022)
9-18N-030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards of the Irvine Commercial Special District will guide
the design of the buildings, landscaping, parking and signage located within
the district boundaries. The master plan provides for office development in
accordance with the development standards set forth in this article.
See section
9-18N-100, exhibit A3 of this article from Rocky Mountain Power on use of the
property in the RMP easement.
A.   Commercial District: The Commercial District is located along 13800 South
and may have retail pads. All buildings within the Commercial District shall
comply with the following development standards:
1.   Office buildings:
a.   Architecture: The architecture shall be the primary tool to create a
strong sense of identity and place throughout the business park. All buildings
will be articulated with use appropriate scale, form, materials, and colors
carefully considered and incorporated throughout the development phases.
However, different architectural styles will be considered and allowed in order
to provide variety and identity to this area.
b.   Character: All building facades shall have the same character each
utilizing the same materials, colors, features, forms, and design elements
appropriate to the scale of the various building sizes and depths as shown in
section
9-18N-100, exhibit B of this article.
c.   Building Materials:
(1)   Building primary materials shall consist of granite, metal, composite
metal panel, stone, EFIS, concrete, GFRC, tile or other similar material as
approved by Draper City staff.
d.   Materials Required: More than one material shall be required on all
building facades.
e.   High Efficiency Glazing: Buildings shall have a minimum of forty percent
(40%) high efficiency glazing.
f.   Primary Material: Buildings shall use a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
primary material per facade.
g.   Entry Features: Buildings shall have notable entry features which could
include:
(1)   An arch or canopy over entry doors.
(2)   Colors or materials that highlight the entry.
(3)   Entry doors and lobby that extend beyond or are recessed behind the main
footprint of the building.
h.   Building Height: No building shall be taller than one hundred ninety six
feet (196') or approximately fourteen (14) floors, not including the mechanical
penthouse. Parking structures will be evaluated to provide the required amount
of parking upon determination of the office building area and required
footprint of the structure.
i.   Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment shall be screened from
view, either by enclosure, parapet wall, or line of sight.
j.   Dumpsters: Dumpsters shall be enclosed within a decorative masonry, split
face CMU or honed CMU enclosure.
k.   Front Setback: The minimum front setback from right-of-way shall be ten
feet (10').
2.   Retail building(s):
a.   Unique Identity: Each will utilize the same palette of materials
compatibly configured to allow unique identity reflective of the established
image of the intended user. Please see section
9-18N-100, exhibit C of this article.
b.   Front Setback: The minimum front setback from the right-of-way shall be
ten feet (10').
c.   Building Height: Buildings shall be single-story.
d.   Materials Required: Fifty percent (50%) of the area of all facades shall
consist of primary materials, as defined by section
9-22-040 of this title, and there shall be a minimum of two (2) primary
materials on each facade. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-040: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
Landscape design will be a major component of the Irvine Commercial Special
District. The overall project will be landscaped with sensitivity to its
environment. A consistent palette of drought tolerant tree types, plant
materials, and ground covers will be incorporated throughout in relation to the
architecture to create a strong and consistent sense of place and identity. The
tree and plant palette will be submitted in conjunction with specific site plan
approval application for each phase. The landscape design shall comply with the
following standards:
A.   The landscaping shall define and enhance primary public entrances into the
development.
B.   Ornamental landscaping shall be strategically designed to provide intimate
outdoor spaces for public amenities and at pedestrian pathways and entrances as
shown in section
9-18N-100, exhibit D of this article.
C.   All on-site parking areas shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from
any public or private right-of-way. The setback area shall be established with
bermed vegetative ground covers or plantings that provide screening of the
parking area from the right-of-way.
D.   Tree palette shall be a combination of deciduous and nondeciduous trees
and shade and ornamental trees.
E.   The initial tree size shall have a minimum two inch (2") caliper and be a
minimum of six feet (6') high.
F.   The minimum landscape percentage for the park shall be twenty percent
(20%) inclusive of all phases. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-050: PARKING DESIGN:
The districts will be configured to reduce the appearance of large parking
expanses and be designed in accordance with the following standards:
A.   The range of parking for office buildings shall be a minimum of 3.5 stalls
and a maximum of eight (8) stalls per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
B.   Retail uses shall have the range of parking at a minimum of 3.5 stalls and
a maximum of ten (10) stalls per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
C.   Office warehousing uses shall provide at least one stall per one thousand
(1,000) gross square feet for the warehousing component. Office components
shall meet the office standard.
D.   Parking stall provision for all other uses shall meet the requirement set
forth in chapter 25 of this title.
E.   One tree shall be provided per eight foot by eighteen foot (8' x 18')
island and for double parked rows, two (2) trees will be provided for each
eight foot by thirty six foot (8' x 36') island.
F.   Parking structures will be allowed on the site in order to accommodate the
higher density uses. Parking structures shall meet the following standards:
1.   Parking structures shall include the use of the same or complementary
building facade materials as the office buildings (see section
9-18N-100, exhibit B of this article) and be designed as an integral component
of the site plan and architectural theme. Acceptable complementary materials
added to the concrete parking structure are those that are similar in
durability, color and/or appearance of the office building facades. Parking
structures shall follow the general design of the concept elevations provided
in section
9-18N-100, exhibit G of this article, including architectural style and facade
materials.
2.   Parking structures shall follow best CPTED practices and provide for well-
lit and visible pedestrian corridors, visible parking areas, security devices,
and natural surveillance both inside of and outside of the structure.
3.   The use of landscaping and architectural materials, forms, and scale shall
be used to enhance the facility, see section
9-18N-100, exhibit D of this article.
4.   Pedestrian pathways shall connect the pedestrian exit from the parking
structure to the buildings it serves, see section
9-18N-100, exhibits A and D of this article.
5.   If a parking structure is placed adjacent to a public right- of-way, the
building design shall include human scale and detailing along the first floor
to enhance its relationship with the pedestrian.
G.   Parking lot design and layout shall be consistent with section
9-18N-100, exhibits A and D of this article.
H.   Parking stalls that are head to head are not required to have a landscape
buffer, see section
9-18N-100, exhibits A and D of this article.
I.   The drive-aisle width in the parking lot is a minimum twenty four feet
(24'), and all emergency access lanes are a minimum width of twenty six feet
(26'). (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-060: LIGHTING DESIGN:
A.   Parking lot lighting shall provide adequate illumination at a minimum 0.5
foot-candle and a maximum of four (4) foot-candles.
B.   Parking lot lighting shall utilize cutoff type fixtures.
C.   Parking lot lighting outside of the RMP corridor shall not be taller than
thirty feet (30'), including base if any, and shall be allowed to have a
maximum twenty degree (20°) tilt to avoid excessive number of poles.
D.   Parking lot light poles within ten feet (10') of the Rocky Mountain Power
corridor for the overhead power lines that pass through the property shall be
allowed to have no greater than a twenty degree (20°) tilt to provide adequate
illumination under the overhead power lines and to avoid an impractical and
unsightly amount of light poles. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-070: SIGNAGE:
Signage design and location will be an important component of the Irvine
Commercial Special District. Allowed signage shall include:
A.   One monument sign will be allowed per building. Each monument sign shall
have a uniform, architecturally compatible design consistent with the Irvine
Commercial Special District design theme with faces not larger than one hundred
(100) square feet. Locations must be approved by the City to ensure clearance
of sight distance requirements at entries and adequate separation for
readability. Monument signs shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and
fourteen feet (14') in width. Please see section
9-18N-100, exhibit F of this article.
B.   In addition to monument signs allowed at each building, three (3)
additional monument signs shall be allowed in the park, two (2) of them
fronting 13800 South and one of them fronting Bangerter Highway. They will
follow the same monument guidelines as stated above.
C.   Wall signage may be installed by individual businesses/buildings on
freestanding and in-line single-/multi- tenant buildings. Such signs shall have
individually illuminated letters or decorative sign cabinets. Where sign
cabinets are utilized, they shall be built into the architectural fascia.
D.   Wall signage shall be allowed at two (2) square feet of wall signage for
every one linear foot of building length.
E.   Wayfinding signs will be allowed in the project. Height shall not exceed
four feet (4'). The area of the sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
F.   Suspended or blade type projecting signs may be provided along pedestrian
walkways and shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above the
pavement.
G.   Flags shall be allowed along the main corridor for up to one week per
business as permitted through Draper City. Banners shall be allowed subject to
existing Draper code.
H.   One pole sign shall be permitted on the Bangerter Highway frontage. This
sign may be a multi-tenant sign, shall be designed to be architecturally
compatible with the office park design theme and shall be no taller than thirty
feet (30') and no wider than fifteen feet (15') with a sign face of no larger
than two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
I.   The pole sign may have LED lighting subject to subsection
9-26-090D of this title. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-080: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The construction of any building or other structure within the project,
including the design, architecture, exterior elevations, exterior finishes and
other architectural attributes will first be approved by the Irvine Business
Park Architectural Review Committee. The Architectural Review Committee will
have the right to establish standardized construction guidelines for the
project which are binding on the owners. No building or structure within the
project will be reconstructed, altered, added to or maintained in such a
fashion as to alter, in any material respect, the architectural appearance,
character, motif or functional purpose of such item, unless such alteration is
first approved in writing by the Architectural Review Committee. The
Architectural Review Committee is not responsible for determining compliance
with Structural and Building Codes, solar ordinances, Zoning Codes or other
governmental restrictions, all of which are the responsibility of the
applicable owner. The Architectural Review Committee shall consist of as many
persons, but not less than three (3), as the declarant, during the declarant
control period, or the owners, following the expiration of the declarant
control period, may from time to time appoint. At least one member shall be a
professional in the field of architecture. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-090: PROCEDURES:
Approval of this Commercial Special District text and accompanying exhibits
shall constitute conceptual site plan approval for the commercial components in
accordance with City ordinances. Except provided otherwise herein, all other
permits shall be processed in accordance with the Draper City requirements,
ordinances and procedures. (Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
9-18N-100: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   PROPERTY AND SITE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3878.jpg] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3898.jpg]
 
Note: Drive aisle width in the parking lot is a minimum of 24 feet in width and
all emergency access lanes are a minimum of 26 feet in width.
   IRVINE BUSINESS PARK
   400 WEST 13800 SOUTH DRAPER, UTAH
   Print Date: May 1, 2018
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3908.jpg]
 
Total area                        = 21.72 acres
20% open space required           = 4.34 acres
Open space provided               = 4.02 acres
Parking lot area                  = 17.50 acres
7% parking lot landscape required = 1.23 acres
Parking lot landscape provided    = 1.63 acres
Surface parking stalls            = 2,086 stalls
Handicap surface parking stalls   = 44 stalls
Phase 1 parking stalls            = 1,310 stalls
Phase 2 parking stalls            = 597 stalls
Phase 3 parking stalls            = 223 stalls
Total surface parking stalls      = 2,130 stalls
 
Note: There are no codified documents wherein RMP defines the requirements or
restrictions, other than the restrictions noted in other areas of this article,
such as a 10'0" high pole limitation. They are determined on a per project
basis with RMP.
   EXHIBIT B
   EXAMPLE OFFICE BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3910.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3912.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT C
   EXAMPLE RETAIL BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3918.jpg] 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3920.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3922.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3924.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT D
   LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3926.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3880.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3882.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3884.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3886.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3888.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3890.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT E
   SITE LIGHTING
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3892.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3894.jpg]
 
    EXHIBIT F
   SIGNAGE
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3896.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3900.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3902.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3904.jpg]
 
    EXHIBIT G
   EXAMPLE PARKING GARAGE STRUCTURES
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3906.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3914.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3916.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1343, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 19
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
SECTION:
9-19-010: Purpose
9-19-020: Definitions
9-19-030: Applicability
9-19-040: Responsibility For Geologic Hazard Studies
9-19-050: Minimum Qualifications Of The Geologist
9-19-060: Minimum Qualifications Of The Engineer
9-19-070: Preliminary Activities
9-19-080: Geologic Hazards Study Area Maps
9-19-090: Geologic Hazard Studies And Reports Required
9-19-100: Geologic Hazard Reports
9-19-110: Review Of Geologic Hazard Reports
9-19-120: Disclosure When A Geologic Hazard Report Is Required
9-19-130: Warning And Disclaimer
9-19-140: Change Of Use
9-19-150: Conflicting Regulations
9-19-160: Table 1
9-19-161: Appendices
9-19-161-1: Appendix A, Geologic Hazards Study Area Maps
9-19-161-2: Appendix B, Minimum Standards For Surface Fault Rupture Hazard
Studies
9-19-161-3: Appendix C, Minimum Standards For Slope Stability Analysis
9-19-161-4: Appendix D, Minimum Standards For Liquefaction Investigations And
Evaluations
9-19-161-5: Appendix E, Minimum Standards For Debris Flow Analyses
9-19-161-6: Appendix F, Minimum Standards For Rockfall Analyses
9-19-010: PURPOSE:
A.   The purpose of this geologic hazards chapter is to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of Draper City, protect Draper City's
infrastructure and financial health, and minimize adverse effects of geologic
hazards to public health, safety, and property by encouraging wise land use.
B.   This chapter and its appendices address surface fault rupture, slope
stability, liquefaction, debris flow, and rockfall hazards, and present minimum
standards and methods for evaluating geologic hazards.
C.   Results of geologic hazard studies shall comply with this chapter and its
appendices. The standards set forth in the appendices are minimum requirements.
More complex projects may require more detailed and in depth evaluations than
outlined herein. In addition, the appendices shall not supersede other more
stringent requirements that may be required by other regulatory agents.
D.   Section
9-19-161-1, appendix A of this chapter presents geologic hazards study area
maps reflecting geological concerns pertaining to development within Draper
City. The maps incorporate data obtained from previous geologic hazard studies.
Site specific geologic hazard assessments performed by qualified engineering
geologists shall be required prior to developing projects located within a
geologic hazards study area. In the event known or readily apparent geologic
hazards exist in an area subject to a development application, which area is
not depicted on the geologic hazards study area maps, the developer shall
nevertheless submit the applicable study and the process outlined in this
chapter shall be followed. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ACCEPTABLE AND REASONABLE RISK: No loss or significant injury to occupants, no
release of hazardous or toxic substances, and minimal structural damage.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Any structure not designed for human occupancy, which may
include tool or storage sheds, gazebos, and swimming pools.
ACTIVE FAULT: A fault displaying evidence of displacement along one or more of
its traces during Holocene time, which is approximately ten thousand (10,000)
years ago to the present.
AVALANCHE: A large mass of snow, ice, soil or rock, or a mixture of these
materials, falling, sliding, or flowing rapidly under the force of gravity.
BUILDABLE AREA: Based on an accepted engineering geology report, the portion of
a site not impacted by geologic hazards, or the portion of a site where it is
concluded the identified geologic hazards can be mitigated to a level where
risk to human life, property and city infrastructure are reduced and where
structures may be safely sited.
CITY: The public works director, city engineer, community development director,
planning manager, building official, or other Draper City employee.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Draper City.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Essential, hazardous, special occupancy facilities, and
occupancy categories III and IV as defined in the currently adopted
international building code, and lifelines, such as major utility,
transportation, and communication facilities and their connections to critical
facilities.
DEBRIS FLOW: A slurry of rock, soil, organic material, and water transported in
an extremely fast and destructive flow that flows down channels and onto and
across alluvial fans; including a continuum of sedimentation events and
processes, including debris flows, debris floods, mudflows, clear water floods,
and alluvial fan flooding.
DEVELOPMENT: All critical facilities, subdivisions, single- and multi-family
dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings; also additions to or
intensification of existing buildings, storage facilities, pipelines and
utility conveyances, and other land uses.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST: A Utah licensed geologist, who, through education,
training, and experience, is competent in applying geologic data, geologic
techniques, and geologic principles, which includes conducting field
investigations, so that geologic conditions and geologic factors affecting
engineered works, groundwater resources, and land use planning are recognized,
adequately interpreted, and clearly presented for use in engineering practice,
land use planning, and for the protection of the public, and who utilizes
specialized geologic training and experience to provide quantitative geologic
information and recommendations and also works with and for land use planners,
environmental specialists, architects, public policymakers, and property owners
to provide geologic information on which decisions can be made.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGY: Geologic work that is relevant to engineering and
environmental concerns, and the public health, safety, and welfare.
"Engineering geology" is the application of geological data, principles, and
interpretation so that geological factors affecting planning, design,
construction, and maintenance of engineered works, land use planning, and
groundwater resources are adequately recognized and properly interpreted for
use in engineering, land use planning, and related practice.
ESSENTIAL FACILITY: Buildings and other structures intended to remain
operational in the event of an adverse geologic event, including all structures
defined in section
9-19-160, "Table 1", of this chapter.
FAULT: A fracture in the earth's crust forming a boundary between rock or soil
masses that have moved relative to each other.
FAULT SCARP: A steep slope or cliff formed by movement along a fault.
FAULT SETBACK: An area on either side of a fault within which structures for
human occupancy or critical facilities or their structural supports are not
permitted.
FAULT TRACE: The intersection of a fault plane with the ground surface, often
present as a fault scarp, or detected as a lineament on aerial photographs.
FAULT ZONE: A corridor of variable width along one or more fault traces, within
which deformation has occurred.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: A surface fault rupture, liquefaction, slope stability,
landslide, debris flow, and rockfall that may present a risk to life or
property.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDY AREA: A potentially hazardous area as shown on the
geologic hazard study area maps within which hazard investigations are required
prior to development.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A professional, Utah licensed engineer who, through
education, training and experience, is competent in the field of geotechnical
engineering.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING: The investigation and engineering evaluation of earth
materials, including soil, rock, and manmade materials and their interaction
with earth retention systems, foundations, and other civil engineering works.
The practice involves the fields of soil mechanics, rock mechanics, and earth
sciences and requires knowledge of engineering laws, formulas, construction
techniques, and performance evaluation of engineering.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council, or a designee of the city council.
LANDSLIDE: The downslope movement of a mass of soil, surficial deposits or
bedrock, including a continuum of processes between landslides, earth flows,
debris flows and debris avalanches, and rockfalls.
LIQUEFACTION: A process by which certain water saturated soils lose bearing
strength because of earthquake related ground shaking and subsequent increase
of groundwater pore pressure.
NONBUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a site which a geologic hazards report has
concluded may be impacted by geologic hazards and where the siting of critical
facilities is not permitted.
ROCKFALL: A rock or mass of rock, newly detached from a cliff or other steep
slope which moves downslope by falling, rolling, toppling, or bouncing;
includes rockslides, rockfall avalanches, and talus.
SETBACK: An area within which support of critical facilities is not permitted.
SLOPE STABILITY: The resistance of a natural or artificial slope or other
inclined surface to failure by landsliding, usually assessed under both static
and dynamic (earthquake induced) conditions.
SNOW AVALANCHE: A mass of predominantly snow and ice, but also including a
mixture of soil or rock and organic debris, falling, sliding, and/or flowing
rapidly under the force of gravity.
STRUCTURE DESIGNED FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: Any residential dwelling or any other
structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy,
which is expected to have an occupancy rate of at least two thousand (2,000)
person hours per year, but does not include an accessory building.
TALUS: Rock fragments lying at the base of a cliff or a very steep rocky slope.
(Ord. 935, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
9-19-030: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all lands in Draper
City. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-040: RESPONSIBILITY FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES:
Geologic hazard studies often involve both engineering geology and geotechnical
engineering. Engineering geologic studies shall be performed under the direct
supervision of a qualified engineering geologist. Geotechnical engineering
studies shall be performed under the direct supervision of a qualified
geotechnical engineer. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-050: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS OF THE GEOLOGIST:
Engineering geology and the evaluation of geologic hazards is a specialized
discipline within the practice of geology requiring technical expertise and
knowledge of techniques not commonly used in other geologic investigations.
Therefore, geologic hazard investigations involving engineering geologic
studies shall only be accepted by Draper City when conducted and signed by a
qualified engineering geologist. The minimum qualifications of the engineering
geologist who performs geologic hazard investigations are:
A.   An undergraduate or graduate degree in geology, engineering geology, or
geological engineering, or closely related field, from an accredited college or
university;
B.   Five (5) full years of experience in a responsible position in the field
of engineering geology in Utah, or in a state with similar geologic hazards and
regulatory environment. This experience must demonstrate the engineering
geologist's knowledge and application of appropriate techniques in performing
geologic hazard studies; and
C.   A Utah state professional geologist's license. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-060: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ENGINEER:
Evaluation and mitigation of geologic hazards often require contributions from
a qualified geotechnical engineer, particularly in the design of mitigation
measures. Geotechnical engineering is a specialized discipline within the
practice of civil engineering requiring technical expertise and knowledge of
techniques not commonly used in civil engineering investigations. Therefore,
geologic hazard investigations requiring contributions from a qualified
geotechnical engineer will only be accepted by Draper City when also signed and
sealed by a qualified geotechnical engineer. Minimum qualifications of the
geotechnical engineer who participates in geologic hazard investigations are:
A.   A graduate degree in civil engineering, with an emphasis in geotechnical
engineering; or a B.S. degree in civil engineering with twelve (12) semester
hours of post-B.S. credit in geotechnical engineering, or course content
related to evaluation of geologic hazards, from an accredited college or
university;
B.   Five (5) full years of experience in a responsible position in the field
of geotechnical engineering in Utah, or in a state with similar geologic
hazards and regulatory environment, and experience demonstrating the engineer's
knowledge and application of appropriate techniques in participating in
geologic hazard studies; and
C.   A Utah state professional engineer's license. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-070: PRELIMINARY ACTIVITIES:
A.   Development Improvements: This section shall apply to any geologic hazard
investigation for the purpose of determining the feasibility of development or
for the purpose of exploring, evaluating or establishing locations for
permanent improvements.
B.   Scoping Meeting: The developer or consultant shall schedule a scoping
meeting with the city to evaluate the engineering geologist/geotechnical
engineer's investigative approach. At this meeting, the consultant shall
present a work plan that includes locations of anticipated geologic hazards and
locations of proposed exploratory excavations, such as trenches, borings, and
CPT soundings, which meet the minimum standard of practice. The investigation
approach should allow for flexibility due to unexpected site conditions. Field
findings may require modifications to the work plan. Upon completion of a
successful scoping meeting, a land disturbance permit application may be
submitted to Draper City.
C.   Land Disturbance Permit: As required by title 18 of this code and except
as otherwise noted therein, no person shall commence or perform any land
disturbance, grading, relocation of earth, or any other land disturbance
activity, without first obtaining a land disturbance permit. Application for a
land disturbance permit shall be filed with the city engineer on forms
furnished by the city for such purposes only after a scoping meeting has taken
place.
D.   Responsible Contact: The applicant shall specify a primary contact
responsible for coordination with the city during the land disturbance
activity. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-080: GEOLOGIC HAZARDS STUDY AREA MAPS:
A.   Geologic hazards study area maps are prepared using the best available
scientific information but are necessarily generalized and designed only to
indicate areas where hazards may exist and where geologic hazards studies are
required. Because the geologic hazards study area maps are prepared at a
nonsite specific scale, hazards may exist that are not shown on the geologic
hazards study area maps. The fact that a site is not in a geologic hazards
study area for a particular hazard does not exempt the applicant from
considering the hazard if evidence is found that it may exist. If it is
subsequently determined that the site has geologic hazards that are not shown
on the geologic hazards study area maps, the review process will be pursuant to
this chapter.
B.   Geologic hazards study area boundaries shown on the maps will not be
systematically adjusted as each individual site specific study indicates
whether or not an actual hazard exists at a site because geologic hazards study
area maps are meant only to indicate where scientific evidence indicates a
hazard may exist. However, geologic hazards study area maps may be updated and
amended by the city if found to be inaccurate or in error, or as new methods or
data are developed to better define areas of potential hazards.
C.   Where geologic hazards study area maps are thought by an applicant to be
inaccurate or in error and require revision, the applicant shall submit to the
city technical evidence by a qualified professional supporting the claim and
showing the proposed revision. The city will review the information and render
a decision. The applicant may appeal that decision to the city council. (Ord.
935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-090: GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES AND REPORTS REQUIRED:
Any applicant requesting development approval on a parcel of land within a
geologic hazard study area or where there are known or readily apparent
geologic hazards and the area is not depicted on the geologic hazards study
area maps, shall submit to the city two (2) paper copies and one electronic
copy of a site specific geologic hazard study report. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010; amd.
Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020)
9-19-100: GEOLOGIC HAZARD REPORTS:
A.   Each geologic hazards report shall be site specific and shall identify all
known or suspected potential geologic hazards, originating on site or off site,
whether previously identified or previously unrecognized, that may affect the
subject property. All geologic hazards reports shall include the original or
wet signature and professional seal, both in blue ink, of the qualified
professional. Geologic hazards reports coprepared by professional geologists
and engineers must include both professionals' original signature and seal in
blue ink.
B.   Surface fault rupture reports shall contain all requirements as described
in section
9-19-161-2, "Appendix B, Minimum Standards For Surface Fault Rupture Hazard
Studies", of this chapter. Surface fault rupture studies shall be prepared by a
qualified engineering geologist.
C.   Slope stability and landslide reports shall contain all requirements as
described in section
9-19-161-3, "Appendix C, Minimum Standards For Slope Stability Analysis", of
this chapter. Slope stability and landslide studies shall be prepared by a
qualified engineering geologist and a qualified geotechnical engineer.
D.   Liquefaction reports shall contain all requirements as described in
section
9-19-161-4, "Appendix D, Minimum Standards For Liquefaction Investigations And
Evaluations", of this chapter. Liquefaction analyses shall be prepared by a
qualified geotechnical engineer. Liquefaction investigations are not required
for residential construction classified in the international residential code
as R-3.
E.   Debris flow reports shall contain all requirements as described in section
9-19-161-5, "Appendix E, Minimum Standards For Debris Flow Analyses", of this
chapter. Debris flow hazard investigations shall be prepared by a qualified
engineering geologist. Mitigation measures will generally require contributions
from geotechnical engineers, hydrologists, or civil engineers.
F.   Rockfall reports shall contain all requirements as described in section
9-19-161-6, "Appendix F, Minimum Standards For Rockfall Analyses", of this
chapter. Rockfall studies shall be prepared by a qualified engineering
geologist. Mitigation measures will generally require contributions from
geotechnical and/or civil engineers.
G.   All geologic hazards reports shall include, at a minimum:
1.   A one to twenty four thousand (1:24,000) scale geologic map, with
references, showing the general surface geology (landslides, alluvial fans,
etc.), bedrock geology where exposed, bedding attitudes, faults, and other
geologic structural features;
2.   A detailed site map of the subject area, at a scale equal to or more
detailed than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), showing the
locations of subsurface investigations and site specific geologic mapping
performed as part of the geologic investigation, including boundaries and
features related to any geologic hazards, topography, and drainage. The site
map must show the location and boundaries of the property, geologic hazards,
delineation of any recommended setback distances from hazards, and recommended
locations for structures. Buildable and nonbuildable areas shall be clearly
identified;
3.   Trench logs, when applicable, prepared in the field and presented in the
geologic hazard report at a scale equal to or more detailed than one inch
equals five feet (1" = 5');
4.   Boring logs when applicable, prepared with standard geologic nomenclature;
5.   Listing of aerial photographs used and other supporting information, as
applicable;
6.   Conclusions, clearly supported by adequate data included in the report,
that summarize the characteristics of the geologic hazards, and that address
the potential effects of the geologic conditions and geologic hazards on the
proposed development and occupants thereof, particularly in terms of risk and
potential damage;
7.   Specific recommendations for additional or more detailed studies, as may
be required to understand or quantify a geologic hazard;
8.   An evaluation of whether or not mitigation measures are required,
including an evaluation of multiple mitigation options;
9.   Specific recommendations for avoidance or mitigation of the effects of the
hazards, consistent with the purposes set forth in section
9-19-010 of this chapter, including design or performance criteria for
engineered mitigation measures and all supporting calculations, analyses,
modeling or other methods, and assumptions. Final design plans and
specifications for engineered mitigation must be signed and stamped by a
qualified geotechnical, civil and/or structural engineer, as appropriate;
10.   Data upon which recommendations and conclusions are based, shall be
clearly stated in the report; and
11.   A statement shall be provided regarding the suitability of the proposed
development from a geologic hazard perspective.
H.   When a submitted report does not contain adequate data to support its
findings, additional or more detailed studies shall be required to explain or
quantify a particular geologic hazard or to describe how mitigation measures
recommended in the report are appropriate and adequate. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-110: REVIEW OF GEOLOGIC HAZARD REPORTS:
A.   Scope: The city shall review any proposed land use which requires
preparation of a geologic hazards report under this chapter to determine the
possible risks to the safety of persons, property and city infrastructure from
geologic hazards.
B.   Submittal: Prior to consideration of any request for preliminary plat
approval or site plan approval, the geologic hazards report, if required, shall
be submitted to the city for review.
C.   Time Frame For Review: The city will complete each review in a reasonable
time frame, not to exceed forty five (45) days.
D.   Costs Borne By Applicant: All direct costs associated with the review of
geologic hazard studies shall be paid by the applicant.
E.   Records: The city shall retain a copy of each geologic report in the
planning division project file.
F.   Standards: The city shall determine whether the report complies with all
of the following standards:
1.   A suitable geologic hazard report has been prepared by qualified
professionals.
2.   The proposed land use does not present an unreasonable risk to the health,
safety, and welfare of persons or property, including buildings, storm drains,
public streets, culinary water facilities, utilities or critical facilities,
whether off site or on site, or to the aesthetics and natural functions of the
landscape, such as slopes, streams or other waterways, drainage, or wildlife
habitat, whether off site or on site, because of the presence of geologic
hazards or because of modifications to the site due to the proposed land use.
3.   The proposed land use demonstrates that, consistent with the state of the
practice, the identified geologic hazards can be mitigated to a level where the
risk to human life and damage to property are reduced to an acceptable and
reasonable level in a manner which will not violate applicable federal, state,
or local statutes, ordinances or regulations. Mitigation measures should
consider, in their design, the intended aesthetic functions of other governing
ordinances, such as the sensitive lands overlay zone. The applicant must
include with the geologic hazards report a mitigation plan that defines how the
identified hazards or limitations will be addressed without impacting or
adversely affecting off site areas. Mitigation measures must be reasonable and
practical to implement especially if such measures require ongoing maintenance
by property owners.
G.   Additional Requirements: The city may set other requirements as are
necessary to overcome any geologic hazards and to ensure that the purposes of
this chapter are met. These requirements may include, but are not limited to:
1.   Additional or more detailed studies to understand or quantify the hazard
or determine whether mitigation measures recommended in the report are
adequate;
2.   Specific mitigation requirements; establishing buildable and nonbuildable
areas; limitations on slope grading and controls on grading, or revegetation;
3.   Grading plans, when required, shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer. As built grading plans, when required, shall be
signed and sealed by the project geotechnical engineer as well as the
professional engineer that prepared the grading plans. Grading plans, when
required, shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a.   Maps of existing and proposed contours;
b.   Present and proposed slopes for each graded area;
c.   Existing and proposed drainage patterns;
d.   Location and depth of all proposed cuts and fills;
e.   Description of methods to be employed to achieve stabilization and
compaction;
f.   Location and capacities of proposed drainage, structures, and erosion
control measures based on maximum runoff for a 100-year storm;
g.   Location of existing buildings or structures on or within one hundred feet
(100') of the site, or which may be affected by proposed grading and
construction; and
h.   Plan for monitoring and documentation of testing, field inspections during
grading, and reporting to the city.
4.   Installation of monitoring equipment and seasonal monitoring of surface
and subsurface geologic conditions, including groundwater levels; and
5.   Other requirements such as time schedules for completion of the mitigation
and phasing of development.
H.   Condition Of Approval: Draper City may also set requirements necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Draper City, protect
Draper City's infrastructure and financial health, and minimize potential
adverse effects of geologic hazards to public health, safety, and property as a
condition of approval of any development which requires a geologic hazards
report.
I.   On Site Professional; Final Inspection: Draper City may require a
qualified professional be on site, at the cost of the developer, during certain
phases of construction, particularly during grading phases and the construction
of retaining walls. For any real property with respect to which development has
proceeded on the basis of a geologic or geotechnical report which has been
accepted by the city, no final inspection shall be completed or certificate of
occupancy issued or performance bond released until the geotechnical engineer
or engineering geologist who signed and approved the report certifies, in
writing, that the completed improvements and structures conform to the
descriptions and requirements contained in said report.
J.   Appeal: An applicant may appeal any decision made under the provisions of
this chapter only after the city has issued a written review of a report, and
shall set forth the specific grounds or issues upon which the appeal is based.
The appeal shall be submitted in writing to the director of community
development within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the written review or
other decision. The city shall assemble a professional panel of three (3)
qualified experts to serve as the appeal authority for any technical dispute.
The panel shall consist of an expert designated by the city, an expert
designated by the applicant, and an expert chosen by the city's and the
applicant's designated experts. If the city's and the applicant's designated
experts cannot reach a consensus of the third expert within thirty (30) days,
the city shall select the third expert. Decisions of the panel will be binding
and will be based on the majority decision of the panel. The costs of the
appeal process shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-120: DISCLOSURE WHEN A GEOLOGIC HAZARD REPORT IS REQUIRED:
A.   Form Of Disclosure: Whenever a geologic hazards report is required under
this chapter, the owner of the parcel shall record a notice running with the
land in a form satisfactory to Draper City prior to the approval of any
development or subdivision of such parcel. Disclosure shall include signing a
disclosure and acknowledgment form provided by the city, which includes:
1.   Notice that the parcel is located within a geologic hazards study area as
shown on the geologic hazards study area map or as otherwise defined in this
chapter; and
2.   Notice that a geologic hazards report was prepared and is available for
public inspection in the city's files.
B.   Additional Notification On Plat: Where geologic hazards and related
setbacks are delineated in a subdivision, the owner shall also place additional
notification on the plat stating the above information, prior to final approval
of the plat. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-130: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER:
The geologic hazards study area maps represent only those potentially hazardous
areas known to Draper City and should not be construed to include all possible
potential hazard areas. This chapter and the geologic hazards study area maps
may be amended as new information becomes available pursuant to procedures set
forth in section
9-5-060 of this title. The provisions of this chapter do not in any way assure
or imply that areas outside the geologic hazards study area maps boundaries are
free from the possible adverse effects of geologic hazards. This chapter shall
not create any liability on the part of Draper City, any Draper City officer,
Draper City reviewer, or Draper City employee thereof, for any damages from
geologic hazards that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative requirement or decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 935, 6-1-
2010)
9-19-140: CHANGE OF USE:
No change in use which results in the conversion of a building or structure
from one not used for human occupancy to one that is so used shall be permitted
unless the building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-150: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In cases of conflict between the provisions of existing zoning classifications,
building code, subdivision ordinance, or any other ordinance of Draper City and
the geologic hazards ordinance codified in this chapter, the most restrictive
provision shall apply. (Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-160: TABLE 1:
In the event of failure, the following buildings and structures represent a
substantial hazard to human life:
   1.   Those where more than 300 people congregate in one area;
   2.   Elementary schools, secondary schools, or daycare facilities with an
occupancy greater than 250;
   3.   Those colleges or adult education facilities with an occupancy greater
than 500;
   4.   Healthcare facilities with an occupancy greater than 50 or more
resident patients but not having surgery or emergency treatment facilities;
   5.   Jails and detention facilities;
   6.   Any structure with an occupancy greater than 1,000;
   7.   Power generating stations, water treatment or storage for potable
water, wastewater treatment facilities and other public utility facilities; and
   8.   Those containing toxic or explosive substances that would be dangerous
to the public if released.
The following buildings and structures are designated as essential facilities,
including, but not limited to:
   1.   Hospitals and other care facilities having surgery or emergency
treatment facilities;
   2.   Fire, rescue and police stations and emergency vehicle garages and
fueling facilities;
   3.   Designated emergency shelters;
   4.   Designated emergency preparedness, communications, and operation
centers and other facilities required for emergency response;
   5.   Power generating stations and other public utility facilities required
as emergency backup facilities for facilities and structures included in this
table;
   6.   Structures containing highly toxic materials as defined by the most
recently adopted version of the IBC;
   7.   Aviation control towers, air traffic centers and emergency aircraft
hangars;
   8.   Buildings and other structures having critical national defense
functions; and
   9.   Water treatment and storage facilities required to maintain water
pressure for fire suppression.
(Ord. 796, 12-11-2007)
9-19-161: APPENDICES:
9-19-161-1: APPENDIX A, GEOLOGIC HAZARDS STUDY AREA MAPS:
   PLATE A-1: SURFACE FAULT RUPTURE HAZARD SPECIAL STUDY AREA MAP
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3928.jpg]
 
   PLATE A-2: LIQUEFACTION SPECIAL STUDY AREA MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3930.jpg] 
 
   PLATE A-3: SLOPE STABILITY SPECIAL STUDY AREA MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3932.jpg] 
 
   PLATE A-4: DEBRIS FLOW SPECIAL STUDY AREA MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3934.jpg] 
 
   PLATE A-5: ROCKFALL SPECIAL STUDY AREA MAP
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3936.jpg]
 
(Ord. 796, 12-11-2007)
9-19-161-2: APPENDIX B, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SURFACE FAULT RUPTURE HAZARD
STUDIES:
1.0   INTRODUCTION
The Wasatch Fault Zone (WFZ) is a major tectonic feature in the western United
States, extending for about 230 miles from near Fayette, Utah at the south to
near Malad, Idaho at the north. Surface faulting has occurred along the WFZ in
northern Utah throughout late Pleistocene and Holocene time (Lund, 1990; Black
and others, 2003). "Surface faulting" is fault-related offset or displacement
of the ground surface that may occur in an earthquake.
The WFZ consists of a series of normal-slip fault segments with relative
movement down to the west and up to the east. Ten major fault segments are
recognized along the WFZ (Machette and others, 1992), which are believed to be
independent in regard to their potential for surface faulting. These segments
have distinct geomorphic expression and are clearly visible on aerial
photographs.
In Salt Lake Valley, the WFZ is represented by the Salt Lake City segment which
extends for 23± miles along the eastern edge of the valley (Lund, 1990). A
portion of the Salt Lake City segment of the WFZ is present within the east
part of the City (Personius and Scott, 1992; Machette, 1992).
Repeated Holocene movement has been well documented along the Salt Lake City
segment. Studies along Wasatch Boulevard near the mouth of Little Cottonwood
Canyon and at South Fork Dry Creek indicate at least four major earthquake
events in the last 6,000 years (Black and others, 2003).
If a fault were to break the ground surface beneath a building, significant
damage could occur, perhaps resulting in injuries or loss of life. To reduce
risk from surface-fault-rupture hazards and to protect public health and
safety, the City has defined Surface-Fault-Rupture Special Study Areas,
Quaternary faults located within the Surface-Fault-Rupture Special Study Areas
should be considered active until proven otherwise.
To ensure that buildings are not sited across Holocene-age (active) faults, the
Draper City Geologic Hazards Ordinance (Article 4, chapter 9-19 of the Draper
City Municipal Code) requires a site-specific geologic investigation of the
portion of the property situated within the Surface-Fault-Rupture Special Study
Area. The primary purposes of the geologic investigation are to assess the
surface fault rupture potential of the property and to assess the suitability
of the property for the proposed development from the standpoint of surface
fault rupture. If a fault is discovered and determined (or presumed) to be
Holocene- age (i.e., "active"), appropriate building setbacks from the fault
are required such that structures are not located astride the fault trace.
Building setbacks must be established prior to development of sites located
within the Surface-Fault-Rupture Special Study Area.
A site-specific surface-fault-rupture-hazard study includes a field
investigation (usually involving the excavation and geologic documentation of a
trench) and report. This appendix describes the minimum standards required by
the City for surface- fault-rupture-hazard studies.
The purpose of establishing minimum standards for surface fault rupture hazard
studies is to:
(a)   Protect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the public by
minimizing the potentially adverse effects of surface fault rupture and related
hazards;
(b)   Assist property owners and land developers within the Surface-Fault-
Rupture Special Study Area in conducting reasonable and adequate studies;
(c)   Provide consulting engineering geologists with a common basis for
preparing proposals, conducting investigations, and recommending setbacks; and,
(d)   Provide an objective framework for review of fault study report.
The procedures outlined herein are intended to provide the developer and
consulting engineering geologist with an outline of appropriate exploration
methods, standardized report information, and expectations of the City.
These standards constitute the minimum level of effort required in conducting
surface-fault-rupture-hazard special studies in the City. Considering the
complexity of evaluating surface and near- surface faults, additional effort
beyond the minimum standards may be required at some sites to adequately
address the fault hazard. The information presented herein does not relieve the
engineering geologist from his/her duty to perform additional geologic or
engineering services he/she believes are necessary to assess the fault rupture
potential at a site.
1.1   References and Sources
The minimum standards presented herein were developed from the following
sources:
(a)   Guidelines for Evaluating Surface Fault Rupture Hazards in Utah (AEG,
1987).
(b)   Guidelines to geologic and seismic reports, (CDMG, 1986a).
(c)   Guidelines for preparing engineering geologic reports (CDMG, 1986b).
(d)   Guidelines for Evaluating Potential Surface Fault Rupture/Land Subsidence
Hazards in Nevada (Nevada Earthquake Safety Council, 1998).
(e)   Fault Setback Requirements to Reduce Fault Rupture Hazards in Salt Lake
County (Batatian and Nelson, 1999).
(f)   Salt Lake County Geologic Hazards Ordinance (2002).
(g)   Draper City geologic hazard ordinance (2003).
(h)   Guidelines for evaluating surface-fault-rupture hazards in Utah:
Christenson and others (2003).
1.2   Properties Requiring a Fault Investigation
A fault study is required, prior to approval of any land use, for properties
situated within Surface Fault Rupture Study Areas, as shown on the Surface
Fault Rupture Study Area map (Plate A-1). This map identifies known active
faults in the City, and defines special study areas where site-specific
geologic investigations are required. Development of any parcel within a
Surface Fault Rupture Study Areas requires submittal and review of a site-
specific fault study prior to receiving a land use or building permit from the
City. It is the responsibility of the applicant to retain a qualified
engineering geologist to perform the fault study (see Draper City Geologic
Hazards Ordinance 9-19).
In addition, a fault investigation may be required if on site or nearby fault-
related features not shown on the Surface Fault Rupture Study Area map are
identified during the course of other geologic or geotechnical studies
performed on or near the site or during construction.
2.0   MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR FAULT STUDIES
Following are the minimum standards for a comprehensive fault investigation.
Fault investigations may be reported in conjunction with other geological and
geotechnical investigations, or may be submitted separately. See Draper City
Geologic Hazards Ordinance (9-19) for supplemental requirements.
2.1   Scoping Meeting
The developer's consultant must schedule a scoping meeting with the City to
evaluate the fault investigation approach. At this meeting, the consultant
should present a site plan that includes: proposed building locations (if
known); expected fault location(s) and orientation; and the proposed trench
locations, orientation, length, and depth (see section 2.3, Fault Investigation
Method). The investigative approach should allow for flexibility due to
unexpected site conditions; field findings may require modifications to the
work plan.
2.2   Fault Investigation Method
Inherent in fault study methods is the assumption that future faulting will
recur along pre-existing faults and in a manner consistent with past
displacement. The focus of fault investigations is therefore to accurately
locate existing faults. If faults are documented, the investigation shall also
1) evaluate the age of movement along the fault trace(s), and 2) estimate
amounts of past displacement, which is required in order to derive fault
setbacks.
2.2.1   Previous Studies and Aerial Photograph Review
A fault investigation shall include review of available literature pertinent to
the site and vicinity, including previous published and unpublished geologic/
soils reports, and interpretation of available stereo-paired aerial
photographs. The photographs reviewed should include more than one set and
should include pre-urbanization aerial photographs, if available. Efforts must
be made to accurately plot the locations of mapped or inferred fault traces on
the property as shown by previous studies in the area.
2.2.2   Exploration Methods
Subsurface exploration consisting of trenching is required. The engineering
geologist shall clean and document ("log") trench exposures as described in
section 2.3.5. Existing faults may also be identified and mapped in the field
by direct observation of young, fault-related geomorphic features, and by
examination of aerial photographs. When trenching is not feasible (i.e., the
presence of shallow ground water, excessive thickness of fill, etc.),
supplemental methods such as closely spaced Cone Penetration Test (CPT)
soundings may be employed. Such supplemental methods must be discussed with the
City prior to implementation and should be clearly described in the report.
In lieu of conventional trenching or the CPT method, an alternative subsurface
exploration program may be acceptable, depending upon site conditions. Such a
program may consist of a sufficient number of closely spaced downhole-logged
bucket-auger borings, geophysical exploration techniques, or a combination of
techniques.
When an alternative exploration program is proposed, a written description of
the proposed exploration program along with an exploration plan should be
submitted to the City for review, prior to the exploration. The plan must
include, at a minimum, a map of suitable scale showing the site limits, surface
geologic conditions within several thousand feet of the site boundary, the
location and type of the proposed alternative subsurface exploration, and the
anticipated earth materials present at depth on the site.
The actual subsurface exploration program to be used on any specific parcel
will be determined on an individual basis, considering the current state of
technical knowledge about the fault zone and information gained from previous
exploration on adjacent or nearby parcels. At all times, consideration must be
given to safety, and trenching should comply with all applicable safety
regulations.
2.2.3   Trench Siting
Exploratory trenches must be oriented approximately perpendicular to the
anticipated trend of known fault traces. The trenches shall provide the minimum
footage of trenching necessary to explore the portion of the property situated
in the surface- fault-rupture special study area, such that the potential for
surface fault rupture may be adequately assessed. When trenching to determine
if faults might affect a proposed building site, the trench should extend
beyond the building footprint at least the minimum setback distance for the
building type (see
Table A-1).
Test pits or potholes alone are neither adequate nor acceptable. In some
instances more than one trench may be required to cover the entire building
area, particularly if the proposed development involves more than one building.
Where feasible, trenches shall be located outside the proposed building
footprint, as the trench is generally backfilled without compaction, which
could lead to differential settlement beneath the footings. Supplemental
trenching may be required in order to: 1) further refine fault locations (or
the absence thereof); 2) accurately define building restriction areas, and/or;
3) provide additional exposures for evaluating the age of movement along fault
traces.
2.2.4   Location Determination
All trenches and fault locations must be surveyed by a registered professional
land surveyor. Fault locations should be surveyed with an accuracy of about 0.1
foot or better, so that structural setbacks can be developed.
2.2.5   Depth of Excavation
The depth of the trenches will ultimately depend on the trench location,
occurrence of ground water, stability of subsurface deposits, and the geologic
age of the subsurface geologic units. As a minimum, however, trenches shall
extend substantially below the A and B soil horizons and well into distinctly
bedded Pleistocene-age materials, if possible. Where possible, the trenches
should extend below Holocene deposits and should expose contacts between
Holocene materials and the underlying older materials.
Appropriate safety measures pertaining to trench safety for ingress, egress,
and working in or in the vicinity of the trench must be implemented and
maintained. It is the responsibility of the person in the field directing
trench excavation to ensure that fault trenches are excavated in compliance
with current Occupational Safety and Health Administration excavation safety
regulations.
Trench backfilling methods and procedures should be documented in order to
establish whether additional corrective excavation, backfilling, and compaction
should be performed at the time of site grading.
In cases where Holocene (i.e., active) faults may be present, but pre-Holocene
deposits are below the practical limit of excavation, the trenches must extend
at least through sediments that are clearly older than several fault recurrence
intervals. The practical limitations of the trenching must be acknowledged in
the report and recommendations must reflect resulting uncertainties.
2.2.6   Documenting Trench Exposures
Trench walls shall be cleaned of debris and backhoe smear prior to
documentation. Trench logs shall be carefully drawn in the field at a minimum
scale of 1-inch equals 5-feet (1:60) following standard and accepted fault
trench investigation practices. Vertical and horizontal control must be used
and shown on trench logs. Trench logs must document all significant geologic
information from the trench and should graphically represent the geologic units
observed; see section 2.6.3(E). The strike, dip, and net vertical displacement
(or minimum displacement) of faults must be noted.
2.2.7   Age Dating
The engineering geologist shall interpret the ages of geologic units exposed in
the trench. When necessary, radiocarbon or other age determinations methods
shall be used. If evidence of faulting is documented, efforts shall be made to
date the time of latest movement (to determine whether recent (Holocene)
displacement has occurred) using appropriate geologic and/or soil stratigraphic
dating techniques. When necessary, obtain radiocarbon or other age
determinations. If soil stratigraphic dating techniques are used, a geologist
experienced in using the techniques and soil- development rates in the area
should perform them.
Many of the surficial deposits within Salt Lake Valley were deposited during
the last pluvial lake cycle, referred to as the Bonneville lake cycle. Although
late-stage Bonneville lake cycle sediments do not correspond to the
Pleistocene-Holocene boundary (i.e., Bonneville lake cycle deposits are older
than 10,000 years old), for purposes of evaluating fault activity, these
deposits provide a useful regional datum (particularly so when the entire
Holocene sequence of sediments is not present).
For practical purposes, and due to documented Holocene displacement along the
Salt Lake segment of the Wasatch fault, any fault which displaces late-stage
Bonneville Lake Cycle deposits should be considered active unless the
Bonneville deposits are overlain by clearly unfaulted early Holocene-age
deposits. Conversely, the presence of demonstrably unbroken, undeformed, and
stratigraphically continuous Bonneville sediments constitutes reasonable
geologic evidence for the absence of active faulting.
2.3   Field Review
A field review by the City is required during exploratory trenching. The
applicant must provide a minimum of 48-hours notice to schedule the field
review with the City. The trenches should be open, safe, cleaned, and a
preliminary log completed at the time of the review. The field review allows
the City to evaluate the subsurface data (i.e., age and type of sediments;
presence/absence of faulting, etc.) with the consultant. Discussions about
questionable features or an appropriate setback distance are encouraged, but
the City will not help log the trench, explain the stratigraphy, or give verbal
approval of the proposed development during the field review.
2.4   Recommendations for Fault Setbacks
To address wide discrepancies in fault setback recommendations, the City has
adopted the fault setback calculation methodology for normal faults of Batatian
and Nelson (1999) and Christenson and others (2003). The consultant should use
this method to establish the recommended fault setback for critical facilities
and structures designed for human occupancy. If another fault setback method is
used, the consultant must provide justification in the report for the method
used. Faults and fault setbacks must be clearly identified on site plans and
maps.
Minimum setbacks are based on the type and occupancy of the proposed structures
(see
Table A-1). A setback should be calculated using the formulas presented below,
and then compared to the minimum setback established in
Table A-1. The greater of the two shall be used as the setback. Minimum
setbacks apply to both the hanging wall and footwall blocks.
Top of slope and/or toe of slope setbacks required by the local Building Code
must also be considered; again, the greater setback must be used.
Downthrown Fault Block (Hanging Wall)
The fault setback for the downthrown block will be calculated using the
following formula: S = U (2D + F/tan) where:
 
S = Setback within which structures for human occupancy are not permitted;
U = Criticality Factor, based on the proposed occupancy of the structure (see
    Table A-1)
D = Expected fault displacement per event (assumed to be equal to the net
    vertical displacement measured for each past event)
F = Maximum depth of footing or subgrade portion of the building
  = Dip of the fault (degrees)
 
Upthrown Fault Block (Footwall)
The dip of the fault and depth of the subgrade portion of the structure are
irrelevant in calculating the setback on the upthrown fault block. Therefore,
the setback for the upthrown side of the fault will be calculated as:
S = U x 2D
The setback is measured from the portion of the building closest to the fault,
whether subgrade or above grade. Minimum setbacks apply as discussed above.
2.5   Small Displacement Faults
Small-displacement faults are not categorically exempt from setback
requirements. Some faults having less than 4 inches (100 mm) of displacement
("small displacement faults") may be exempt from setback requirements.
Specific structural risk-reduction options such as foundation reinforcement may
be acceptable for some small-displacement faults in lieu of setbacks.
Structural options must minimize structural damage.
Fault studies must still identify faults and fault displacements (both net
vertical displacements and horizontal extension across the fault or fault
zone), and consider the possibility that future displacement amounts may exceed
past amounts. If structural risk-reduction measures are proposed for small
displacement faults, the following criteria must be addressed:
(a)   Reasonable geologic data indicating that future surface displacement
along the particular fault will not exceed 4 inches.
(b)   Specific structural mitigation to minimize structural damage.
(c)   A structural engineer must provide appropriate designs and the City shall
review the designs.
2.6   Required Outline for Surface Fault Rupture Hazard Studies
The information described herein may be presented as a separate surface-fault-
rupture-potential report or it may be incorporated within other geology or
engineering reports that may be required for the property.
The report shall contain a conclusion regarding the potential risk of surface
fault rupture on the subject property and a statement addressing the
suitability of the proposed development from a surface-fault-rupture-hazard
perspective. If exploration determines that there is a potential for surface
rupture due to faulting, or if gradational contacts or other uncertainties
associated with the exploration methods preclude the determination of absence
of small fault offsets, the report should provide estimates of the amplitude of
fault offsets that might affect habitable structures.
Surface-fault-rupture-hazard reports submitted to the City are expected to
follow the outline and address the subjects presented below. However,
variations in site conditions may require that additional items be addressed,
or permit some of the subjects to be omitted (except as noted).
2.6.1.   Report
(a)   Purpose and scope of work: The report shall contain a clear and concise
statement of the purpose of the investigation and the scope of work performed
for the investigation.
(b)   Geologic and tectonic setting: The report shall contain a clear and
concise statement of the general geologic and tectonic setting of the site
vicinity. The section should include a discussion of active faults in the area,
paleoseismicity of the relevant fault system(s), and should reference relevant
published and unpublished geologic literature.
(c)   Site description and conditions: The report shall include information on
geologic units, graded and filled areas, vegetation, existing structures, and
other factors that may affect site development, choice of investigative
methods, and the interpretation of data.
(d)   Methods of investigation:
(1)   Review of published and unpublished maps, literature and records
concerning geologic units, faults, surface and ground water, and other factors.
(2)   Stereoscopic interpretation of aerial photographs to detect fault-related
topography, vegetation or soil contrasts, and other lineaments of possible
fault origin. Reference the photograph source, date, flightline numbers, and
scale. Salt Lake County has an excellent collection of stereoscopic aerial
photographs dating back to 1937 (including 1937, 1940, 1958, 1964, and 1985).
(3)   Observations of surface features, both on-site and off site, including
mapping of geologic and soil units; geomorphic features such as scarps,
springs, and seeps (aligned or not); faceted spurs, offset ridges or drainages;
and geologic structures. Locations and relative ages of other possible
earthquake-induced features such as sand blows, lateral spreads, liquefaction,
and ground settlement should be mapped and described. Slope failures, although
they may not be conclusively tied to earthquake causes, should also be noted.
(4)   Subsurface investigations: The report shall include a description of the
program of subsurface exploration, including trench logs, purpose of trench
locations, and a summary of trenching or other detailed, direct observation of
continuously exposed geologic units, soils, and geologic structures. All trench
logs shall be at a scale of at least 1-inch equals five-feet.
The report must describe the criteria used to evaluate the ages of the deposits
encountered in the trench, and clearly evaluate the presence or absence of
active (Holocene) faulting.
(e)   Conclusions: Conclusions must be supported by adequate data and shall
contain, at a minimum:
(1)   Summary of data upon which conclusions are based.
(2)   Location of active faults, including orientation and geometry of faults,
amount of net slip along faults, anticipated future offset, and delineation of
setback areas.
(3)   Degree of confidence in and limitations of data and conclusions.
(f)   Recommendations: Recommendations must be supported by adequate geologic
data and appropriate reasoning behind each statement. Minimum recommendations
shall include:
(1)   Recommended setback distances per section 2.5. Supporting calculations
must be included. Faults and setbacks must be shown on site maps and final
recorded plat maps.
(2)   Other recommended building restrictions or use limitations (i.e.,
placement of detached garages, swimming pools, or other non-habitable
structures).
(3)   Need for additional or future studies to confirm buildings are not sited
across active faults, such as inspection of building footing or foundation
excavations by the consultant.
2.6.2.   Report References
Reports must include citations of literature and records used in the study,
referenced aerial photographs or images interpreted (air-photo source, date and
flight number, scale), and any other sources of data and information, including
well logs, personal communications, etc.
2.6.3.   Illustrations:
At a minimum, reports must include the following illustrations:
(a)   Location Map: A site location map depicting topographic and geographic
features and other pertinent data. Generally a 1:24,000-scale USGS topographic
base map will suffice.
(b)   Geologic Map: A regional-scale map (1:24,000 to 1:50,000 scale) is
generally adequate. Depending on site complexity, a site-scale geologic map (1
inch = 200 ft or more detailed) may also be necessary. The map should show
Quaternary and bedrock geologic units, faults, seeps or springs, soil or
bedrock slumps, and other geologic and soil features existing on and adjacent
to the project site. Geologic cross-sections may be included as needed to
illustrate 3-dimensional relationships.
(c)   Site Plan: A detailed site plan is required. The site plan should be at a
scale of at least 1 inch = 200 feet (or more detailed) and should clearly show
site boundaries, proposed building footprints, existing structures, streets,
slopes, drainages, exploratory trenches, boreholes, test pits, geophysical
traverses, and any other data pertinent data.
(d)   Site Specific Fault Map: If faulting is documented at a parcel, the
report shall include a site-specific fault map. The fault map should be at a
scale of at least 1 inch = 200 feet and should clearly show the surveyed
locations of trenches (and any other exploratory techniques), surveyed location
(s) of faults documented in the trenches, inferred location of the faults
between trenches, recommended fault setback distance on each side of the
faults, topographic contours, and proposed building locations, if known.
(e)   Exploratory Trench Logs: Trench logs are required for each trench
excavated as part of the study. Trench logs shall accurately depict all
observed geologic features and conditions. Trench logs shall not be generalized
or diagrammatic. The minimum scale is 1 inch = 5 feet (1:60) with no vertical
exaggeration. Trench logs must accurately reflect the features observed in the
trench (see section 2.3.6).
   Trench logs shall include: trench orientation and indication of which trench
wall was logged; trench top and bottom; stratigraphic contacts; stratigraphic
unit descriptions including lithology, USCS soil classification, genesis
(geologic origin), age, and contact descriptions; soil (pedogenic) horizons;
marker beds; and deformation or offset of sediments, faults, and fissures.
Other features of tectonic significance such as buried scarp free-faces,
colluvial wedges, in-filled soil cracks, drag folds, rotated clasts,
lineations, and liquefaction features including dikes, sand blows, etc. should
also be shown. Interpretations of the age and origin of the deposits and any
faulting or deformation must be included, based on depositional sequence. Fault
orientation and geometry (strike and dip), and amount of net displacement must
be measured and noted.
(f)   Exploratory boreholes and CPT soundings: Should boreholes or CPT
soundings be utilized as part of the investigation, reports shall include the
logs of the borings/soundings. Borehole logs must include lithology
descriptions, interpretations of geologic origin, USCS soil classification or
other standardized engineering soil classification (include an explanation of
the classification scheme), sample intervals, penetrative resistance values,
static ground-water depths and dates measured, total depth of borehole, and
identity of the person logging the borehole. Electronic copies of CPT data
files should be provided to the City's reviewer, upon request.
(g)   Geophysical data: All geophysical data, showing stratigraphic
interpretations and fault locations, must be included in the report, along with
correlations to trench or borehole logs to confirm interpretations.
(h)   Photographs: Photographs of scarps, trench walls, or other features that
enhance understanding of site conditions and fault-related conditions are not
required but should be included when deemed appropriate. Composited, rectified
digital photographs of trench walls may be used as background for trench logs,
but features as outlined in section F above must still be delineated.
   REFERENCES
Batatian, L.D., and Nelson, C.V., 1999, Fault setback requirements to reduce
fault rupture hazards in Salt Lake County: AEG Abstracts with Programs, 42nd
Annual Meeting, Salt Lake City, p. 59.
Biek, R.F., 2005, Geologic map of the Lehi quadrangle and part of the
Timpanogos Cave quadrangle, Salt Lake and Utah Counties, Utah: Utah Geological
Survey Map 210, scale 1:24,000.
Black, B.D., Hecker, S., Hylland, M.D., Christenson, G.E., and McDonald, G.N.,
2003, Quaternary fault and fold database and map of Utah: Utah Geological
Survey Map 193DM.
Black, B.D., Lund, W.R., Schwartz, D.P., Gill, H.E., and Mayes, B.H., 1996,
Paleoseismic investigation on the Salt Lake City segment of the Wasatch fault
zone at the South Fork Dry Creek and Dry Gulch Sites, Salt Lake County, Utah:
Utah Geological Survey Special Study 92, 22 p.
Bonilla, M.G., and Lienkaemper, J.J., 1991, Factors affecting the recognition
of faults exposed in exploratory trenches: U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin
1947.
Bonilla, M.G., 1970, Surface faulting and related effects, in Wiegel, R.L.,
editor, Earthquake Engineering: Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, Inc., p.
47-74. (Contains an extensive bibliography on surface faulting, fault patterns
and types, width of fault zones, and creep).
Bonilla, M.G., 1982, Evaluation of potential surface faulting and other
tectonic deformation: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 82-732, 58 p.
California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1986a
(revised), Guidelines to geologic and seismic reports: DMG Note 42, 2 p.
California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1986b
(revised), Guidelines for preparing engineering geologic reports: DMG Note 44,
2 p.
Chase, G.W., and Chapman, R.H., 1976, Black-box geology - uses and misuses of
geophysics in engineering geology: California Geology, v. 29, p. 8-12.
Christenson, G.E., Batatian, L.D., and Nelson, C.V., 2003, Guidelines for
evaluating surface-fault-rupture hazards in Utah: Utah Geological Survey,
Miscellaneous Publication 03-6, 14 p.
Christenson, G.E., 1993, The Wasatch Front County Hazards Geologist Program, in
Gori, P.L, editor, Applications of research from the U.S. Geological Survey
Program, Assessment of Regional Earthquake Hazards and Risk Along the Wasatch
Front, Utah; U. S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1519, p. 114-120.
Christenson, G.E., and Purcell, C.R., 1985, Correlation and age of Quaternary
alluvial-fan sequences, Basin and Range Province, southwestern United States,
in Soils and Quaternary Geology of the Southwestern United States, Weide, D.L.,
editor: Geological Society of America Special Paper 203, p. 1-21.
Cluff, L.S., Brogan, G.E., and Glass, E.E., 1970, Wasatch fault, northern
portion, earthquake fault investigation and evaluation, a guide to land use
planning: Oakland, California, Woodward-Clyde and Associates, unpublished
report for the Utah Geological and Mineral Survey, variously paginated.
Crittenden, M.D., Jr., 1965, Geology of the Draper quadrangle, Utah: U.S.
Geological Survey Map GQ 377, scale 1:24000.
Davis, F.D., 1983, Geologic map of the central Wasatch Front, Utah: Utah
Geological and Mineral Survey Map 54A - Wasatch Front Series, scale 1:100,000.
Draper City, 2003, Article 4 - Special purpose and overlay zones, chapter 9-19,
Geologic Hazards Ordinance, adopted December 30, 2003 - Ord. 547, effective
January 13, 2004.
Draper City, 2003, Appendix A, Minimum standards for surface fault rupture
hazard studies: July 2003, Draper City Geologic Hazards Ordinance, chapter 9-
19.
Gilbert, G.K., 1875, Report upon the geology of portions of Nevada, Utah,
California, and Arizona, Examined in the years 1871 and 1872, in Wheeler, G.M.,
editor, Report upon geographical and geological exploration and surveys west of
the 100th meridian, vol 3: Geology, published by the Washington D.C.,
government printing office, p. 17-187.
Gilbert, G.K., 1890, Lake Bonneville: U.S. Geological Survey Monograph 1, 438
p.
Hart, E.W., 1992 (revised), Fault-rupture hazard zones in California:
California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, Special
Publication 42, 32 p. (Revised periodically; information on state law and
zoning program for regulating development near hazardous faults.
Hart, E.W., and Williams, J.W., 1978, Geologic review process: California
Geology, v. 31, no 10, p. 235-236.
Hatheway, A. W., and Leighton, F.B., 1979, Trenching as an exploratory tool, in
Hatheway, A. W., and McClure, C.R., Jr., editors, Geology in the siting of
nuclear power plants: Geologic Society of America, Reviews in Engineering
Geology, v. IV, p. 169-195.
Joint Committee on Seismic Safety, California Legislature, 1974, Meeting the
earthquake challenge: California Division of Mines and Geology, Special
Publication 45, 223 p.
Hecker, S., 1993, Quaternary tectonics of Utah with emphasis on earthquake-
hazard characterization: Utah Geological Survey Bulletin 127, 157 p.
Lund, W.R., 1990, editor, Engineering geology of the Salt Lake City
metropolitan area, Utah: Utah Geological Survey Bulletin 126, 66 p.
Machette, M.N., 1989, Preliminary surficial geologic map of the Wasatch fault
zone, eastern part of Utah valley, Utah County and parts of Salt Lake and Juab
Counties, Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-2109,
scale 1:50,000.
Machette, M.N., 1992, Surficial geologic map of the Wasatch fault zone, eastern
part of Utah valley, Utah County and parts of Salt Lake and Juab Counties,
Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Investigation Series Map I-2095,
scale 1:50,000.
Machette, M.N., Personius, S.F., Nelson, A.R., Schwartz, D.P., and Lund, W.R.,
1991, The Wasatch fault zone, Utah - segmentation and history of Holocene
earthquakes: Journal of Structural Geology, v. 13, no. 2, p. 137-149.
Machette, M.N., Personius, S.F., and Nelson, A.R., 1992, Paleoseismology of the
Wasatch fault zone: a summary of recent investigations, interpretations, and
conclusions, in Gori, P.L. and Hays, W.W., eds., Assessment of regional
earthquake hazards and risk along the Wasatch Front, Utah: U.S. Geological
Survey Professional Paper 1500, p. A1-A71.
Madsen, D.B., 2000, Late quaternary paleoecology in the Bonneville basin: Utah
Geological Survey Bulletin 130, p. 190.
Madsen, D.B., and Currey, D.R., 1979, Late Quaternary glacial and vegetation
changes, Little Cottonwood Canyon area, Wasatch Mountains, Utah: Quaternary
Research, v. 12, p. 254-270.
McCalpin, James P., 2002, New age control from the Wasatch fault megatrench of
1999: Abstracts with Programs, Geological Society of America, Rocky Mountain
section.
McCalpin, James P., 1996, editor, Paleoseismology: Academic Press, 588 p.
McCalpin, James P., 1987, Recommended setbacks from active normal faults, in
McCalpin, James, editor, Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Symposium on
Engineering Geology and Soils Engineering: Logan, Utah State University, April
6-8, 1987, p. 35-56.
Miller, R.D., 1980, Surficial geologic map along part of the Wasatch Front,
Salt Lake valley, Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field Studies Map
MF-1198, scale, 1:100,000.
National Research Council, 1986, Studies in geophysics-active tectonics:
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 266 p. (contains several articles
evaluating active faulting).
Nevada Earthquake Safety Council, 1998, Guidelines for Evaluating Potential
Surface Fault Rupture/Land Subsidence Hazards in Nevada; Available online at
http://www.nbmg.unr.edu/nesc/guidelines.html
Nelson, C.V., 1987, Surface fault rupture and liquefaction hazard areas, map
compiled for public information and planning: Salt Lake County Planning
Division, Salt Lake City, Utah.
Noller, J.S., Sowers, J.M., and Lettis, W.R., editors, Quaternary
geochronology, methods and applications: Washington D.C., American Geophysical
Union AGU Reference Shelf 4, 582 p.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 1989, Federal Register, Tuesday
October 31, 1989. 29 CFR Part 1926. For updates: www.osha-slc.gov/SLTC/
constructiontrenching/index.html.
Oviatt, C.G., and Thompson, R.S., 2002, Recent developments in the study of
Lake Bonneville since 1980, in Gwynn, J.W., editor, Great Salt Lake 2000 - An
Overview of Change: Utah Geological Survey Miscellaneous Publication XX, p. XX.
Oviatt, C.G., Currey, D.R., and Sack, D., 1992, Radiocarbon chronology of Lake
Bonneville, Eastern Great Basin, U.S.A.: Paleogeography, Paleoclimotology, and
Paleoecology, v. 99, p. 225-241.
Personius. S.F., and Scott. W.E., 1992. Surficial geologic map of the Salt Lake
City segment and parts of adjacent segments of the Wasatch fault zone, Davis,
Salt Lake, and Utah Counties, Utah: U.S. Geological Survey Map I-2106.
Salt Lake County, 2002a, Geologic hazards ordinance, chapter 19.75 of the Salt
Lake County zoning code of ordinances, adopted July 2002: Salt Lake County
Planning and Development Services Division, 2001 South State Street, Suite
N3700, Salt Lake City, Utah, 84190-4200, 11p.
Salt Lake County, 2002b, Minimum standards for surface fault rupture hazard
studies, Appendix A, Geologic hazards ordinance, chapter 19.75 of the Salt Lake
County zoning code of ordinances, adopted July 2002: Salt Lake County Planning
and Development Services Division, 2001 South State Street, Suite N3700, Salt
Lake City, Utah, 84190-4200, 9p.
Salt Lake County, 2001, Liquefaction: a guide to land use planning, Geologic
Hazards Ordinance chapter 19.75 Appendix B: Salt Lake County Planning and
Development Services Division. 6 p.
Salt Lake County, 1995, Surface rupture and liquefaction potential special
study areas map, Salt Lake County, Utah, adopted March 1989, revised July 1995:
Salt Lake County Public Works, Planning Division, 2001 South State Street,
Suite N3700, Salt Lake City, Utah, 84190-4200, scale: 1:43,547.
Schwartz, D.P., and Coppersmith, K.J., 1984, Fault behavior and characteristic
earthquakes: examples from the Wasatch and San Andreas fault zones: Journal of
Geophysical Research, v. 89, no. B-7, July 10, 1984, p. 5681 - 5698.
Scott, W.E., and Shroba, R.R., 1985, Surficial geologic map of an area along
the Wasatch fault zone in the Salt Lake Valley, Utah: U.S. Geol. Survey Open-
File Report 85-448, 18 p.
Scott, W.E., McCoy, W.D., Shroba, R.R., and Rubin, M., 1983, Reinterpretation
of the exposed record of the last two cycles of Lake Bonneville, Western United
States: Quaternary research, v. 20, p. 261-285.
Sherard, J.L., Cluff, L.S., and Allen, C.R., 1974, Potentially active faults in
dam foundations: Geotechnique, Institute of Civil Engineers, London, v. 24, no.
3, p. 367-428.
Simon, D.B., and Shlemon, R.J., 1999, The Holocene "Downtown Fault" in Salt
Lake City, Utah, 1999: Association of Engineering Geologists, 1999 Annual
Meeting, Abstract Volume, Salt Lake City, Utah, p. 85.
Simon, D.B., Bartlett, S.J., and Shlemon, R.J., 1999, Holocene ground failure
in downtown Salt Lake City, Utah: Geological Society of America, Cordilleran
section, Abstracts with Program, v. 31, no. 6, p. A-95.
Slemmons, D.B., 1977, State-of-the-art for assessing earthquake hazards in the
United States: Report 6, faults and earthquake magnitude: U.S. Army Engineer
Waterways Experiment Station Miscellaneous Paper S-73-1, 129 p., 37 p. appendix
(Summarizes fault evaluation techniques; extensive bibliography).
Slemmons, D.B., and dePolo, C.M., 1992, Evaluation of active faulting and
associated hazards: in Studies in Geophysics-Active Tectonics: National
Research Council, p. 45-62.
Taylor, C.L., and Cluff, L.S., 1973, Fault activity and its significance
assessed by exploratory excavation, in Proceedings of the Conference on
Tectonic Problems of the San Andreas Fault System; Stanford University
Publication, Geological Sciences, v. XIII, September 1973, p. 239-247.
Wallace, R.E., 1977, Profiles and ages of young fault scarps, north-central
Nevada: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 88, p. 1267-1281.
Youd, T.L., 1980. Ground failure displacement and earthquake damage to
buildings: American Society of Civil Engineers Conference on Civil Engineering
and Nuclear Power, 2nd, Knoxville, Tennessee, v. 2, p. 7-6-2 to 7-6-26.
TABLE A-1
SETBACK RECOMMENDATIONS AND CRITICALITY FACTORS (U) FOR IBC OCCUPANCY CLASSES
(International Code Council, 2003)
Class Occupancy Group Criticality U Minimum Setback
(IBC)
Class Occupancy Group                          Criticality U   Minimum Setback
(IBC)
A     Assembly                                 2           2.0 25 feet
B     Business                                 2           2.0 20 feet
E     Educational                              1           3.0 50 feet
F     Factory/Industrial                       2           2.0 20 feet
H     High hazard                              1           3.0 50 feet
I     Institutional                            1           3.0 50 feet
M     Mercantile                               2           2.0 20 feet
R     Residential (R-1, R-2, R-4)              2           2.0 20 feet
R-3   Residential (R-3, includes single family 3           1.5 15 feet
      homes)
S     Storage                                  -           1   0
U     Utility and misc.                        -           1   0
     Table A-2                                1           3.0 50 feet
 
TABLE A-2
ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRING GEOLOGIC INVESTIGATION
Buildings and other structures that represent a substantial hazard to human
life in the event of failure, but not limited to:
1.   Buildings and other structures where more than 300 people congregate in
one area.
2.   Buildings and other structures with elementary school, secondary school or
day care facilities with occupancy greater than 250.
3.   Buildings and other structures with occupancy greater than 500 for
colleges or adult education facilities.
4.   Health care facilities with occupancy greater than 50 or more resident
patients but not having surgery or emergency treatment facilities.
5.   Jails and detention facilities.
6.   Any other occupancy with occupancy greater than 1000.
7.   Power generating stations, water treatment or storage for potable water,
waste water treatment facilities and other public utility facilities.
8.   Buildings and other structures containing sufficient quantities of toxic
or explosive substances to be dangerous to the public if released.
Buildings and other structures designed as essential facilities including, but
not limited to:
1.   Hospitals and other care facilities having surgery or emergency treatment
facilities.
2.   Fire, rescue and police stations and emergency vehicle garages and fueling
facilities.
3.   Designated emergency shelters.
4.   Designated emergency preparedness, communications, and operation centers
and other facilities required for emergency response.
5.   Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities required as
emergency backup facilities for facilities and structures included in this
table.
6.   Structures containing highly toxic materials as defined by the most
recently adopted version of the IBC where the quantity of the material exceeds
the maximum allowable quantities defined by the most recently adopted version
of the IBC.
7.   Aviation control towers, air traffic centers and emergency aircraft
hangars.
8.   Buildings and other structures having critical national defense functions.
9.   Water treatment and storage facilities required to maintain water pressure
for fire suppression.
(Ord. 796, 12-11-2007)
9-19-161-3: APPENDIX C, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SLOPE STABILITY ANALYSIS:
1.0   INTRODUCTION
The procedures outlined herein are intended to provide consultants with a
general outline for performing quantitative slope stability analyses and to
clarify the expectations of Draper City. These standards constitute the minimum
level of effort required in conducting quantitative slope stability analyses in
Draper City. Considering the complexity inherent in performing slope stability
analyses, additional effort beyond the minimum standards presented herein may
be required at some sites to adequately address slope stability. The
information presented herein does not relieve consultants of their duty to
perform additional geologic or engineering analyses they believe are necessary
to assess the stability of slopes at a site.
The evaluation of landslides generally requires quantitative slope stability
analyses. Therefore, the standards presented herein are directly applicable to
landslide investigation, and also constitute the minimum level of effort when
performing landslide investigations. This appendix does not address debris
flows (see appendix E) or rock falls (see appendix F).
The purposes for establishing minimum standards for slope stability analyses
are to:
(a)   Protect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the public by
minimizing the potentially adverse effects of unstable slopes and related
hazards;
(b)   Assist property owners and land developers in conducting reasonable and
adequate studies;
(c)   Provide consulting engineering geologists and geotechnincal engineers
with a common basis for preparing proposals, conducting investigations, and
mitigation; and,
(d)   Provide an objective framework for regulatory review of slope stability
reports.
1.1   References and Sources
The minimum standards presented herein were developed, in part, from the
following sources:
(a)   Guidelines for Evaluating Landslide Hazards in Utah (Hylland, 1996).
(b)   Recommended Procedures for Implementation of DMG Special Publication 117,
Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating Landslide Hazards in California (Blake
et al., 2002).
(c)   CDMG Special Publication 117, Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating
Landslide Hazards in California
(d)   Salt Lake County Geologic Hazards Ordinance (2002).
(e)   Holladay City, Utah Natural Hazards Areas Provision (2006).
(f)   Cottonwood Heights, Utah Code of Ordinances (2005).
(g)   Centerville City Planning and Zoning Ordinance, section 12-330-2 Hillside
Overlay District (1995).
(h)   City of Camarillo, California 2003 Guidelines for the preparation of
geotechnical and geologic studies, prepared by Fugro, dated June 18, 2003.
(i)   City of Palmdale, California, Guidelines for preparation of geotechnical
reports, prepared by GeoDynamics, Inc., dated April 2006 (draft copy).
(j)   City of Malibu, California, Guidelines for the preparation of engineering
geologic and geotechnical engineering reports and procedure for report
submittal, prepared by Bing Yen and Associates) dated April, 2006.
1.2   Areas Requiring Slope Stability Analyses
Slope stability analyses shall be performed for all sites located within the
Slope Stability Study Area Map (Plate A-3) and for all slopes that may be
affected by the proposed development which meet the following criteria:
(a)   Cut and/or fill slopes steeper than about 2 horizontal (h) to 1 vertical
(v).
(b)   Natural slopes steeper than or equal to 3 horizontal (h) to 1 vertical
(v).
(c)   Natural and cut slopes with potentially adverse geologic conditions
(e.g., bedding, foliation, or other structural features that are potentially
adverse to the stability of the slope).
(d)   Natural and cut slopes which include a geologic hazard such as a
landslide, irrespective of the slope height or slope gradient.
(e)   Buttresses and stability fills.
(f)   Cut, fill, or natural slopes of water-retention basins or flood-control
channels.
(g)   In hillside areas (Plate A-3), investigations shall address the potential
for surficial instability, debris/mudflows (see Appendix E), rock falls (see
Appendix F), and soil creep on all slopes that may affect the proposed
development or be affected by the proposed development.
(h)   When evaluating site conditions to determine the need for slope stability
analyses, off-property conditions shall be considered (both up-slope to the top
(s) of adjacent ascending slopes and down-slope to and beyond the toe(s) of
adjacent descending slopes). Also, the consultant shall demonstrate that the
proposed hillside development will not affect adjacent sites or limit adjacent
property owners' ability to develop their sites.
1.3   Roles of Engineering Geologist and Engineering
The investigation of the static and seismic stability of slopes is an
interdisciplinary practice. To provide greater assurance that the hazards are
properly identified, assessed, and mitigated, involvement of both an
engineering geologist and geotechnical engineer is required. Analyses shall be
performed only by or under the direct supervision of licensed professionals,
qualified and competent in their respective area of practice. An engineering
geologist shall provide appropriate input to the geotechnical engineer with
respect to the potential impact of the geology, stratigraphy, and hydrologic
conditions on the stability of the slope. The shear strength and other
geotechnical earth material properties shall be evaluated by the geotechnical
engineer. Qualified engineering geologists, geological engineers and
geotechnical engineers may assess and quantitatively evaluate slope stability.
However, the geotechnical engineer shall perform all design stability
calculations. Ground motion parameters for use in seismic stability analysis
may be provided by either the engineering geologist or geotechnical engineer.
1.4   Minimum Qualifications of the Licensed Professional
Slope stability analyses must be performed by qualified engineering geologists
and qualified geotechnical engineers (see sections
9-19-050 and
9-19-060 of the Draper City Geologic Hazards Ordinance, chapter 9-19).
2.0   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Except for the derivation of the input ground motion for pseudostatic and
seismic deformation analyses (see section 12), slope stability analyses and
evaluations should be performed in general accordance with the latest version
of Recommended Procedures for Implementation of DMG Special Publication 117,
Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating Landslide Hazards in California (Blake
et al., 2002). Procedures for developing input ground motions to be used in
Draper City are described in section 12.1. See Draper City Geologic Hazard
Ordinance, chapter 9-19, for supplemental requirements.
3.0   SUBMITTALS
Submittals for review shall include boring logs; geologic cross sections;
trench and test pit logs; laboratory data (particularly shear strength test
results, including individual stress- deformation plots from direct shear
tests); discussions pertaining to how idealized subsurface conditions and shear
strength parameters used for analyses were developed; analytical results,
including computer output files (if requested); and summaries of the slope
stability analyses and conclusions regarding slope stability.
Subsurface geologic and groundwater conditions must be illustrated on geologic
cross sections and must be utilized by the geotechnical engineer for the slope
stability analyses. If on-site sewage or storm water disposal exists or is
proposed, the slope stability analyses shall include the effects of the
effluent plume on slope stability.
The results of any slope stability analyses must be submitted with pertinent
backup documentation (i.e., calculations, computer output, etc.). Printouts of
input data, output data (if requested), and graphical plots must be submitted
for each computer-aided slope stability analysis. In addition, input data
files, recorded on diskettes, CDs, or other electronic media may be requested
to facilitate the City's review.
4.0   FACTORS OF SAFETY
The minimum acceptable static factor of safety is 1.5 for both gross and
surficial slope stability. The minimum acceptable factor of safety for a
calibrated pseudostatic analysis is 1.0 using the method of Stewart and others
(2003) (see section 12.2).
5.0   LANDSLIDES
The evaluation of landslides generally requires quantitative slope stability
analyses. Therefore, the standards presented herein are directly applicable to
landslide investigation, and also constitute the minimum level of effort when
performing landslide investigations. Evaluation of landslides shall be
performed in the preliminary phase of hillside developments. Where landslides
are present or suspected, sufficient subsurface exploration will be required to
determine the basic geometry and stability of the landslide mass and the
required stabilization measures. The depth of geologic exploration shall
consider the regional geologic structure, the likely failure mode of the
suspected failure, and past geomorphic conditions.
6.0   SITE INVESTIGATION AND GEOLOGIC STUDIES
Adequate evaluation of slope stability for a given site requires thorough and
comprehensive geologic and geotechnical engineering studies. These studies are
a crucial component in the evaluation of slope stability. Geologic mapping and
subsurface exploration are normal parts of field investigation. Samples of
earth materials are routinely obtained during subsurface exploration for
geotechnical testing in the laboratory to determine the shear strength
parameters and other pertinent engineering properties.
In general, geologic studies for slope stability consist of the following
fundamental phases:
(a)   Study and review of published and unpublished geologic information (both
regional and site specific).
(b)   Review and interpretation of available stereoscopic and oblique aerial
photographs, DEMs, and LiDAR.
(c)   Geologic field mapping, including, but not necessarily limited to,
measurement of bedding, foliation, fracture, and fault attitudes and other
parameters.
(d)   Documentation and evaluation of subsurface groundwater conditions
(including effects of seasonal and longer-term natural fluctuations as well as
landscape irrigation), surface water, on-site sewage disposal, and/or storm
water disposal.
(e)   Subsurface exploration.
(f)   Analysis of the geologic failure mechanisms that could occur at the site
(e.g., mode of failure and construction of the critical geologic cross
sections).
(g)   Presentation and analysis of the data, including an evaluation of the
potential impact of geologic conditions on the project.
Geologic/geotechnical reports shall demonstrate that each of these phases has
been adequately performed and that the information obtained has been considered
and logically evaluated. Minimum criteria for the performance of each phase are
described and discussed in Blake and others (2002).
7.0   SUBSURFACE EXPLORATION
The purpose of subsurface exploration is to identify potentially significant
geologic materials and structures at a site and to provide samples for detailed
laboratory characterization of materials from potentially critical zones.
Subsurface exploration is almost always required and may be performed by a
number of widely known techniques such as bucket-auger borings, conventional
small-diameter borings, cone penetration testing (CPT), test pits, trenches,
and/or geophysical techniques (see section 4.2 of Blake et al., 2002). A
discussion of the applicability of some subsurface exploration techniques
follows.
7.1   Trenching
Subsurface exploration consisting of trenching has proven, in some cases, to be
necessary when uncertainty exists regarding whether or not a particular
landform is a landslide. Care must be exercised with this exploration method
because landslides characteristically contain relatively large blocks of intact
geologic units, which in a trench exposure could give the false impression that
the geologic unit is "in-place." Although limited to a depth of about 15 feet
below existing grades, trenching has also proven to be a useful technique for
verifying margins of landslides, although the geometry of a landslide can
generally be readily determined from evaluation of stereoscopic aerial
photographs. Once a landslide is identified, conventional subsurface
exploration drilling techniques will be required (see section 7.2 and 7.3).
Slope stability analyses based solely on data obtained from trenches will not
be accepted.
7.2   Methods for Bedded Formations
Conventional subsurface exploration techniques involving continuous core
drilling with an oriented core barrel, test pits, and deep bucket-auger borings
may be used to assess the subsurface soil and geologic conditions, particularly
for geologic units with inclined bedding that includes weak layers.
Although not commonly utilized in Utah, a 24-inch-diameter bucket-auger-boring
with down-hole logging can provide valuable data (provided the consultant has
determined the drill hole is safe to enter). The evaluation of safety of the
proposed subsurface exploration program will be the responsibility of the
consultant.
Particular attention must be paid to the presence or absence of weak layers
(e.g., clay, claystone, silt, shale, or siltstone units) during the
exploration. Unless adequately demonstrated (through comprehensive and detailed
subsurface exploration) that weak (clay, claystone, silt, shale, or siltstone)
layers (even as thin as 1/16-inch or less) are not present, a weak layer shall
be assumed to possibly occur anywhere in the stratigraphic profile (i.e.,
ubiquitous weak clay beds).
The depth of the subsurface exploration must be sufficient to assess the
conditions at or below the level of the deepest potential failure surface
possessing a factor of 1.5 or less. A preliminary slope stability analysis may
need to be performed to assist in the planning of the subsurface exploration
program.
7.3   Other Geologic Units
For alluvium, fill materials, or other soil units that do not contain weak
interbeds, other exploration methods such as small- diameter borings (e.g.,
rotary wash or hollow-stem-auger) or cone penetration testing may be suitable.
8.0   SOIL PARAMETERS
Soil properties, including unit weight and shear strength parameters (cohesion
and friction angle), may be based on conventional field and laboratory tests as
well as on field performance. Where appropriate (i.e., for landslide slip
surfaces, along bedding planes, for surficial stability analyses, etc.),
laboratory tests for saturated, residual shear strengths must be performed.
Estimation of the shear resistance along bedding (or landslide) planes normally
requires an evaluation of saturated residual along-bedding-strength values of
the weakest interbedded (or slide-plane) material encountered during the
subsurface exploration, or in the absence of sufficient exploration, the
weakest material that may be present, consistent with site geologic conditions.
Strength parameters derived solely from CPT data may not be appropriate for
slope-stability analysis in some cases, particularly for strengths along
existing slip surfaces where residual strengths have developed. Additional
guidance on the selection of strength parameters for slope stability analyses
is contained in Blake et al. (2002).
8.1   Residual Shear Strength Parameters
Residual strength parameters may be determined using the direct shear or ring
shear testing apparatus; however ring shear tests are preferred. If performed
properly, direct shear test results may approach ring-shear test results. The
soil specimen must be subjected to a sufficient amount of deformation (e.g., a
significant number of shearing cycles in the direct shear test or a significant
amount of rotation in the ring shear test) to assure that residual strength has
been developed. In the direct- shear and ring-shear tests, stress-deformation
curves can be used to determine when a sufficient number of cycles of shearing
have been performed by showing that no further significant drop in shear
strength results with the addition of more cycles or more rotation. The stress-
deformation curves obtained during the shear tests must be submitted with the
other laboratory test results. It shall be recognized that for most clayey
soils, the residual shear strength envelope is curved and passes through the
origin (i.e., at zero normal stress there is zero shear strength). Any
"apparent shear strength" increases resulting from a non- horizontal shear
surface (i.e., ramping) or "bulldozing" in residual direct shear tests shall be
discounted in the interpretation of the strength parameters.
8.2   Interpretation
The engineer will need to use considerable judgment in the selection of
appropriate shear test methods and in the interpretation of the results to
develop shear strength parameters commensurate with slope stability conditions
to be evaluated. Scatter plots of shear strength data may need to be presented
to allow for assessment of idealized parameters. The report shall summarize
shear strength parameters used for slope stability analyses and describe the
methodology used to interpret test results and estimate those parameters.
Peak shear strengths may be used to represent across-bedding failure surfaces
or compacted fill, in situations where strength degradations are not expected
to occur (see guidelines in Blake et al., 2002). Where peak strengths cannot be
relied upon, fully softened (or lower) strengths shall be used.
Ultimate shear strength parameters shall be used in static slope stability
analyses when there has not been past deformation. Residual shear strength
parameters shall be used in static slope stability analyses when there has been
past deformation.
Averaged strength parameters may be appropriate for some across- bedding
conditions, if sufficient representative samples have been carefully tested.
Analyses for along-bedding or along- existing-landslide slip surfaces shall be
based on lower-bound interpretations of residual shear strength parameters and
comparison of those results to correlations, such as those of Stark and others
(2005).
8.3   Default Soil Parameters
In the Traverse Mountain area, failure surfaces for known landslides commonly
occur within the Tertiary volcanics. Those failure surfaces typically are along
clay layers formed by the in situ alteration of tuff deposits. In cases when
the failure surface has been sampled and tested, relatively low residual-
shear-strength values have been obtained; these values are cohesion equal to 0
psf and a friction angles equal to 11 to 12 degrees. Similar values have also
been reported from the Springhill landslide in North Salt Lake that is in a
similar tuffaceous volcanic formation of Tertiary age.
To assist in understanding shear strengths of these materials, the following
shear strength parameters for landslide failure surfaces and along weak layers
within the Tertiary volcanics shall be used; cohesion equal to 0 psf and a
friction angle equal to 11 degrees, unless otherwise demonstrated. If site-
specific testing produces lower residual shear strength than these values, the
site-specific test results should be used. If site-specific testing produces
higher values, documentation must be provided to demonstrate that the weakest
materials were retrieved and tested and that the materials retrieved truly
represent the basal landslide slip surface.
9.0   SOIL CREEP
The potential effects of soil creep shall be addressed where any proposed
structure is planned in close proximity to an existing fill slope or natural
slope. The potential effects on the proposed development shall be evaluated and
mitigation measures proposed, including appropriate setback recommendations.
Setback recommendations shall consider the potential affects of creep forces.
All reports in hillside areas shall address the potential for surficial
instability, debris/mudflow (Appendix E), rock falls (Appendix F), and soil
creep on all slopes that may affect the proposed development or be affected by
the proposed development. Stability of slopes along access roads shall be
addressed.
10.0   GROSS STATIC STABILITY
Gross stability includes rotational and translational deep-seated failures of
slopes or portions of slopes existing within or outside of but potentially
affecting the proposed development. The following guidelines, in addition to
those in the Blake and others (2002) document, shall be followed when
evaluating slope stability:
(a)   Stability shall be analyzed along cross sections depicting the most
adverse conditions (e.g., highest slope, most adverse bedding planes,
shallowest likely ground water table, and steepest slope). Often analyses are
required for different conditions and for more than one cross section to
demonstrate which condition is most adverse. When evaluating the stability of
an existing landslide, analyses must also address the potential for partial
reactivation. Inclinometers may be used to help determine critical failure
surfaces and, along with high-resolution GPS, the state of activity of existing
landslides. The critical failure surfaces on each cross-section shall be
identified, evaluated, and plotted on the large-scale cross section.
(b)   If the long-term, static factor of safety is less than 1.5, mitigation
measures will be required to bring the factor of safety up to the required
level or the project may be redesigned to achieve a minimum factor of safety of
1.5.
(c)   The temporary stability of excavations shall be evaluated and mitigation
measures shall be recommended as necessary to obtain a minimum factor of safety
of 1.3.
(d)   Long-term stability shall be analyzed using the highest known or
anticipated groundwater level based upon a groundwater assessment performed
under the requirements of section 6.0.
(e)   Where back-calculation is appropriate, shear strengths utilized for
design shall be no higher than the lowest strength computed using back
calculation. If a consultant proposes to use shear strengths higher than the
lowest back- calculated value, justification shall be required. Assumptions
used in back-calculations regarding pre-sliding topography and groundwater
conditions at failure must be discussed and justified.
(f)   Reports shall describe how the shear strength testing methods used are
appropriate in modeling field conditions and long-term performance of the
subject slope. The utilized design shear strength values shall be justified
with laboratory test data and geologic descriptions and history, along with
past performance history, if known, of similar materials.
(g)   Reports shall include shear strength test plots consisting of normal
stress versus shear resistance (failure envelope). Plots of shear resistance
versus displacement shall be provided for all residual and fully softened
(ultimate) shear tests.
(h)   The degree of saturation for all test specimens shall be reported. Direct
shear tests on partially saturated samples may grossly overestimate the
cohesion that can be mobilized when the material becomes saturated in the
field. This potential shall be considered when selecting shear strength
parameters. If the rate of shear displacement exceeds 0.005 inches per minute,
the consultant shall provide data to demonstrate that the rate is sufficiently
slow for drained conditions.
(i)   Shear strength values higher than those obtained through site-specific
laboratory tests generally will not be accepted.
(j)   If direct shear or triaxial shear testing is not appropriate to model the
strength of highly jointed and fractured rock masses, the design strengths
shall be evaluated in a manner that considers overall rock mass quality and be
consistent with rock mechanics practice.
(k)   Shear strengths used in slope stability analyses shall be evaluated
considering the natural variability of engineering characteristics inherent in
earth materials. Multiple shear tests on each site material are likely to be
required.
(l)   Direct shear tests do not always provide realistic strength values (Watry
and Lade, 2000). Correlations between liquid limit, percent clay fraction, and
strength (fully softened and residual) with published data (e.g., Stark and
McCone, 2002) shall be performed to verify tested shear strength parameters.
Strength values used in analyses that exceed those obtained by the correlation
must be appropriately justified.
(m)   Shear strengths for proposed fill slopes shall be evaluated using samples
mixed and remolded to represent anticipated field conditions. Confirming
strength testing may be required during grading.
(n)   Where bedding planes are laterally unsupported on slopes, potential
failures along the unsupported bedding planes shall be analyzed. Similarly,
stability analyses shall be performed where bedding planes form a dip-slope or
near-dip-slope using composite potential failure surfaces that consist of
potential slip surfaces along bedding planes in the upper portions of the slope
in combination with slip surfaces across bedding planes in the lower portions
of the slope.
(o)   The stability analysis shall include the effect of expected maximum
moisture conditions on soil unit weight.
(p)   For effective stress analyses, measured groundwater conditions adjusted
to consider likely unfavorable conditions with respect to anticipated future
groundwater levels, seepage, or pore pressure shall be included in the slope
stability analyses.
(q)   Tension crack development shall be considered in the analyses of
potential failure surfaces. The height and location of the tension crack shall
be determined by searching.
(r)   Anticipated surcharge loads as well as external boundary pressures from
water shall be included in the slope stability evaluations, as deemed
appropriate.
(s)   Analytical chart solutions may be used provided they were developed for
conditions similar to those being analyzed. Generally though, computer-aided
searching techniques shall be used, so that the potential failure surface with
the lowest factor of safety can be located. Examples of typical searching
techniques are illustrated on figures 9.1a through 9.1f in Blake and others
(2002). However, verification of the reasonableness of the analytical results
is the responsibility of the geotechnical engineer and/or engineering
geologist.
(t)   The critical potential failure surface used in the analysis may be
composed of circles, wedges, planes, or other shapes considered to yield the
minimum factor of safety most appropriate for the geologic site conditions. The
critical potential failure surface having the lowest factor of safety with
respect to shearing resistance must be sought. Both the lowest factor of safety
and the critical failure surface shall be documented.
11.0   SURFICIAL STABILITY OF SLOPES
Surficial slope stability refers to slumping and sliding of near- surface
sediments and is most critical during the snowmelt and rainy season or when
excessive landscape water is applied. The assessment of surficial slope
stability shall be based on analysis procedures for stability of an infinite
slope with seepage parallel to the slope surface or an alternate failure mode
that would produce the minimum factor of safety. The minimum acceptable depth
of saturation for surficial stability evaluation shall be four feet.
11.1   Applicability and Procedures
Conclusions shall be substantiated with appropriate data and analyses. Residual
shear strengths comparable to actual field conditions shall be used in
completing surficial stability analyses. Surficial stability analyses shall be
performed under rapid draw-down conditions where appropriate (e.g., for debris
and detention basins).
Where 2:1 or steeper slopes have soil conditions that can result in the
development of an infinite slope with parallel seepage, calculations shall be
performed to demonstrate that the slope has a minimum static factor of safety
of 1.5, assuming a fully saturated 4-foot thickness. If conditions will not
allow the development of a slope with parallel seepage, surficial slope
stability analyses may not be required (provided the geologic/geotechnical
reviewer concurs).
Surficial slope stability analyses shall be performed for fill, cut, and
natural slopes assuming an infinite slope with seepage parallel to the slope
surface or other failure mode that would yield the minimum factor of safety
against failure. A suggested procedure for evaluating surficial slope stability
is presented in Blake et al. (2002).
11.2   Soil Properties
Soil properties used in surficial stability analyses shall be determined as
noted in section 8.1. Residual shear strength parameters for surficial slope
stability analyses shall be developed for a stress range that is consistent
with the near- surface conditions being modeled. As indicated in section 8.1,
it shall be recognized that for most clayey soils, the residual shear strength
envelope is curved and passes through the origin (i.e., at zero normal stress
there is zero shear strength). For sites with deep slip surfaces, the
guidelines given by Blake and others (2002) should be followed.
11.3   Seepage Conditions
The minimum acceptable vertical depth for which seepage parallel to the slope
shall be applied is four feet for cut or fill slopes. Greater depths may be
necessary when analyzing natural slopes that have significant thicknesses of
loose surficial material.
12.0   SEISMIC SLOPE STABILITY
In addition to static slope stability analyses, slopes shall be evaluated for
seismic slope stability as well. Acceptable methods for evaluating seismic
slope stability using calibrated pseudo- static limit-equilibrium procedures
and simplified methods (e.g., those based on Newmark, 1965) to estimate
permanent seismic slope movements are summarized in Blake and others (2002).
Nonlinear, dynamic finite element/finite difference numerical methods also may
be used to evaluate slope movements resulting from seismic events as long as
the procedures, input data, and results are thoroughly documented, and deemed
acceptable by the City.
12.1   Ground Motion for Pseudostatic and Seismic Deformation Analyses
The two controlling faults that would most affect Draper City are the Salt Lake
City and Provo segments of the Wasatch fault zone (WFZ). Repeated Holocene
movement has been well documented along both segments (Black and others, 2003).
Studies along the Provo segment of the WFZ indicate a recurrence interval of
about 1150 years (Olig, and others, 2006; later revised, Olig, 2007) and the
most recent event being about 500 to 650 years ago (Black and others, 2003;
Olig, and others, 2006). Studies along the Salt Lake City segment of the WFZ
indicate a recurrence interval of about 1300 years and the most recent event
being about 1300 years ago (Lund, 2005). Based on the paleoseismic record of
the Salt Lake City segment and assuming a time-dependent model, McCalpin (2002)
estimates a conditional probability (using a log-normal renewal model) of 16.5%
in the next 100 years (8.25% in the next 50 years) for a M>7 surface-faulting
earthquake. Therefore, using a time-dependent rather than Poisson or random
model for earthquake recurrence, the likelihood of a large surface-faulting
earthquake on the Salt Lake City segment of the WFZ is relatively high and
therefore the Salt Lake City segment is considered the primary controlling
fault for deterministic analyses.
In regards to design ground accelerations for seismic slope- stability
analyses, Draper City prefers a probabilistic approach to determining the
likelihood that different levels of ground motion will be exceeded at a
particular site within a given time period. In order to more closely represent
the seismic characteristics of the WFZ and better capture this possible high
likelihood of a surface-faulting earthquake on the Salt Lake City segment,
design ground motion parameters for seismic slope stability analyses shall be
based on the peak accelerations with a 3.5 percent probability in 50 years
(1,400-year return period). Peak bedrock ground motions can be readily obtained
via the internet from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) National
Seismic Hazard Maps, Data and Documentation web page (USGS, 2002), which is
based on Frankel and others (2002). PGAs obtained from the USGS (2002) web page
should be adjusted for effects of soil/rock (site-class) conditions in
accordance with Seed and others (2001). Site specific response analysis may
also be used to develop PGA values as long as the procedures, input data, and
results are thoroughly documented, and deemed acceptable by the City.
12.2   Pseudo-Static Evaluations
Pseudo-static methods for evaluating seismic slope stability are acceptable as
long as minimum factors of safety are satisfied, and due consideration is given
in the selection of the seismic coefficient, kh, reduction in material shear
strengths, and the factor of safety for pseudo-static conditions.
Pseudo-static seismic slope stability analyses can be performed using the
"screening analysis" procedure described in Blake et al. (2002). For that
procedure a kh-value is selected from seismic source characteristics (modal
magnitude, modal distance, and firm rock peak ground acceleration) and an
acceptable level of deformation (5 cm) is specified. For that procedure, a
factor of safety of 1.0 or greater is considered acceptable; otherwise, an
analysis of permanent seismic slope deformation shall be performed.
12.3   Permanent Seismic Slope Deformation
For seismic slope stability analyses, estimates of permanent seismic
displacement are preferred and may be performed using the procedures outlined
in Blake and others (2002). It should be noted that Bray and Rathje (1998),
referenced in Blake and others (2002), has been updated and superseded by Bray
and Travasarou (2007), which is the City's currently preferred method. For
those analyses, calculated seismic displacements shall be 5 cm or less, or
mitigation measures shall be proposed to limit calculated displacements to 5 cm
or less.
For specific projects, different levels of tolerable displacement may be
possible, but site-specific conditions, which shall include the following, must
be considered:
(a)   The extent to which the displacements are localized or broadly
distributed - broadly distributed shear deformations would generally be less
damaging and more displacement could be allowed.
(b)   The displacement tolerance of the foundation system - stiff, well-
reinforced foundations with lateral continuity of vertical support elements
would be more resistant to damage (and hence could potentially tolerate larger
displacements) than typical slabs-on-grade or foundation systems with
individual spread footings.
(c)   The potential of the foundation soils to experience strain softening -
slopes composed of soils likely to experience strain softening should be
designed for relatively low displacements if peak strengths are used in the
evaluation of ky due to the potential for progressive failure, which could
involve very large displacements following strain softening.
In order to consider a threshold larger than 5 cm, the project consultant shall
provide prior, acceptable justification to the City and obtain the City's
approval. Such justification shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
City, that the proposed project will achieve acceptable performance 1 .
13.0   WATER RETENTION BASINS AND FLOOD CONTROL CHANNELS
For cut, fill, or natural slopes of water-retention basins or flood-control
channels, slope stability analyses shall be performed. In addition to analyzing
typical static and seismic slope stability, those analyses shall consider the
effects of rapid drawdown, if such a condition could develop.
14.0   MITIGATION
When slope stability hazards are determined to exist on a project, measures to
mitigate impacts from those hazards shall be implemented. Some guidance
regarding mitigation measures is provided in Blake et al. (2002). Slope
stability mitigation methods include 1) hazard avoidance, 2) grading to improve
slope stability, 3) reinforcement of the slope or improvement of the soil
within the slope, and (4) reinforcement of the structure built on the slope to
tolerate anticipated slope displacements.
Where mitigation measures that are intended to add stabilizing forces to the
slope are to be implemented, consideration may need to be given to strain
compatibility. For example, if a compacted fill buttress is proposed to
stabilize laterally unsupported bedding or a landslide, the amount of
deformation needed to mobilize the recommended shear strength in the buttress
shall be considered to confirm that it will not result in adverse movements of
the upslope bedding or landslide deposits. Similarly, if a series of drilled
soldier piers is to be used to support a potentially unstable slope and a
residential structure will be built on the piers, pier deformations resulting
from movements needed to mobilize the soil's shear strength shall be compared
to tolerable deflections in the supported structure.
14.1   Full Mitigation
Full mitigation of slope stability hazards shall be performed for developments
in the City. Remedial measures that produce static factors of safety in excess
of 1.5 and acceptable seismic displacement estimates shall be implemented as
needed.
14.2   Partial Mitigation for Seismic Displacement Hazards
On some projects or portions thereof (such as small structural additions,
residential "infill projects", non-habitable structures, and non-structural
natural-slope areas), full mitigation of seismic slope displacements may not be
possible, due to physical or economic constraints. In those cases, partial
mitigation, to the extent that it prevents structural collapse, injury, and
loss of life, may be possible if it can be provided consistent with IBC
philosophies, and if it is approved by Draper City. The applicability of
partial mitigations to specific projects will be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis.
15.0   Notice of Geologic Hazard and Waiver of Liability
For developments where full mitigation of seismic slope displacements is not
implemented, a Notice of Geologic Hazard shall be recorded with the proposed
development describing the displacement hazard at issue and the partial
mitigation employed. The Notice shall clearly state that the seismic
displacement hazard at the site has been reduced by the partial mitigation, but
not totally eliminated.
In addition, the owner shall assume all risks, waive all claims against the
City and its consultants, and indemnify and hold the City and its consultants
harmless from any and all claims arising from the partial mitigation of the
seismic displacement hazard.
   APPENDIX C - REFERENCES
Black, B.D., Hecker, Suanne, Hylland, M.D., Christenson, G.E., and McDonald,
G.N. (2003), Quaternary fault and fold database and map of Utah, Utah
Geological Survey Map 193DM, CD.
Blake, T.F., Hollingsworth, R.A. and Stewart, J.P., Editors (2002), Recommended
Procedures for Implementation of DMG Special Publication 117, Guidelines for
analyzing and mitigating landslide hazards in California: organized by the
Southern California Earthquake Center, available for download at: http://
www.scec.org/resources/catalog/hazardmitigation.html#land.
California Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG) (1997), Guidelines for
evaluating and mitigating seismic hazards in California, CDMG Special
Publication (SP) 117.
FEMA (1997), NEHRP guidelines for the seismic rehabilitation of buildings:
FEMA-273/October,
Frankel, A.D., Petersen, M.D., Mueller, C.S., Haller, K.M., Wheeler, R.L.,
Leyendecker, E.V., Wesson, R.L., Harmsen, S.C., Cramer, C.H., Perkins, D.M.,
and Rukstales, K.S. (2002), Documentation for the 2002 update of the National
Seismic Hazard Maps, USGS Open-File Report 02-420.
IBC (2006), International Building Code, International Code Council, Inc., 658
p
Lund, W.R. (2005), Consensus preferred recurrence-interval and vertical slip-
rate estimates-Review of Utah paleoseismic- trenching data by the Utah
Quaternary Fault Parameters Working Group, Utah Geological Survey Bulletin 134,
CD.
McCalpin, J.P. (2002), Post-Bonneville paleoearthquake chronology of the Salt
Lake City segment, Wasatch fault zone, from the 1999 "megatrench" site, Utah
Geological Survey Miscellaneous Publication 02-7, 38 p.
Newmark, N.M. (1965), Effects of earthquakes on dams and embankments,
Geotechnique, v. 25, no. 4.
Olig, S.S. (2007), written communication, August 16, 2007: URS Corp, Oakland,
California.
Olig, S.S., McDonald, G., Black, B., DuRoss, C., and Lund, W.R. (2006), A
longer and more complete paleoseismic record for the Provo segment of the
Wasatch fault zone, Utah, (abs.), Seismological Research Letters, v. 77, p.
274.
Seed, R.B., Cetin, K.O., Moss, R.E.S., Kammerer, A.M., Wu, J., Pestana, J.M.,
and Riemer, M.F. (2001), Recent advances in soil liquefaction engineering and
seismic site response evaluation, Fourth International Conference on Recent
Advances in Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics, University
of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla, Missouri, 2001, Paper No. SPL-2, 45 p.
Stark, T.D., Choi, H., and McCone, S. (2005), "Drained shear strength
parameters for analysis of landslides," Journal of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Engineering, v. 131, no. 5, pp. 575-588.
Stewart, J.P., Blake, T.M., and Hollingsworth, R.A. (2003), Development of a
screen analysis procedure for seismic slope stability: Earthquake Spectra, 19
(3), pp. 697-712.
USGS (2002), National Seismic Hazard Maps, Data and Documentation web page:
http://eqhazmap.usgs.gov. For obtaining a pga for a specific probability or
return period see http://earthquake.usgs.gov/research/hazmaps/design/.
Watry, S.M. and Lade, P.V. (2000), "Residual shear strengths of bentonites on
Palos Verdes Peninsula, California," Proceedings of the session of Geo-Denver
2000, American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 323-342.
(Ord. 796, 12-11-2007)
 
Notes
  1. The SP117 Guidelines Committee (Blake and others, 2002) struggled in its
  deliberations regarding this issue and was unable to reach unanimous
  consensus. However, it was the judgment of all but one of the committee
  members (14 out of the 15) that when the critical slip surface from slope
  stability analysis daylights within a structure that is likely to be occupied
  by people during an earthquake, and if calculated median displacements (u)
  can be maintained at less than 5 cm, it is unlikely that the building would
  be damaged sufficiently to significantly threaten its structural integrity.
  One of the committee members felt that the calculated median seismic
  displacements through occupied structures should be maintained at less than
  15 cm, but other than having that opinion, he did not offer a specific
  justification for that choice. Neither of those values (5 or 15 cm) is
  necessarily the "correct" median value, because they are judgment-based.
   
  Ideally, allowable displacements for analyses would be established from a
  database in which observed slope displacements from earthquakes are
  correlated to measures of damage in structures. Unfortunately, however, such
1 data do not exist in sufficient quantity to be useful, and hence there is an
  insufficient basis for selecting allowable displacements empirically.
  Accordingly, allowable displacement levels are established from engineering
  judgment. A number of factors affect the degree to which slope displacements
  will be damaging to structures. Displacements that occur beneath occupied
  structures are more critical than those in garden areas or streets.
  Displacements that occur abruptly across a narrow shear surface can be more
  damaging than those that are broadly distributed across a wide zone of
  deformation. Moreover, different structural systems will have different
  tolerances to differential movements beneath their foundation.
   
  In their recent paper, Bray and Travasarou (2007) describe displacements of 1
  cm or less as "negligible" and displacements of 5 cm or less as "minor." In
  an oral presentation made to the Los Angeles section of ASCE (on November 15,
  2007), Jonathan Bray described seismic displacements of 15 cm to 1 m as
  "moderate" and those larger than 1 m as "large," but he cautioned that such
  general classifications depend on things such as the foundation system,
  consequences of displacement, the soil behavior, etc.
9-19-161-4: APPENDIX D, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIQUEFACTION INVESTIGATIONS AND
EVALUATIONS:
1.0   INTRODUCTION
The procedures outlined herein are intended to provide consultants with a
general outline for performing liquefaction investigations and to specify the
expectations of Draper City. These standards constitute the minimum level of
effort required in conducting liquefaction investigations in Draper City.
Considering the complexity inherent in performing liquefaction investigations,
additional effort beyond the minimum standards presented herein may be required
at some sites to adequately address the liquefaction potential at the site. The
information presented herein does not relieve consultants of their duty to
perform additional geologic or geotechnical engineering analyses they believe
are necessary to adequately assess the liquefaction potential at a site.
The purpose of establishing minimum standards for liquefaction investigations
is to:
(a)   Protect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the public by
minimizing the potentially adverse effects of liquefaction and related hazards;
(b)   Assist property owners and land developers in conducting reasonable and
adequate studies;
(c)   Provide consulting engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers with
a common basis for preparing proposals, conducting investigations, and
mitigation; and,
(d)   Provide an objective framework for regulatory review of liquefaction
investigation reports.
1.1   References and Sources
The minimum standards presented herein were developed, in part, from the
following sources:
(a)   CDMG Special Publication 117, Guidelines for evaluating and mitigating
seismic hazards in California (1997).
(b)   Recommended procedures for implementation of DMG special publication 117,
guidelines for analyzing and mitigating liquefaction hazards in California
(Martin and Lew, 1999).
(c)   Proceedings of the NCEER Workshop on Evaluation of Liquefaction
Resistance of Soils, Technical Report NCEER-97-0022 (Youd and Idriss, 1997).
(d)   Liquefaction Resistance of Soils: Summary Report from the 1996 and 1998
NCEER/NSF Workshops on Evaluation of Liquefaction Resistance of Soils, Journal
of Geotechnical and Environmental Engineering, (Youd et al., 2001).
(e)   Salt Lake County geologic hazards ordinance (2002).
(d)   Draper City geologic hazard ordinance (2003).
(e)   City of Camarillo, California 2003 Guidelines for the preparation of
geotechnical and geologic studies, prepared by Fugro, dated June 18, 2003.
(f)   City of Palmdale, California, Guidelines for preparation of geotechnical
reports, prepared by GeoDynamics, Inc., dated April 2006 (draft copy).
(g)   City of Malibu, California, Guidelines for the preparation of engineering
geologic and geotechnical engineering reports and procedure for report
submittal, prepared by Bing Yen and Associates) dated April, 2006.
1.2   Properties Requiring Liquefaction Analyses
Plate A-2 (Appendix A of the Draper City Geologic Hazards Ordinance, chapter 9-
19), Liquefaction Special Study Area Map, depicts generalized liquefaction
susceptibility for the city, and shall be used to determine whether or not a
site-specific liquefaction assessment is required for a particular project.
The Liquefaction Special Study Area map is based on a regional- scale
investigation of Salt Lake County. These maps may not identify all areas that
have potential for liquefaction; a site located outside of a zone of required
investigation is not necessarily free from liquefaction hazard. The zone does
not always include lateral spread run-out areas. The Liquefaction Special Study
Area map is available from the Draper City Planning Department.
The Draper City Geologic Hazards Ordinance requires a site- specific
liquefaction investigation to be performed prior to approval of a project based
on the land-use/liquefaction potential matrix shown in the following table.
 
Type Of Facility            Liquefaction Study Area Acceptable Factor Of Safety
Critical facilities
(essential facilities,
hazardous facilities, and
special occupancy           YES                     1.3
structures as defined in
section
9-19-20
Category III and IV in
table 1604.58 of the most   YES                     1.3
recently adopted edition of
the IBC.
Industrial and commercial   YES                     1.25
buildings.
Residential structures and  NO                       
subdivisions
 
1.3   Roles of Engineering Geology and Geotechnical Engineering
The investigation of liquefaction hazard is an interdisciplinary practice. The
site investigation report must be prepared by a qualified engineering geologist
or geotechnical engineer, who must have competence in the field of seismic
hazard evaluation and mitigation, and be reviewed by a qualified engineering
geologist or geotechnical engineer, also competent in the field of seismic
hazard evaluation and mitigation.
Because of the differing expertise and abilities of qualified engineering
geologists and geotechnical engineers, the scope of the site investigation
report for the project may require that both types of professionals prepare and
review the report, each practicing in the area of their expertise. Involvement
of both a qualified engineering geologist and geotechnical engineer will
generally provide greater assurance that the hazard is properly identified,
assessed, and mitigated.
Liquefaction analyses are the responsibility of the geotechnical engineer,
although the engineering geologist should be involved in the application of
screening criteria (section 3.0, steps 1 and 2) and general geologic site
evaluation (section 4.1) to map the likely extent of liquefiable deposits and
shallow groundwater. Engineering properties of earth material shall be
evaluated by the geotechnical engineer. The performance of the quantitative
liquefaction analysis resulting in a numerical factor of safety and
quantitative assessment of settlement and liquefaction-induced permanent ground
displacement shall be performed by geotechnical engineers. The geotechnical and
civil engineers shall develop all mitigation and design recommendations. Ground
motion parameters for use in quantitative liquefaction analyses may be provided
by either the engineering geologist or geotechnical engineer.
1.4   Minimum Qualifications of the Licensed Professional
Liquefaction analyses must be performed by qualified engineering geologists and
qualified geotechnical engineers (see sections
9-19-050 and
9-19-060 of the Draper City Geologic Hazards Ordinance).
  2.0   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Except for the derivation of input ground motion (see section 5.0),
liquefaction investigations should be performed in general accordance with the
latest version of Recommended Procedures for Implementation of DMG Special
Publication 117, Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating Liquefaction in
California (Martin and Lew, 1999). Additional protocol for liquefaction
investigations is provided in Youd and Idriss (1997). See Draper City Geologic
Hazard Ordinance (Chapter 9-19) for supplemental requirements. Acceptable
factors of safety are shown on the table in section 1.2.
3.0   PRELIMINARY SCREENING FOR LIQUEFACTION
The Liquefaction Study Area map is based on broad regional studies and does not
replace site-specific studies. The fact that a site is located within a
Liquefaction Study Area does not mean that there is a significant liquefaction
potential at the site, only that a study shall be performed to determine if
there is.
Soil liquefaction is caused by strong seismic ground shaking where saturated,
cohesionless, granular soil undergoes a significant loss in shear strength that
can result in settlement and permanent ground displacement. Surface effects of
liquefaction include: settlement, bearing capacity failure, ground
oscillations, lateral spread and flow failure. It has been well documented that
soil liquefaction may occur in clean sands, silty sands, and sandy silt, non-
plastic silts and gravelly soils. The following conditions must be present for
liquefaction to occur:
(a)   Soils must be submerged below the water table;
(b)   Soils must be loose to moderately dense;
(c)   Ground shaking must be relatively intense; and
(d)   The duration of ground shaking must be sufficient for the soils to
generate seismically-induced excess pore water pressure and lose their shearing
resistance.
The following screening criteria may be applied to determine if further
quantitative evaluation of liquefaction hazard is required:
(a)   If the estimated maximum past-, current-, and maximum- future-
groundwater-levels (i.e., the highest groundwater level applicable for
liquefaction analyses) are determined to be deeper than 50 feet below the
existing ground surface or proposed finished grade (whichever is deeper),
liquefaction assessments are not required. For soil materials that are located
above the level of the groundwater, a quantitative assessment of seismically
induced settlement is required.
(b)   If "bedrock" or similar lithified formational material underlies the
site, those materials need not be considered liquefiable and no analysis of
their liquefaction potential is necessary.
(c)   If the corrected standard penetration blow count, (N1)60, is greater than
or equal to 33 in all samples with a sufficient number of tests, liquefaction
assessments are not required. If cone penetration test soundings are made, the
corrected cone penetration test tip resistance, qc1N, should be greater than or
equal to 180 in all soundings in sand materials, otherwise liquefaction
assessments are needed.
If plastic soil (PI 20) materials are encountered during site exploration,
those materials may be considered non-liquefiable. Additional acceptable
screening criteria regarding the effects of plasticity on liquefaction
susceptibility are presented in Boulanger and Idriss (2004), Bray and Sancio
(2006), and Seed and others (2003).
If the screening investigation clearly demonstrates the absence of liquefaction
hazards at a project site and the City concurs, the screening investigation
will satisfy the site investigation report requirement for liquefaction
hazards. If not, a quantitative evaluation is required to assess the
liquefaction hazards.
4.0   FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
Geotechnical field investigations are routinely performed for new projects as
part of the normal development and design process. Geologic reconnaissance and
subsurface explorations are normally performed as part of the field exploration
program even when liquefaction does not need to be investigated.
4.1   Geologic Reconnaissance
Geologic research and reconnaissance are important to provide information to
define the extent of unconsolidated deposits that may be prone to liquefaction.
Such information should be presented on geologic maps and cross sections and
provide a description of the formations present at the site that includes the
nature, thickness, and origin of Quaternary deposits with liquefaction
potential. There also should be an analysis of groundwater conditions at the
site that includes the highest recorded water level and the highest water level
likely to occur under the most adverse foreseeable conditions in the future.
During the field investigation, the engineering geologist should map the limits
of unconsolidated deposits with liquefaction potential. Liquefaction typically
occurs in cohesionless silt, sand, and fine-grained gravel deposits of Holocene
to late Pleistocene age in areas where the groundwater is shallower than about
50 feet.
Shallow groundwater may exist for a variety of reasons, some of which are of
natural and or manmade origin. Landscape irrigation, on-site sewage disposal,
and unlined manmade lakes reservoirs, and storm-water detention basins may
create a shallow groundwater table in sediments that were previously
unsaturated.
4.2   Subsurface Explorations
Subsurface explorations shall consist of drilled-borings and/or cone
penetration tests (CPTs). The exploration program shall be planned to determine
the soil stratigraphy, groundwater level, and indices that could be used to
evaluate the potential for liquefaction by either in situ testing or by
laboratory testing of soil samples. Borings and CPT soundings must penetrate a
minimum of 50 feet below final ground surface. If a standard penetration test
(SPT) is used, sampling intervals shall not exceed 2.5 feet.
For saturated cohesionless soils where the SPT (N1)60 values are less than 15,
or where CPT tip resistances are below 60 tsf, grain-size analyses, hydrometers
tests, and Atterberg Limits tests shall be performed on these soils to further
evaluate their potential for permanent ground displacement (Youd et al., 2002)
and other forms of liquefaction-induced ground failure and settlement.
Where a structure may have subterranean construction or deep foundations (e.g.,
caissons or piles), the depth of investigation should extend to a depth that is
a minimum of 20 feet (6 m) below the lowest expected foundation level (e.g.,
caisson bottom or pile tip) or 50 feet (15 m) below the existing ground surface
or lowest proposed finished grade, whichever is deeper. If, during the
investigation, the indices to evaluate liquefaction indicate that the
liquefaction potential may extend below that depth, the exploration should be
continued until a significant thickness (at least 10 feet or 3 m, to the extent
possible) of nonliquefiable soils are encountered.
5.0   GROUND MOTION FOR LIQUEFACTION SUSCEPTIBILITY AND GROUND DEFORMATION
ANALYSES
The two controlling faults that would most affect Draper City are the Salt Lake
City and Provo segments of the Wasatch Fault Zone (WFZ). Repeated Holocene
movement has been well documented along both segments (Black and others, 2003).
Studies along the Provo segment of the WFZ indicate a recurrence interval of
about 1150 years (Olig, and others, 2006; later revised, Olig, 2007) and the
most recent event being about 500 to 650 years ago (Black and others, 2003;
Olig, and others, 2006). Studies along the Salt Lake City segment of the WFZ
indicate a recurrence interval of about 1300 years and the most recent event
being about 1300 years ago (Lund, 2005). Based on the paleoseismic record of
the Salt Lake City segment and assuming a time-dependent model, McCalpin (2002)
estimates a conditional probability (using a log-normal renewal model) of 16.5%
in the next 100 years (8.25% in the next 50 years) for a M>7 surface-faulting
earthquake. Therefore, using a time-dependent rather than Poisson or random
model for earthquake recurrence, the likelihood of a large surface-faulting
earthquake on the Salt Lake City segment of the WFZ is relatively high and
therefore the Salt Lake City segment is considered the primary controlling
fault for deterministic analyses.
In regards to design ground accelerations for liquefaction analyses, Draper
City prefers a probabilistic approach to determining the likelihood that
different levels of ground motion will be exceeded at a particular site within
a given time period. In order to more closely represent the seismic
characteristics of the WFZ and better capture this possible high likelihood of
a surface-faulting earthquake on the Salt Lake City segment, design ground
motion parameters for liquefaction analyses shall be based on the peak
accelerations with a 3.5 percent probability in 50 years (1,400-year return
period). Peak bedrock ground motions can be readily obtained via the internet
from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) National Seismic Hazard Maps,
Data and Documentation web page (USGS, 2002), which is based on Frankel and
others (2002). PGAs obtained from the USGS (2002) web page should be adjusted
for effects of soil/rock (site-class) conditions in accordance with Seed and
others (2001) or other appropriate methods that consider the site-specific soil
conditions and their potential for amplification/deamplification of the high
frequency strong motion.
6.0   REMEDIAL DESIGN
Sites, facilities, buildings, structures and utilities that are founded on or
traverse liquefiable soils may require further remedial design and/or
relocation to avoid liquefaction-induced damage. These should be investigated
and evaluated on a site- specific basis with sufficient geologic and
geotechnical evaluations to support the remedial design and/or mitigative plan.
This design or plan may include: changes/modifications to the soil, foundation
system, structural frame or support of the building, etc. and should be
reviewed and approved by the City.
7.0   SUBMITTALS
Submittals for review shall include: boring logs; geologic cross- sections;
laboratory data; discussions pertaining to how idealized subsurface conditions
and parameters used for analyses were developed; analytical results, including
computer output files (on request); and summaries of the liquefaction analyses
and conclusions regarding liquefaction potential and likely types and amounts
of ground failure.
Subsurface geologic and groundwater conditions must be illustrated on geologic
cross-sections and must be utilized by the geotechnical engineer for the
liquefaction analyses. If on- site sewage or storm-water disposal exists or is
proposed, the liquefaction analyses shall include the effects of the effluent
plume on liquefaction potential.
The results of any liquefaction analyses must be submitted with pertinent
backup documentation (i.e., calculations, computer output, etc.). Printouts of
input data, output data (on request), and graphical plots must be submitted for
each computer-aided liquefaction analysis. In addition, input data files,
recorded on diskettes, CDs, or other electronic media, may be requested to
facilitate the City's review.
   Appendix D - References
Bartlett, S.F. and Youd, T. L., (1995), Empirical prediction of liquefaction-
induced lateral spread: Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 121, No. 4,
April, A.S.C.E., pp. 316-329.
Black, B.D., Hecker, S., Hylland, M.D., Christenson, G.E., and McDonald, G.N.,
(2003), Quaternary fault and fold database and map of Utah, Utah Geological
Survey Map 193DM.
Boulanger, R.W., and Idriss I.M., (2004), "Evaluating the potential for
liquefaction resistance or cyclic failures of silts and clays, Report UCD/CGM-
04/01 University of California, Davis California.
Bray J. D. and Sancio R. B., (2006), Assessment of Liquefaction Susceptibility
of Fine-Grained Soils, ASCE Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental
Engineering, September 2006.
California Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG), (1997), Guidelines for
evaluating and mitigating seismic hazards in California, CDMG Special
Publication (SP) 117.
Lund, W.R. (2005), Consensus preferred recurrence-interval and vertical slip-
rate estimates-Review of Utah paleoseismic- trenching data by the Utah
Quaternary Fault Parameters Working Group, Utah Geological Survey Bulletin 134,
CD.
McCalpin, J., (2002), Post-Bonneville paleoearthquake chronology of the Salt
Lake City segment, Wasatch fault zone, from the 1999 (mega-trench) site, Utah
Geological Survey Miscellaneous Publication 02-7.
Frankel, A.D., Petersen, M.D., Mueller, C.S., Haller, K.M., Wheeler, R.L.,
Leyendecker, E.V., Wesson, R.L., Harmsen, S.C., Cramer, C.H., Perkins, D.M.,
and Rukstales, K.S., (2002), Documentation for the 2002 Update of the National
Seismic Hazard Maps, U.S.G.S. Open-File Report 02-420, 33p.
Martin, G.R. and Lew, M., eds., (1999), Recommended procedures for
implementation of DMG special publication 117, guidelines for analyzing and
mitigating liquefaction potential in California, Southern California Earthquake
Center (SCEC), University of Southern California, 63 p.
Olig, Susan S., McDonald, Greg, Black, Bill D., DuRoss, Christopher B., and
Lund, William R., (2006), A longer and more complete paleoseismic record for
the Provo segment of the Wasatch fault zone, Utah, 2006 Seismological Society
of America Annual Meeting in San Francisco, California, April 17-22, 2006.
Olig, (2007), URS Corp, Oakland, California; written communication, August,
2007.
Seed, H.B., and Idriss, I.M., (1982), Ground motion and soil liquefaction
during earthquakes: Earthquake Engineering Research Institute, Oakland,
California, 135 p.
Seed, R.B., Cetin, K.O., Moss, R.E.S., Kammerer, A.M., Wu, J., Pestana, J.M.,
and Riemer, M.F., (2001), Recent advances in soil liquefaction engineering and
seismic site response evaluation, Fourth International Conference on Recent
Advances in Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics, University
of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla, Missouri, 2001, Paper No. SPL-2, 45 p.
Seed, R.B., Cetin, K.O., Moss, R.E.S., Kammerer, A.M., Wu, J., Pestana, J.M.,
and Riemer, M.F. (2001) Recent Advances in Soil Liquefaction Engineering and
Seismic Site Response Evaluation, Proceedings, Fourth International Conference
on Recent Advances in Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics and
Symposium in Honor of Professor W.D. Liam Finn, San Diego, California, March
26-31, 2001, 45 pp.
Seed, R.B., Cetin, K.O., Moss, R.E.S., Kammerer, A.M., Wu, J., Pestana, J.M.,
and Riemer, M.F., Sancio, R.B., Bray, J.D., Kayen, R.E., and Faris, A. (2003)
Recent Advances in Soil Liquefaction Engineering: A Unified and Consistent
Framework, 26th Annual ASCE Los Angeles Geotechnical Spring Seminar, Keynote
Presentation, H.M.S. Queen Mary, Long Beach, California, April 30, 2003, 71 pp.
Youd, T.L., and Idriss, I.M., eds., (1997), Proceedings of the NCEER workshop
on evaluation of liquefaction resistance of soils: National Center for
Earthquake Engineering Research Technical Report NCEER 97-0022.
Youd, T.L., and Gilstrap, S.D., (1999), Liquefaction and deformation of silty
and fine-grained soils: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering, Lisboa, Portugal, 21-25 June 1999, Seco e
Pinto (ed.), pp. 1013-1020.
Youd, T.C., Hansen, C.M., and Bartlett, S.F., (2002), Revised MLR equations for
predicting lateral spread displacement, ASCE Journal of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Engineering, December 2002.
(Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-161-5: APPENDIX E, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DEBRIS FLOW ANALYSES:
Debris-flow reports shall follow general guidance contained in "Guidelines for
the geologic evaluation of debris-flow hazards on alluvial fans in Utah," Utah
Geological Survey Miscellaneous Publication 05-6. Debris-flow hazard analyses
and mitigation measures may require contributions from hydrologists as well as
qualified engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers.
(Ord. 935, 6-1-2010)
9-19-161-6: APPENDIX F, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ROCKFALL ANALYSES:
Useful methods to evaluate rock-fall hazards are outlined in: Evans, S.G., and
Hungr, O., 1993, The assessment of rockfall hazard at the base of talus slopes:
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, v. 30, p. 620-636; Jones, C.L., Higgins, J.D.,
and Andrew, R.D., 2000, Colorado rockfall simulation program, version 4.0:
Report prepared for the Colorado Department of Transportation, 127 p.; and
Wieczorek, G.F., Morrissey, M.M., Iovine, G., and Godt, J., 1998, Rock-fall
hazards in the Yosemite Valley: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 98-467,
7 p., 1 pl., scale 1:12,000. Rock-fall studies shall be prepared by a qualified
engineering geologist and may require contributions from a qualified
geotechnical engineer, particularly in the design of mitigation measures.
(Ord. 796, 12-11-2007)
CHAPTER 20
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
SECTION:
9-20-010: Purpose
9-20-020: Scope
9-20-030: Definitions
9-20-040: Design Standards
9-20-050: Design Suggestions
9-20-060: Security
9-20-070: Illumination Standards
9-20-080: Buffering
9-20-090: Staged Lighting
9-20-100: Required Submittals
9-20-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety, and
welfare of city residents and businesses by regulating the design and
installation of lighting fixtures to achieve the following objectives:
A.   To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting;
B.   To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians;
C.   To protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky and help to
preserve the quality of life for residents and visitors of the city;
D.   To prevent light pollution and light trespass in all areas of the city;
E.   To promote energy conservation by installing efficient and cost effective
lighting;
F.   To ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote
safety and security by eliminating shadows and blinding glare;
G.   To allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures;
H.   To provide lighting guidelines;
I.   To provide assistance to property owners and occupants in bringing
nonconforming lighting into conformance with this chapter;
J.   To work with other county jurisdictions as well as the state to meet the
purposes of this chapter;
K.   To provide a superior aesthetic and design quality of lighting and
fixtures; and
L.   To eliminate the over illumination of commercial sites. (Ord. 795, 1-15-
2008)
9-20-020: SCOPE:
All outdoor/exterior lighting shall be in compliance with the regulations
established by this chapter and any other chapters of this title. These
regulations shall apply to all outdoor lighting, including, but not limited to,
buildings and structures, recreational areas, parking lots, landscaping,
streets, and signage. (Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located,
or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outside. Fixtures that
are installed indoors that are intended to light something outside are
considered exterior lighting for the intent of this chapter.
FIXTURE: The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system, including the
elements designed to give light output control, such as a reflector or mirror,
the refractor or lens, the ballast, the housing, and the attachment parts.
FLOODLIGHT: Light that generally produces from one thousand (1,000) to one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens and is designed to flood a well defined
area with light.
FOOT-CANDLE: Illuminance produced on a surface one foot (1') from a uniform
point source of one candela, measured by a light meter.
FULL CUTOFF FIXTURES: Fixtures that are designed or shielded in such a manner
that all light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamps or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running
through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.
GLARE: Intense light that results in discomfort and/or a reduction of visual
performance and visibility.
ILLUMINANCE: Density of luminous flux incident on a surface. A typical unit of
measurement is foot-candle or lux. For the purposes of this chapter, all units
of illuminance shall be measured in foot-candles.
ILLUMINATION RATIO: The relationship between the maximum illumination value
observed to the average of all illumination values observed.
LAMP: The source of electric light: the bulb and its housing as a part of the
luminaire, also referred to as a light source.
LIGHT: The form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the eye to make sight
possible.
LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effect of manmade light, including, but not
limited to, light trespass, uplighting, the uncomfortable distraction to the
eye, or any manmade light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky,
reducing the general quality of life and the reasonable enjoyment of property
for the community; often used to denote urban sky glow.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light falling where it is not wanted or needed, such as a light
on a property that shines onto the property of others.
LIGHTING: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light.
LUMEN: Unit of luminous flux equal to the light emitted in a unit solid angle
by a uniform point source of one candle intensity. One foot-candle is equal to
one lumen per square foot. One lux is equal to one lumen per square meter.
LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, the fixture, and
other parts.
WALL PACK: A light or grouping of lights mounted to the exterior of a building
designed or implemented to provide illumination to an area near the building.
(Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-040: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A.   Recreational Lighting:
1.   The following standards apply to the lighting of all nonresidential
outdoor recreational facilities except baseball, softball, soccer, volleyball,
football fields, driving ranges, outdoor arenas and amphitheaters, or other
field recreational facilities:
a.   The height of any light source shall not exceed twenty feet (20') to the
top of the luminaire or pole, whichever is higher, as depicted in
figure 9-20-1 of this section.
FIGURE 9-20-1
TYPICAL MAXIMUM HEIGHT DETERMINATION METHODS FOR LIGHTING
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3938.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-3940.jpg]
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3942.jpg]
 
b.   All lighting or illumination units or sources shall be hooded or shielded
so as to allow no light trespass onto any adjacent lot or real property. Lights
or illuminating units shall not direct light, either directly or through a
reflecting device, upon any adjacent real property.
2.   All of the recreational lighting excepted from the above standards shall
meet the following standards:
a.   All metal halide lamps shall be filtered by glass, acrylic, or translucent
enclosures.
b.   No lighting of one hundred fifty (150) watts or greater shall be used
after ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.
B.   Sign Lighting: Although signage is strongly encouraged to be back lit
whenever possible, external lighting of the face of signs, when implemented,
shall be placed above the sign, facing downward toward the sign, and shielded
in a manner that the lamp shall not be visible from any adjacent lot or real
property. Lamp visibility shall be considered as if the glass or globe of the
fixture was not present. External lighting for signage should not produce more
than 0.5 foot-candle of light reflection from the sign. Also see section
9-26-080 of this title.
C.   Security, Landscaping, Architectural, And Other Lighting: All outdoor
lights shall be shielded to reduce light trespass to permissible levels.
D.   Other Pole Mounted Lighting For Parking, Etc.: All lights mounted on poles
eight feet (8') or greater in height shall be directed down perpendicular to
the ground. The lamp shall be shielded so that it will not be visible from any
adjacent real property. Lamp visibility shall be considered as if the glass or
globe of the fixture was not present. Pole lighting should only be implemented
for parking areas and other vehicular circulation features.
E.   Street Pole Mounted Lighting: All lights mounted on poles eight feet (8')
or greater in height shall be directed down perpendicular to the ground. The
light source shall be full cutoff fixtures. (Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
F.   Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting, including public street
lighting, as applicable, shall meet the following design criteria:
1.   Background spaces like parking lots shall be illuminated as unobtrusively
as possible to meet the functional needs of safe circulation and protection of
people and property. Foreground spaces, such as building entrances and outside
seating areas, shall utilize local lighting that defines the space without
glare.
2.   Light sources shall be full cutoff fixtures to minimize the potential for
glare and unnecessary diffusion on adjacent property.
3.   All outdoor light not necessary for security purposes shall be reduced,
activated by motion sensors devices, or turned off during nonoperation hours.
4.   Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other object
mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall use a narrow cone beam or light
that will not produce illumination of 0.2 foot-candle or greater above the
object being lit. All such lights shall be recessed such that the surface of
the globe is flush with the finished grade or object's base in which the light
is mounted.
5.   For upward directed architectural, landscape, and decorative lighting,
direct light emissions shall not exceed 0.1 foot-candle at the building
roofline.
6.   Light fixtures shall be located, whenever possible, on the interior of
parking areas with light directed such that only the parking areas receive
direct light. Wall pack lighting to be located on building facades shall be
implemented only for the illumination of building entrance areas and directed
such that only the area around building entrances is illuminated.
7.   Maximum pole height is twenty feet (20') except as provided in section
9-20-090 of this chapter.
G.   Number Of Primary Lighting Poles: The maximum number of primary light
poles to be implemented on a site shall be limited to a ratio of one pole for
not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross site area. If
additional lighting is necessary, a bollard or pedestrian scale light pole of
not more than eight feet (8') in height may be used.
H.   Light Pole Spacing: Light poles shall be spaced such that overlap in the
areas of direct lighting is eliminated.
I.   Wall Packs: The implementation of wall pack lighting should be stringently
avoided with the exception of sites which are incorporating existing lights on
existing structures.
J.   Bollards: The use of bollard style lighting should be the primary
illumination source for all pedestrian walkways and areas as well as buildings
entry areas.
K.   Colors:
1.   Light Color: Site lighting is strongly encouraged to be a white light.
2.   Pole Colors: Site lighting poles shall be black in color. The planning
commission may permit colors other than black for lighting poles upon
establishing findings that the color: a) will architecturally match the colors
of the building(s) on the site to a greater extent than black; and b) will less
dramatically detract from the appearance of the building(s) on the site than
will black poles.
3.   Uniformity: All site lighting poles shall be of the same color throughout
any one site or development.
L.   Light Pole Placement: Site lighting is strongly encouraged to be placed on
the site such that the poles do not line the exterior of the site but rather
are placed toward the interior of the site to reduce the number of poles on a
site and to allow the inherent grade area coverage of the light to be
maximized. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
9-20-050: DESIGN SUGGESTIONS:
There are many ways to adequately illuminate a site without reducing the
aesthetics or safety of the site. Examples of alternative methods strongly
encouraged by this chapter are the use of bollards, teardrop lights, lower
poles, and downward facing gooseneck lights. (Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-060: SECURITY:
Sufficient lighting should be provided to protect persons and property as well
as to allow for proper function of surveillance equipment. Security lighting
plans shall utilize shielded fixtures; no floodlights shall be permitted. All
security lighting shall be implemented with motion detectors that shall not
turn on unless an intruder is within five feet (5') of the property and
automatically turns off the lights after a maximum period of fifteen (15)
minutes. No security lighting shall be permitted with any off site light
trespass. (Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-070: ILLUMINATION STANDARDS:
A.   Illumination Ratios: For the purpose of this section, the illumination
ratio shall be the direct comparison between the maximum illumination reading
at any one point on a site and the average of all illumination readings
throughout the same site. This arrangement, although not typical of ratio
comparisons established elsewhere, is done in an effort to achieve an even and
appropriate amount of illumination while maintaining night sky visibility,
reducing light pollution, and providing for general safety throughout Draper
City.
B.   Intensities: All uses which require a lighting plan to be submitted for
review according to this chapter shall maintain compliance with the
illumination found in
tables 9-20-1 and
9-20-2 of this section.
TABLE 9-20-1
ILLUMINATION STANDARDS1
Uses Maximum Illumination Maximum Average Maximum Illumination Ratio
                          Illumination    (Max:Ave)
Uses               Maximum Illumination Maximum Average Maximum Illumination
                                        Illumination    Ratio (Max:Ave)
Auto dealerships   25.0                 15.0            5:1
Bank               5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
Building entrance  8.0                  5.0             2:1
areas
Canopies           15.0                 10.0            2:1
Church or place of 5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
worship
Gas stations/      10.0                 5.0             2.5:1
convenience stores
Hospital           5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
Hotel/motel        8.0                  4.0             3:1
Medical service    5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
Multi-family
residential        8.0                  4.0             2.5:1
developments
Office             5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
Pedestrian areas   7.0                  4.0             3:1
Preschool and      8.0                  4.0             3:1
daycare4
Restaurants        8.0                  5.0             2.5:1
Retail             10.0                 6.0             2:1
Security lighting3 15.0                 10.0            3:1
Site boundary2     0.2                  0.1             n/a
Other uses5        8.0                  5.0             2.5:1
 
Notes:
   1.    All readings measured in foot-candles.
   2.    Unless more tightly restricted by section
9-20-090 of this chapter.
   3.    All lighting to meet the terms of section
9-20-060 of this chapter or must conform to standard site illumination.
   4.    Such uses in residential zones may be required to maintain lower
illumination levels to mitigate light impacts on neighboring properties.
   5.    All other uses that require a lighting plan not otherwise identified
in this table.
C.   After Hours Intensities: Sites which require a site lighting plan and
which are to contain a use or uses which is not open to their patronage twenty
four (24) hours per day shall also be required to submit a site lighting plan
which details the illumination to be on the site during closed periods. After
hours illumination plans shall conform to at least the following standards:
1.   Illumination Reduction: The after hours lighting plan shall meet each of
the applicable standards outlined in
table 9-20-2 of this section.
TABLE 9-20-2
AFTER HOURS ILLUMINATION STANDARDS1
Uses Maximum Illumination Maximum Average Maximum Illumination Ratio
                          Illumination    (Max:Ave)
Uses               Maximum Illumination Maximum Average Maximum Illumination
                                        Illumination    Ratio (Max:Ave)
Auto dealerships   15.0                 10.0            5:1
Bank               5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
Building entrance  4.0                  2.5             2:1
areas
Canopies           10.0                 5.0             2:1
Church or place of 3.0                  2.0             2.5:1
worship
Gas stations/      5.0                  2.5             2.5:1
convenience stores
Hospital           5.0                  3.0             2.5:1
Hotel/motel        8.0                  4.0             3:1
Medical service    3.0                  2.0             2.5:1
Multi-family
residential        8.0                  4.0             2.5:1
developments
Office             3.0                  2.0             2.5:1
Pedestrian areas   7.0                  4.0             3:1
Preschool and      4.0                  2.5             3:1
daycare4
Restaurants        4.0                  2.5             2.5:1
Retail             5.0                  3.0             2:1
Security lighting3 15.0                 10.0            3:1
Site boundary2     0.2                  0.1             n/a
Other uses5        6.0                  3.5             2.5:1
 
Notes:
1.    All readings measured in foot-candles.
2.    Unless more tightly restricted by section
9-20-090 of this chapter.
3.    All lighting to meet the terms of section
9-20-060 of this chapter or must conform to standard site illumination.
4.    Such uses in residential zones may be required to maintain lower
illumination levels to mitigate light impacts on neighboring properties.
5.    All other uses that require a lighting plan not otherwise identified in
table 9-20-1 of this section.
2.   Lighting Reduction: The after hours lighting plan shall also demonstrate a
reduction in the number of lighting sources that are on during after hours
times. The reduction in the number of lighting sources shall reduce the
lighting sources in use by at least one-third (1/3).
3.   Alterations: The planning commission may approve an increase in the number
of lighting sources remaining lit or the illumination level during after hours
times upon establishing the finding that such an alteration is necessary to
maintain the security of the site. Said alterations shall only be allowed to
the minimum number of light fixtures necessary to remain lit to maintain
adequate security for the site. (Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-080: BUFFERING:
Any lighting implemented as a part of a plan as required by this chapter along
a property line shared with a residential use or zone shall conform to the
following standards:
A.   The maximum illumination at any point along the property line shall be 0.2
foot-candle.
B.   No lighting source shall be located within twenty feet (20') of the shared
property line. If the site area immediately adjacent to the property line is a
pedestrian area or landscaped buffer area, bollard style lighting may be used
for illumination of these areas.
C.   No lamp shall be visible from the adjacent property when standing on the
shared property line. Lamp visibility shall be considered as if the glass or
globe of the fixture was not present. (Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-090: STAGED LIGHTING:
For the purposes of this section, staged lighting shall refer only to the
heights of the light poles, allowing greater heights toward the interior of
large parking areas in an effort to minimize the amount and impact of site
lighting required. Sites which incorporate one hundred (100) or more parking
spaces in any one parking area may be designed to include staged lighting
systems. Larger commercial developments which include multiple buildings, uses,
and/or parking areas may, as approved by the planning commission, also
implement staged lighting.
A.   Pole Heights: Sites desiring to implement staged lighting shall not have
pole heights exceeding the following, as depicted in
figure 9-20-2 of this section:
1.   The outermost row(s) of lights may not have poles exceeding fifteen feet
(15') in height, typically measured.
2.   The second outermost row of lights may not have poles exceeding twenty
feet (20') in height, typically measured.
3.   The third outermost row of lights may not have poles exceeding twenty five
feet (25') in height, typically measured.
4.   The fourth outermost row of lights, and all subsequent rows may not have
poles exceeding thirty feet (30') in height, typically measured.
FIGURE 9-20-2
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5235.jpg]
 
B.   Buildings: Where buildings are located or proposed to be located between
the boundary of the property and the outermost row of site lighting, the
outermost row of lights may be considered a subsequent inner row for all poles
where the building is between the light and the property line so long as the
height of that outermost row of lights does not exceed the height of the
building. Subsequent lighting rows may then increase in height as typical for
inner rows.
C.   Photometrics: The photometric requirements for a site shall not be
adjusted for any site incorporating staged lighting.
D.   Bollards: Sites which are proposed to include a staged lighting plan are
strongly encouraged to incorporate bollard style lighting to illuminate
building entrance areas and pedestrian areas away from parking area lighting.
E.   Boundaries: Sites with a staged lighting plan shall have a maximum of 0.0
foot-candle illumination at any point along the boundary line of the site.
(Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
9-20-100: REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
All new construction or reconstruction which is subject to staff design review
and/or site plan approval shall submit an outdoor lighting plan and lighting
study for the entire site which indicates how the standards of this chapter are
to be met as determined by the zoning administrator and/or planning commission,
as required. All outdoor lighting plans must include at least:
A.   The general layout of the site including buildings, pedestrian areas,
parking areas, and site features to be implemented or preserved as natural;
B.   Illumination readings for the site, spaced no greater than five feet (5')
apart, depicting what can be expected at the finished grade of the site;
C.   Location of all proposed lighting sources, whether freestanding or
building mounted;
D.   Design details and quantities for each lighting source type proposed to be
implemented on the site;
E.   Design details, including full dimensioning, for all pole and mounting
systems to be implemented on the site;
F.   Illumination readings measured along the boundary line of the site, spaced
no greater than five feet (5') apart regardless of site size, as can be
expected at the finished grade;
G.   Tabular information declaring the maximum, minimum, average, and ratio
illumination readings for at least general site areas, canopy areas, site
boundary, pedestrian areas, and building entrance areas; and
H.   Complete and clear identification of all aspects of a staged lighting
proposal for the site, as applicable.
APPENDIX A
ALLOWED LIGHTING TYPES
Figure 1
What is a true full cutoff lighting fixture?
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3946.jpg]
 
Flat glass lens, eliminates or minimizes direct glare with no upward thrown
light. The housing for these fixtures is available in many styles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3948.jpg]
 
Same fixture as above, mounted incorrectly defeating the horizontal mounting
design. The fixture now produces direct glare and can also produce upward
thrown light, sometimes at steep mounting angles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3950.jpg]
 
Known as "cutoff", center drop or sag lens with or without exposed bulbs still
produces direct glare.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3952.jpg]
 
Forward throw style. Exposed bulb in forward direction produces some direct
glare.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3954.jpg]
 
   APPENDIX B
   ALLOWED ILLUMINATION STYLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3956.jpg]
 
   APPENDIX C
   EXAMPLE OF LIGHTING USES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3958.jpg]
 
Examples of full cut off lighting and bollard lighting to light walkways
(Ord. 795, 1-15-2008)
CHAPTER 21
INSTITUTIONAL CARE
SECTION:
9-21-010: Purpose
9-21-020: Scope
9-21-030: Use Regulations
9-21-040: Development Standards
9-21-050: Off Street Parking And Loading
9-21-060: Required Amenities For Institutional Care Facilities
9-21-070: Use And Development Standards Tables
9-21-010: PURPOSE:
The institutional care IC zone is established to provide a residential
environment within Draper City for institutional care developments such as:
A.   Alzheimer's facilities;
B.   Assisted living facilities;
C.   Congregate housing facilities;
D.   Hospices;
E.   Medical services, limited;
F.   Nursing care facilities;
G.   Transitional care developments; or
H.   Other similar land uses that are constructed and used primarily for long
term or permanent residence by the elderly and persons with a disability.
It is intended that this zone be located in areas along or very near an
arterial or collector street, preferably within reasonable walking distance to
general commercial centers that may include services such as grocery stores or
pharmacies and to areas where mass transit may be available currently or in the
future. To ensure neighborhood compatibility, all developments shall be
approved by the Draper City planning commission as a part of site plan review.
(Ord. 760, 6-26-2007)
9-21-020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property located in an
institutional care zone as shown on the official zoning map. No building,
structure or real property shall be used for institutional care developments
and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally or
substantially altered, or enlarged except as set forth in this chapter. Such
requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable
provisions of this title, this code, or other laws. (Ord. 760, 6-26-2007)
9-21-030: USE REGULATIONS:
A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed
within institutional care zones shall be set forth in section
9-21-070,
table 9-21-1 of this chapter. Permitted and conditional uses are indicated by a
"P" or "C", respectively, in the appropriate column. Uses not permitted are
indicated by "NP". Any permitted or conditional uses not shown on section
9-21-070,
table 9-21-1 of this chapter, shall be prohibited unless the zoning
administrator determines the use is substantially the same as a permitted or
conditional use.
B.   Accessory Uses: The permitted and conditional uses set forth in section
9-21-070,
table 9-21-1 of this chapter, shall be deemed to include accessory uses and
activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with and incidental
and subordinate to such uses.
1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the same zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a permitted or conditional use has been established. (Ord. 760,
6-26-2007)
9-21-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards within the institutional care zone shall be set forth in
section
9-21-070,
table 9-21-2 of this chapter, and in this section.
A.   Building Materials: All main buildings shall utilize a variety of building
colors and materials.
1.   Color utilization should be sensitive to existing development within the
vicinity and the natural landscape in which the project is situated.
2.   Materials shall include a combination of brick, stone, ceramic tile,
masonry materials and wood composite siding. Exposed concrete, cinder block and
concrete masonry unit is not permitted, except for minimal foundation exposure.
Stucco, wood siding, or wood composite siding is to be used as an accent
material only.
3.   A minimum of three (3) colors per elevation is required.
4.   All projects within the institutional care zone shall submit a sample
board containing examples of all exterior surfacing materials and colors,
including roofing material and color, in accordance with subsection
9-5-090D1d(6)(B) of this title.
B.   Building Design:
1.   All buildings shall have a residential look and incorporate design
elements such as dormers, a pitched roof, porticoes, quoins, shutters, or other
residential elements consistent with the immediate residential neighborhood as
determined by the planning commission during review.
2.   Long, continuous rooflines greater than fifty feet (50') shall not be
permitted.
3.   The front facade of institutional care structures shall exhibit visual
relief through an array of architectural features and varied setbacks and shall
protrude beyond any garage door by at least five feet (5').
4.   Side and rear elevations that are visible from public and private streets
shall match the architectural detailing of the front facade.
5.   Shared entrances shall be centrally located, accentuated with
architectural detailing, and well lit.
6.   Carports and garages shall complement the project architecture in terms of
design, materials, and colors.
7.   Notwithstanding the height limitations shown in section
9-21-070,
table 9-21-2 of this chapter, greater building height may be allowed pursuant
to approval of a conditional use permit.
C.   Building Placement And Orientation:
1.   All buildings in the institutional care zone shall front onto a right of
way that is accessible to emergency vehicles.
a.   The planning commission may grant an exception from this requirement, if
the following findings can be met:
(1)   Buildings front onto an open space such as a courtyard or park that is
determined to provide a substantial number of public amenities and is
accessible to all residents.
(2)   Standard emergency vehicle access is accommodated for all structures.
b.   Any building with frontage on a public street shall orient units toward
the public street unless an alternately appropriate orientation toward an inner
courtyard or green space is determined by the planning commission.
D.   Site Plan:
1.   All institutional care developments and uses shall have a formal site plan
review, pursuant to section
9-5-090 of this title, or subsequent sections. All site plans shall be approved
by the planning commission. Site plan review may be applied for concurrently
with the conditional use permit approval process.
2.   Parking areas, service areas, buffers, entrances, exits, yards, courts,
landscaping, graphics, and lighting shall be designed as integrated portions of
the total development and shall project a residential character.
3.   Building spaces. Each development shall provide reasonable visual and
acoustical privacy for dwelling units. Fences, insulation, walks, barriers,
landscaping, and sound reducing methods shall be used as appropriate for the
aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants, the
screening of objectionable views or uses, and the reduction of noise.
4.   Pedestrian and automobile circulation shall flow in a logical manner and
integrate neighborhood street connectivity.
a.   The number of road connections and access points for an institutional care
development shall be proportional to the number of units according to the
international fire code.
b.   To encourage connectivity, institutional care developments shall emulate
the existing neighborhood street pattern and design and connect to public
street networks and adjacent private street networks at all logical points.
c.   Traffic calming measures such as lateral shifts, raised crosswalks, bulb
outs, or chicanes shall be incorporated where appropriate.
d.   Institutional care developments shall install sidewalks on both sides of
all private streets. Sidewalks shall be a width of no less than five feet (5').
The planning commission may modify the requirement for sidewalks on both sides
of a private street by eliminating the sidewalk or a portion of the sidewalk on
one side of the street upon a finding that: 1) the second sidewalk or portion
of the sidewalk does not facilitate pedestrian connectivity; 2) ample
pedestrian circulation has been provided and is otherwise satisfied; and 3) the
purpose and intent of the development standards set forth in this chapter are
met. The granting of this modification shall be within the planning
commission's discretion and is intended to be utilized in limited circumstances
where design and site layout adequately provide pedestrian circulation within
the project and the second sidewalk or portion thereof is unnecessary and/or
undesirable.
e.   Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access points, entryways,
public gathering nodes, and parking areas. Pedestrian access points shall be
installed between the project and the external neighborhood.
E.   Lighting:
1.   Lighting for all uses shall be in accordance with chapter 20, "Outdoor
Lighting", of this title.
2.   All institutional care developments shall submit a lighting plan that
illustrates lighting accommodation for automobile and pedestrian networks.
a.   Exterior lighting along streets shall be pedestrian in scale with a
maximum height of fourteen feet (14').
b.   Low level bollard lighting is encouraged for illumination of internal
pedestrian pathways.
F.   Landscaping:
1.   Landscaping for all uses shall be in accordance with chapter 23,
"Landscaping And Screening", of this title.
2.   All institutional care projects shall submit a landscaping plan in
accordance with chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening", of this title.
3.   The preservation of natural features that enhance the development and will
benefit the community, including trees, scenic points, view corridors, historic
buildings or locations, unique geological formations and other community assets
shall be preserved and incorporated into the overall landscape plan.
4.   The landscaping upon the entire site shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
a.   Front setback: A minimum of twenty feet (20') measured from the front
property line from the existing or planned right of way. This standard shall
apply to both frontages of a corner parcel.
b.   Side and rear setback:
(1)   A minimum of fifteen feet (15') between parking areas and side or rear
property lines.
(2)   A minimum of five feet (5') between an access driveway and a side or rear
property line unless said driveway is to be used for common access by an
adjacent commercial parcel.
G.   Screening At District Boundaries: Where the planning commission determines
it appropriate, an opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all
district boundaries, other than streets, where the premises abut areas zoned
for residential uses, unless otherwise provided.
1.   Except where otherwise provided, the screen shall have a minimum height of
six feet (6').
2.   Acceptable construction materials for screens shall only include ceramic
tile, stone, brick, concrete panel, concrete block, vinyl, or such other
materials as the planning commission may approve. Concrete panels and posts
must be reinforced with rebar and wire as determined by the building official.
3.   No signs or sign supports shall be permitted on any required screen or
fence.
4.   Fencing no higher than six feet (6') shall be allowed a public street
under the condition that a maximum of three feet (3') of the height may be
opaque material with the remaining height of the fence consisting of a material
that does not limit views into the development, such as wrought iron.
5.   For the purpose of calculating the required land use buffer, any
development in the institutional care zone shall be considered to have a land
use intensity factor of 5. (Ord. 760, 6-26-2007)
9-21-050: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
A.   Off Street Parking: Parking for all uses shall be calculated through a
parking study pursuant to subsection
9-25-090C of this title. No parking shall be permitted in the minimum front,
side, or rear landscape setback areas. Unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission, no parking shall be permitted between the street and all
main buildings.
B.   Loading: All loading and unloading operations shall be performed on the
site. The site shall allow for adequate turning and maneuvering as well as a
covered or enclosed area for drop off or pick up types of activities for
residents and/or patients. Loading and unloading areas with drop off parking
areas may be permitted between the street and all main buildings. (Ord. 760, 6-
26-2007)
9-21-060: REQUIRED AMENITIES FOR INSTITUTIONAL CARE FACILITIES:
A.   Amenities Required: The following amenities are required for all
developments under this section, including all multi-unit developments, and
similar developments intended for independent or assisted living:
1.   Elevators: All two-story or greater multi-unit buildings shall include at
least one elevator per building.
2.   Common Areas: All projects shall provide accessible common areas. Such
indoor common areas may include a meeting area, laundry facilities, furnished
lobby, library, reading room, game room, exercise room, artwork within the
hallways, pharmacy, beauty salon, ancillary interior convenience store for
residents only, nursing station, classrooms, kitchens, dining rooms, and
patios.
3.   Transportation: All institutional care facilities should provide
transportation options for its residents. Such transportation may include van
service operated by the facility or contracted out to a multifacility provider.
Such facilities are encouraged to be located near current or proposed mass
transit lines to provide alternative travel options for its residents. Such
facilities shall provide connections to public sidewalks, trail systems and
other compatible land uses.
4.   Twenty Four Hour On Site Facilities Manager: All institutional care
developments shall provide at least one on site facilities manager twenty four
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. The position may either be a live-
in manager or regular employee staffing.
B.   Outdoor Amenities For Smaller Projects: Projects of fewer than fifty (50)
dwelling units or beds shall provide an outdoor amenities package appropriate
for the project size and location.
C.   Number Of Amenities Per Units: Institutional care projects shall include
at least one amenity per fifty (50) units or beds from the following list:
1.   Community garden;
2.   Courtyard with benches;
3.   Picnic tables and barbecue area with shade structures;
4.   Swimming pool;
5.   Sports courts;
6.   Natural open space area with benches/viewing areas and/or trails; or
7.   Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of this
guideline. (Ord. 760, 6-26-2007)
9-21-070: USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLES:
TABLE 9-21-1
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES ALLOWED IN THE INSTITUTIONAL CARE ZONE
Use Zone
    IC
Use                                                                       Zone
                                                                          IC
Residential uses:                                                          
Alzheimer's facility                                                      P
Assisted living facility                                                  P
Congregate housing facility                                               P
Dwelling, multiple-family (as part of transitional care development only) C
Dwelling, two-family (as part of transitional care development only)      C
Dwelling, single-family (as part of transitional care development only)   C
Nursing care facility                                                     P
Residential facility for elderly persons                                  P
Residential facility for persons with a disability                        P
Transitional care development                                             C
Public and civic uses:                                                     
Charter school                                                            P
Church or place of worship                                                C
Club or service organization                                              C
Hospice                                                                   P
Park                                                                      P
Post office                                                               P
Public school                                                             P
Senior center                                                             C
Municipal uses:                                                            
Commercial uses bank or financial institution1                            C
Franchise municipal uses                                                  P
Funeral home                                                              C
Laundry and dry cleaning, limited1                                        C
Medical service, limited1                                                 C
Municipal uses                                                            P
Office, general1                                                          C
Personal care service1                                                    C
Personal instruction service1                                             C
Recreation and entertainment, indoor                                      C
Restaurant, general1                                                      C
Retail, general1                                                          C
 
Note:
1.    As part of a building that contains both a residential and commercial use
only.
TABLE 9-21-2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN THE INSTITUTIONAL CARE ZONE
Development Standards Zone
                      IC
Development Standards        Zone
                             IC
Lot standards:                
Minimum area of zone         1 acre
Maximum lot coverage         50%
Building standards:           
Maximum height of building   35 ft.
Setback standards:            
Main buildings - front yard  20 ft.
Main buildings - side yard 1 15 ft.
Main buildings - side yard 2 20 ft.
Main buildings - rear yard 2 20 ft.
 
Notes:
   1.    Greater height may be allowed pursuant to a conditional use permit
pursuant to subsection
9-21-040B7 of this chapter.
   2.    These standards will apply when developing next to single-family
zones.
(Ord. 760, 6-26-2007)
CHAPTER 22
DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
SECTION:
9-22-010: Purpose
9-22-020: Scope
9-22-030: Deviation From Design Standards
9-22-040: Building Design
9-22-050: Site Design
9-22-010: PURPOSE:
A.   Specified: The purpose of the design standards and guidelines outlined in
this chapter is to facilitate exceptional design in the built environment and
preserve the quality of life within Draper City. The justification for these
standards and guidelines comes from the Draper City master plan and the desires
of Draper City citizens expressed therein.
1.   Higher quality designs will bring value to the commercial community of
Draper City and attract businesses which positively contribute to the overall
quality of life and well being of Draper City citizens.
2.   Draper City welcomes a variety of businesses, including local and national
retailers, for whom branding has become an important aspect of developing a
successful and competitive business. While Draper City acknowledges this fact,
the design standards and guidelines enumerated in this chapter are intended to
help and encourage development of imaginative and unique design solutions which
meet these branding needs, while at the same time preserving Draper City's
unique history and community identity.
3.   The provisions in this chapter are meant to supplement the objectives of
other chapters in this title which also impose certain design standards or
requirements that are zone specific. Examples of this include the requirements
of the town center and destination commercial zones.
B.   Design Criteria: This chapter establishes design standards intended to
improve the quality and compatibility of development, particularly with regard
to building design, and site design. These criteria apply to all commercial
projects and are the minimum that will be accepted.
1.   Design Standards: Design standards are required in addition to other
standards set forth in this title and are indicated by the verb "shall". Design
standards are intended to ensure quality development and permanence in design.
The implementation of these standards ensures that the goals and values of the
community are reflected in each commercial development and contribute
positively to the overall built environment. (Ord. 799, 12-4-2007; amd. Ord.
1479, 2-16-2021)
9-22-020: SCOPE:
A.   Applicability: The design standards and guidelines set forth in this
chapter shall apply to:
1.   All new commercial, public facilities, or industrial buildings and uses
except where:
a.   A different standard is imposed by the requirements of an applicable
zoning classification or overlay zone, such as the town center or destination
commercial zones; or
b.   The requirements of this chapter are expressly superseded by another
provision of this title.
2.   Existing buildings and uses when a change occurs that involves a standard
or guideline set forth in this chapter; and (Ord. 799, 12-4-2007)
a.   Requires a building or other permit issued by the city;
b.   Increases required parking; or
c.   Increases the amount of outside storage. (Ord. 867, 11-18-2008)
B.   Imposition Of Conditions: In approving a development plan, the planning
commission may impose conditions consistent with the purpose and intent of this
title.
C.   Other Code Requirements: The requirements of this chapter shall apply in
addition to other applicable requirements of this title, including, but not
limited to:
1.   Chapter 20, "Outdoor Lighting";
2.   Chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening";
3.   Chapter 24, "Natural Resources Inventory";
4.   Chapter 25, "Parking"; and
5.   Chapter 26, "Signs". (Ord. 799, 12-4-2007)
9-22-030: DEVIATION FROM DESIGN STANDARDS:
A.   Purpose: An applicant may request deviations from the design standards of
section
9-22-040 and
9-22-050 of this chapter with the exception of the height and roofline design
standards of subsection
9-22-040(D). Deviations from the design standards of
9-22-050(F) shall meet the deviation criteria listed in
9-25-080(E)(2).
B.   Deviation Criteria Threshold: Proposed developments requesting a deviation
under this section shall meet at least three (3) of the following criteria.
1.   The proposed development includes additional amenities or pedestrian and
bike connectivity in excess of what is otherwise required.
2.   The overall landscape and open space area provided within the proposed
development exceeds required amounts by more than ten percent (10%).
3.   The proposed development is a transit oriented development (TOD) and
provides direct connectivity for active transportation methods to a
transportation facility.
4.   The traffic impacts of the proposed development will be mitigated through
creative design, traffic calming measures, companywide carpool or transit pass
programs, or other similar measures.
5.   The proposed development is designed to meet LEED certification standards.
6.   The proposed development involves redeveloped buildings, additions to
existing buildings, minor structures being added to a site, or is a new
building within a previously approved phased development and the deviation is
necessary to create a consistency with other existing buildings.
7.   Vegetative landscaping (excluding lawn, turf, and groundcovers) exceeds
the amounts required in this Title by at least ten percent (10%).
8.   The building is designed by a licensed architect in a specific
architectural style, that utilizes facade materials differently than prescribed
in subsection
9-22-040(F) of this chapter.
9.   The amount of primary materials used for each building facade exceeds the
required amount by more than ten percent (10%).
C.   Request Responsibility: The applicant shall demonstrate to the planning
commission that the development application meets three (3) or more of the
criteria of subsection
9-22-030(B) above and that the deviation is of benefit to the city by:
1.   Providing a written description and analysis of the proposed design
standard deviation(s) and an analysis of the selected criteria from subsection
9-22-030(B) above. The analyses shall be written by a licensed professional,
such as an architect, engineer or landscape architect;
2.   Providing a written justification as to why the city should deviate from
its design standards that indicates any benefit to the city.
D.   Findings Required: The planning commission may approve deviations from the
design standards listed in this chapter only if it finds:
1.   That the requested deviation is consistent with the purpose and intent of
the development standards of the applicable zoning district or land use
category; and
2.   That the proposed development satisfies at least three (3) of the criteria
listed in
9-22-030(B). (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022)
9-22-040: BUILDING DESIGN:
A.   Context: All building designs shall consider surrounding or nearby
buildings and developments and implement design solutions which are sensitive
to those nearby buildings and developments. The review of this requirement
shall be based on the following:
1.   The buildings positively contribute to the overall character of Draper
City and the neighborhood in which it is located;
2.   The buildings reflect the character of surrounding development through use
of some similar positive and desirable features;
3.   The buildings demonstrate imaginative design; and
4.   Where proposed building designs closely copy or mirror surrounding
development, the buildings vary colors, materials, or architectural elements.
B.   Entrances: All building entrances shall be clearly articulated to indicate
a transition from the exterior to the interior of the building. Every main
entrance shall have a special emphasis when compared to the other portions of
the building. This shall be accomplished through the use of at least three (3)
of the following near entrances:
1.   A prominent architectural feature that is unique to the overall building
design;
2.   Complementary yet differing building materials or colors;
3.   Increased use of windows or glass;
4.   Pedestrian amenities that may include patios, porches, special paving
treatments, seating areas, or awnings; or
5.   Increased landscaping.
C.   Facade Articulation: Buildings designed with completely flat facades and
monotone color schemes are not permitted. All buildings shall demonstrate
articulation of all facades.
1.   Horizontal or vertical facade variations shall occur at least every thirty
feet (30') or along a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the horizontal length
of buildings with facades one hundred feet (100') or greater. This shall be
accomplished by using methods such as:
a.   Variation in the surface plane that may include pop outs, bays, and
recesses;
b.   Variation in the surface pattern such as arches, banding, and paneling; or
c.   Distinguished treatment of windows, doors, and eaves that may include
molding or framing.
2.   Buildings with facades one hundred feet (100') or greater in total length
shall have at least one significant facade variation from the primary wall
plane whose depth is at least five feet (5') and whose width is at least twenty
feet (20'). There shall be no uninterrupted facades one hundred feet (100') or
greater in length.
D.   Height And Roofline: All buildings shall include varied rooflines in order
to add architectural interest and avoid the appearance or sense of monotonous
roofline expanses by:
1.   Providing roofline and parapet variations where there are long,
continuous, and undisturbed rooflines fifty feet (50') or longer;
2.   Using materials and colors on the back of false fronts, parapets,
cornices, or other parts of the building which extend beyond the roofline that
are similar to the rest of the building so that the building appears cohesive
from all views; and
3.   Screening mechanical equipment and systems that are mounted on the roof.
The height of screen walls for mechanical equipment and systems located on the
roof may extend above the typical building height limits in the zone, but shall
not extend higher than the equipment being screened, or fourteen feet (14'),
whichever is less. Screen walls permitted to extend above the typical height
limits in the zone under this section may not be utilized for building signage.
Any portion of the mechanical equipment or systems not fully screened from view
shall be painted the same color as the roofing or parapet materials.
E.   Massing: Buildings shall have a composition which clearly relates to
surrounding buildings, as well as the overall scale of the built environment in
nearby residential or commercial neighborhoods. Proper massing reduces the
impact of the massive bulk created by large buildings that may not otherwise
relate in scale to surrounding development. Vertical articulation, horizontal
articulation, and multiplaned roof and awning designs should be used to
mitigate the impact that may occur on surrounding development and the overall
landscape.
F.   Materials: Quality long lasting materials shall be required for all
buildings in order to contribute to the aesthetics of the community over the
long term. Permanence in design and construction will add to the overall value
and sustainability of the community.
1.   Minimum Colors: A minimum of three (3) colors per elevation shall be
required.
2.   Color Utilization: Color utilization should be sensitive to existing
development within the vicinity and the natural landscape in which the project
is situated.
3.   Primary Materials: Brick, stone, ceramic tile, wood or concrete fiber
composite siding, concrete masonry units (CMU), metal composite material, and
architectural precast concrete are acceptable primary materials. CMU must be
colored and feature decorative or architectural finishes such as honed, scored,
offset or split face. Gray CMU block is not an acceptable finished building
material and shall not be permitted on any finished building elevation with the
exception of minimal foundation exposure. The following guidelines shall apply
when designing a commercial or industrial building:
a.   Each building face shall have a minimum of two (2) primary materials. At
least seventy five percent (75%) of each building's finished face shall be in
primary materials.
b.   When brick is used as a primary material, it may be utilized up to one
hundred percent (100%) of the facade material, in which case, no secondary
primary material will be required.
c.   Doors, glass and roofing materials shall not be included in the
calculations of primary and secondary materials.
4.   Secondary Materials: Secondary materials may include stucco; EIFS,
including specialty finishes; metal, excluding corrugated sheet metal; exposed
concrete; vinyl; shake shingles or wood siding. Materials such as awnings, wood
timbers and other similar features will be considered accent and not figured
into the totals of secondary materials.
5.   Tilt-Up Concrete: Exposed tilt-up concrete may be used as a primary
material on buildings located in all manufacturing zones and in the CBP zoning
classification. Some variation in materials along the base and near the
entrances of concrete tilt-ups is required.
6.   Sample Board: All projects shall submit color elevations that call out the
specific building material type and color. The Zoning Administrator may require
actual samples of exterior surface materials in order to verify quality of
material and conformance with the standards found within this section.
G.   Pedestrian Considerations: Buildings designed at the human scale
effectively relate to pedestrians and create inviting and hospitable commercial
districts that encourage pedestrian activity and social interaction. All
buildings shall consider pedestrians as an integral part of the design.
Additionally, buildings that contain more than one story or that are above
twenty feet (20') in height shall provide a clearly articulated and more
detailed base that relates to pedestrians.
H.   Signs: Signs located on any building facade shall be compatible with the
building's overall design. As an integral design element, signs shall be
compatible with the style of the buildings in terms of location, scale, color,
and lettering.
1.   The locations for signs on a building's facade shall be planned for as
part of the building's overall design.
2.   Signs located on facades should integrate similar or complementary
materials as the building.
I.   Windows: Windows are key to the overall design of a building and the
relationship between the exterior and interior. The majority of windows shall
relate to the scale of the person.
1.   Windows should be at eye level when possible and provide for transparency
into the building.
2.   Where buildings are adjacent to pedestrian walkways, transparent windows
shall be used to relate the scale of the building and the building's interior
to pedestrians. Where transparent windows may not be desirable, tinted windows,
false windows, or glass block shall be used.
3.   Window awnings are an effective way to add detail and variation to a
building, emphasize pedestrian scale windows, and create an exciting and
inviting environment. When placing awnings:
a.   Quality materials shall be used which are durable and are able to
withstand extremes in the weather;
b.   Colors should be complementary to the color of the building on which the
awning is located; and
c.   Styles should be compatible with the architectural features and overall
architecture of the building on which the awning is located. (Ord. 799, 12-4-
2007; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022)
9-22-050: SITE DESIGN:
A.   Building Placement: Building placement is integral to the site design and
the overall effect any development has on surrounding properties. Building
placement shall be carefully considered as part of the overall development
review.
1.   All buildings shall be located with the main facade and main entrance
facing the principal street to which it has frontage.
2.   Buildings located on corner lots shall orient main facades to each street
and give equal architectural treatment to each.
3.   Buildings shall be located as close to the front property line as possible
considering site, use, and other constraints or requirements of service
providers or of this title.
4.   Building placement on a site shall account for the provision of required
open space, landscaping, facilities, services, and amenities as specified
elsewhere in this title and be situated to take advantage of existing site
characteristics that create privacy, and the beneficial exposure of the
building interior to natural light and air circulation.
B.   Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, and Screening: Screening and separation of
service areas, utility equipment, mechanical equipment, outdoor storage areas,
and other similar areas within a development is required. To accomplish the
necessary screening and separation, the design of these areas shall comply with
the following:
1.   Loading and service bays:
a.   Landscaped areas or walls shall be used to separate loading and service
bays from customer parking.
b.   Loading and service bays shall be oriented away from adjacent residential
areas and major public streets.
c.   The design and layout of loading and service bays shall be designed to
prevent public access to them.
2.   Outdoor Storage:
a.   Outdoor storage areas shall comply with the provisions of section
9-27-230 of this title and be screened from view in accordance with the same.
b.   The area surrounding an outdoor storage enclosure shall be landscaped in
accordance with chapter 9-23 of this title, except in locations necessary for
vehicular access to the storage area.
c.   Outdoor storage areas shall be designed to restrict public access to them.
3.   Trash, refuse and garbage collection:
a.   Outdoor containers for trash, refuse and garbage collection are required
for all development sites.
b.   Containers for recycling collection are recommended, and shall be subject
to the same standards as trash, refuse, and garbage collection.
c.   Containers for trash, refuse and garbage collection shall be screened from
view on all sides by an opaque enclosure, a minimum of six feet (6') in height,
built using the same materials and colors as the building, or masonry or
concrete fencing.
d.   Gates that facilitate access for trash collection trucks shall be required
on one side of the enclosure. Gates may be constructed predominantly or
exclusively of metal components, but must be designed and painted to be
architecturally compatible with the design of the principal building(s) on the
site, and the other sides of the enclosure.
e.   Gates and openings that facilitate access for trash collection trucks
shall not be oriented towards or parallel to major public streets, except where
the enclosure is located behind the principal building, or more than one-
hundred twenty feet (120') from the street.
f.   The gate and enclosure design shall incorporate features capable of fixing
the gate in both the closed and open position. Gates shall remain closed,
except during active collection and disposal of accumulated wastes.
g.   Except for the area in front of a gate, the area immediately surrounding
the enclosure shall be landscaped in accordance with chapter 9-23 of this
title.
h.   The enclosure shall be designed to prevent illegal dumping and restrict
access by pests and nuisance animals.
i.   Enclosures for trash, refuse, and garbage collection shall not be located
closer than ten feet (10') to a property line.
j.   As an exception to the conditional use permit requirement of section
9-27-080 of this title, the zoning administrator may approve or require that a
taller enclosure be built, up to a maximum of ten feet (10') in height, upon
finding that the additional height is needed to mitigate existing or potential
negative impacts to neighboring properties, visitors or employees.
4.   Shopping cart corrals:
a.   Corrals shall be required for all commercial and retail establishments
that provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers.
b.   Corrals shall be anchored to the ground at fixed locations within the
parking area.
c.   Corrals may not be located within required landscape planter islands.
5.   Utility equipment and meters, generators, mechanical systems, and other
similar auxiliary equipment:
a.   The location of all utility boxes, meters, generators, large auxiliary
equipment, ground mounted building mechanical systems and the like shall be
shown on the site plan and on the landscape planting plan.
b.   The location and placement of such equipment within a site shall provide
mitigation of the negative impacts of noise, appearance, or odors that the
equipment may create, particularly for occupants of neighboring properties.
c.   Generators, auxiliary equipment, and other ground mounted building
mechanical systems, shall rest directly on the ground, or a ground level
concrete pad not more than four inches (4") above grade. Where equipment is
mounted to supports or anchors, the bottom of the equipment may not be located
higher than six inches (6") from the ground or concrete pad surface.
d.   Exhaust systems shall not protrude above the equipment.
e.   Utility boxes, utility meters, generators, other large auxiliary
equipment, ground mounted building mechanical systems and the like shall be
screened from public view. A combination of walls, opaque fences, and
landscaping may be utilized.
f.   As an exception to the conditional use permit requirement of section
9-27-080 of this title, where walls or fences are used to screen the equipment
identified in subsection 9-22-050(B)(5), the zoning administrator may approve,
or require, a taller screen or enclosure to be built, up to a maximum of ten
feet (10') in height, upon finding that the additional height is needed to
mitigate existing or potential negative impacts to neighboring properties,
visitors, or employees.
g.   The proposed location, size, and operational needs of public utilities and
utility equipment located on a development site shall be coordinated by the
property owner or applicant together with the applicant's architect, civil
engineer, landscape architect or designer, and the various public utility
providers prior to the submission of a site plan and landscaping plans to the
City.
h.   Once a site plan and landscape plan have been approved by the city,
changes made or proposed to the location, number, or the physical size of above
ground utility boxes, meters, generators, and other auxiliary equipment shall
require submittal of an updated plan detailing the proposed site screening and
landscaping changes. Revised plans must receive city approval in writing prior
to installation of the appurtenance(s) and landscaping.
C.   Amenities: Amenities shall be used to enhance and beautify the site and
provide recreational areas and conveniences for patrons, visitors, residents,
and employees.
1.   With the exception of developments subject to the Multiple-Family Dwelling
Development Standards found in Chapter 32 of this title, outdoor amenities are
required for every development on a site with a combined building total floor
area of twenty-thousand square feet (20,000 ft²) or greater.
2.   Outdoor amenities include:
a.   Seating areas, including patios, decks, porches, benches, tables, and
pergolas;
b.   Water features;
c.   Garden areas designed for active use;
d.   Pedestrian plazas;
e.   Natural open space; or
f.   Other areas designed and designated for recreational use or convenience of
those utilizing them.
3.   Outdoor amenities shall be integrated into the overall landscape plan
design.
4.   Property owners and managers shall not permit landscaping to overgrow or
impede pedestrian paths or areas.
5.   Each development subject to the requirements of this subsection shall
provide a minimum of two (2) amenities from the list in 9-22-050(C)(2) above
and additional amenities as follows:
a.   Public, Civic, Municipal and Institutional uses:
(1)   One (1) additional outdoor amenity for each additional twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of floor area.
b.   Commercial uses:
(1)   One (1) additional outdoor amenity for each additional thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of floor area.
c.   Industrial/manufacturing uses:
(1)   One (1) additional outdoor amenity for each additional forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of floor area.
d.   Agricultural business, industry, or processing uses:
(1)   One (1) additional outdoor amenity for each additional forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of floor area.
D.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall comply with the site design requirements of
this section and the landscaping requirements found in chapter 9-23. All
developments subject to this chapter that are required to provide public
landscaping improvements or infrastructure improvements, as defined in Utah
State Code, shall install such improvements, or post an improvement completion
assurance for these items in the manner outlined in
17-4-075 of this code, prior to conducting any other development activity. All
other required landscaping, with the exception of street trees, shall be
installed no later than September 30th of the following calendar year after an
approved use is commenced or a certificate of occupancy is issued, or one year
from the date an approved use is commenced or a certificate of occupancy is
issued, whichever is sooner.
E.   Lighting: Carefully planned lighting schemes shall have the effect of
creating safe environments for pedestrians and motorists. Lighting shall also
be considered an integral design element which adds to the overall site plan
and building design.
1.   Lighting schemes should include coordinating parking, wall, and pedestrian
scaled fixtures which complement building architecture and site features.
2.   Sensitively placed low light landscape lighting that highlights a site's
desirable features is encouraged.
F.   Parking and Site Circulation: Commercial development creates impacts to
the city transportation system, including the mutual inducement of development
pressures and impacts between abutting properties. Applicants for development
shall design proposed parking areas, drive aisles, access points and streets to
have minimal impact on the built environment and provide vehicular and
pedestrian connectivity to abutting sites. City staff shall conduct an
individualized determination for any exaction required by this subsection
according to the procedures outlined in section
9-05-220.
1.   Each application shall comply with the traffic impact study guidelines and
related requirements in section
11-02-060 of this code.
2.   Major internal circulation drive aisles and roadways that provide access
from the public right of way or between buildings on the same site or which
provide required cross access or connectivity to abutting sites shall be
separated from parking areas using curb and gutter and a combination of any of
the following methods:
a.   Landscaping;
b.   Pedestrian walkways; or
c.   Lighting. (Ord. 799, 12-4-2007)
3.   Pedestrian walkways shall have a minimum five feet (5') wide free travel
width. Where wheel stops are not used to keep vehicles off the walkway, the
pedestrian walkway shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') wide. Additionally,
where other encroachments into the walkway exist, widths of the walkways shall
be increased to ensure the minimum five feet (5') wide free travel width.
4.   Abutting nonresidential or mixed use developments accessing a street of a
major collector or arterial class shall have a shared access point between
development sites. When a shared access point is provided between abutting
sites, the city may waive cross access requirements between their parking
areas.
5.   Subject to compliance with applicable engineering standards found in
Titles 7, 8, 11, 12, 16, and 18, nonresidential and mixed use developments
shall provide perpetual cross access and connectivity for pedestrians,
vehicles, and emergency vehicles to abutting properties with existing or
planned nonresidential and mixed use developments by;
a.   Connecting to existing cross access drives, streets, sidewalks and
pedestrian walkways that abut the property; and
b.   Stubbing proposed cross access drives, streets, sidewalks and pedestrian
walkways to abutting properties to facilitate future cross access and
connectivity between properties.
6.   Cross access drives, streets, sidewalks and pedestrian walkways between
properties subject to this section shall:
a.   Accommodate customary pedestrian, vehicular, and emergency vehicle access,
the required minimum width of which shall be five feet (5') for sidewalks and
walkways, and as determined by the fire marshal based upon the requirements for
fire access roadways for cross access drives and streets;
b.   Be constructed of asphalt or cement;
c.   Include access easements for ingress and egress across the cross access
drives, private streets, sidewalks and pedestrian walkways for access by
emergency vehicles and the benefit of employees, patrons and visitors of the
abutting development; and
d.   Be reciprocal between abutting properties.
7.   Easements required under this section shall be recorded prior to issuance
of a land disturbance permit or building permit.
8.   Gates are not allowed across a cross access drive or street providing
cross access or connectivity under this section.
G.   Pedestrian Considerations: Site layout and design shall consider with
equal weight the needs of pedestrians and automobiles. Measures shall be taken
to ensure adequate access and safety for pedestrians on the site.
1.   Pedestrian access from the public right of way through the site to main
entrances shall be provided. These walkways shall be constructed of different
materials than the roadway or parking area, and provide for clearly defined
crossings where there are points of conflict with automobiles.
2.   Similar pedestrian access from public transit stations and stops into the
site and to each building entrance shall be provided.
3.   Differing roadway materials within parking lots shall be used directly in
front of entrances to slow motorists and create a safer environment for
pedestrians.
4.   Pedestrian drop off locations when incorporated within overall circulation
patterns shall be convenient and safe for pedestrians.
5.   Benches, pedestrian scaled lighting, bike racks, and other pedestrian
amenities shall be placed appropriately throughout the site.
H.   Security: Security of the site and CPTED (crime prevention through
environmental design) principles shall be strongly considered in any site
design. Many of the goals of CPTED are supported by and accomplished through
following the standards and guidelines already enumerated in this chapter. In
addition to these standards and guidelines, other measures should be considered
with the following four (4) overlapping CPTED principles in mind:
1.   Territoriality is a design concept that plainly demarcates private space
from semipublic and public areas. Clear territoriality in the design of a site
also creates a sense of ownership wherein people will be more likely to defend
and care for such spaces. Following this principle ultimately creates an
environment where intruders stand out and are more easily identified.
a.   Symbolic barriers, such as landscaping or changes in paving materials or
patterns can be effective in creating defined public spaces.
b.   Spaces which are designed for active use, such as plazas, outdoor seating
and eating areas, benches, fountains, and playgrounds add to the sense of
ownership.
2.   Natural surveillance is a design concept directed primarily at keeping
intruders under observation. Provision of natural surveillance helps create
environments where there is sufficient opportunity for people engaged in their
normal behavior to observe the space around them. Areas can be designed so they
are more easily observed through:
a.   Landscape designs and follow up maintenance that allows for clear,
unobstructed views of accessible areas;
b.   Walkways which are visible, well lit, and overlooked by windows from
nearby buildings;
c.   Mixed uses that engage a site at all hours;
d.   Use of unglazed or tinted windows and doors; and
e.   Lighting of alcoves, stairwells, and other areas which may otherwise
provide concealment.
3.   Access control is a design concept directed primarily at decreasing
criminal accessibility. Provision of natural access control limits access and
increases natural surveillance to restrict criminal intrusion, especially into
areas where they will not be easily observed through:
a.   Clearly marking entrances;
b.   Restricting access to screened areas such as garbage receptacles, delivery
areas, and outdoor storage areas; and
c.   Eliminating design elements which allow access to roofs and upper levels.
4.   Proper maintenance of landscaping, lighting treatments, and other features
can facilitate the principles of CPTED.
I.   Signs: The primary purpose of signs is to clearly identify businesses.
Signs shall be integrated into the overall design of a commercial development,
including materials, and shall add to the quality of the built environment
without contributing to visual clutter. While the approval of signs requires a
separate review and approval process, their placement should be planned for
during initial site planning and provide for required landscaping, lighting,
and other related considerations. (Ord. 799, 12-4-2007; amd. Ord. 1535, 5-3-
2022; Ord. 1583, 6- 20-2023)
CHAPTER 23
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
SECTION:
9-23-010: Purpose
9-23-020: Scope; Exemptions
9-23-030: Jordan Valley Water Conservancy District Efficiency Standards
9-23-040: Landscape Plans
9-23-050: Landscape Design Criteria
9-23-055: Irrigation
9-23-060: Vision Obstructions
9-23-070: Tree And Vegetation Protection
9-23-080: Park Strip Landscaping
9-23-090: Perimeter Landscaping
9-23-100: Parking Lot Landscaping
9-23-110: Land Use Buffers
9-23-120: Site Feature Buffering And Screening
9-23-130: Tree And Landscape Material Standards
9-23-140: Installation, Inspection, Maintenance And Replacement
9-23-150: Substitution Of Plant Materials
9-23-160: Temporary Suspension Of Landscaping Installation
9-23-170: Tables
9-23-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
preservation, installation and continued maintenance of landscaping. The
objectives of this chapter are:
A.   To protect existing vegetation and trees.
B.   To promote water conservation by requiring the use of water-wise landscape
design principles and water-conserving plants.
C.   To enhance the value and appearance of property.
D.   To buffer and mitigate impacts between conflicting land uses.
E.   To maintain and improve environmental conditions through mitigations in
air, water, soil, and, noise pollution as well as reductions in solar glare,
urban heat effect, and stormwater runoff.
F.   Improve public health and general welfare of city residents, employees and
visitors. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-020: SCOPE; EXEMPTIONS:
A.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, the standards of this chapter
shall apply to all new development and to expansions and modifications of
existing development. All landscaping, buffering and site design features
required by this chapter and previous regulations shall be continuously
maintained according to the approved development plans and the standards
contained herein.
B.   Bona-fide agricultural uses within agricultural zones and Residential
Agricultural zones, shall be exempt from the standards of this chapter.
Properties and areas of a property engaged in agricultural industry,
agricultural processing, and agricultural sales and service uses as defined in
section
9-3-040, are not included in this exemption.
C.   Landscaping for properties containing a detached single-family or two-
family dwellings are exempt from the standards found in sections
9-23-040,
9-23-055,
9-23-070,
9-23-090,
9-23-100,
9-23-110,
9-23-120, and the tables found in section
9-23-170, but shall comply with all other requirements pertaining to water-wise
landscaping, including the installation and maintenance of street trees and
park strips. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-030: JORDAN VALLEY WATER CONSERVANCY DISTRICT EFFICIENCY STANDARDS:
A.   In addition to the specific requirements and design standards of this
title, developer or contractor installed residential, commercial, institutional
and industrial construction shall comply with the Jordan Valley Water
Conservancy District (JVWCD) standards for water efficiency, as applicable. The
JVWCD outdoor landscaping standards are also required for new landscaping
construction installed by homeowners.
B.   JVWCD Outdoor Landscaping Standards.
1.   All new and rehabilitated landscaping for public agency projects, private
development projects, developer-installed landscaping in multi-family and
single-family residential projects within the front and side yards, and
homeowner provided landscape improvements within the front and side yards of
single and two-family dwellings shall comply with the landscaping standards
below:
a.   Activity zones: Portions of the landscape designed for recreation or
function, such as storage areas, fire pits, vegetable gardens, and playgrounds.
b.   Active recreation areas: Areas of the landscape dedicated to active play
where Lawn may be used as the playing surface (ex. sports fields and play
areas).
c.   Central open shape: An unobstructed area that functions as the focal point
of Localscapes and is designed in a shape that is geometric in nature.
d.   Gathering areas: Portions of the landscape that are dedicated to
congregating, such as patios, gazebos, decks, and other seating areas.
e.   Hardscape: Durable landscape materials, such as concrete, wood, pavers,
stone, or compacted inorganic mulch.
f.   Lawn: Ground that is covered with grass or turf that is regularly mowed.
g.   Localscapes: A landscaping approach designed to create locally adapted and
sustainable landscapes through a basic 5-step approach (central open shape,
gathering areas, activity zones, connecting pathways, and planting beds).
h.   Mulch: Any material such as rock, bark, compost, wood chips or other
materials left loose and applied to the soil.
i.   Park strip: A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-
of-curb and sidewalk.
j.   Paths: Designed routes between landscape areas and features.
k.   Planting bed: Areas of the landscape that consist of plants, such as
trees, ornamental grasses, shrubs, perennials, and other regionally appropriate
plants.
l.   Total landscaped area: Improved areas of the property that incorporate all
of the completed features of the landscape. The landscape area does not include
footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, and other non-
irrigated areas intentionally left undeveloped.
C.   JVWCD Landscaping Requirements. The following reflect the published
requirements of the JVWCD water efficiency standards not specifically contained
elsewhere in this chapter. They are applicable as outlined in subsection 9-23-
030(A) above.
1.   All irrigation shall be appropriate for the designated plant material to
achieve the highest water efficiency.
2.   Lawn shall not be installed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent
(25%) or in areas less than eight feet (8') in width. To the extent reasonably
practicable, lawn shall be free from obstructions (trees, signs, posts, valve
boxes, etc.).
3.   In residential landscapes, the landscaping shall adhere to the following
Localscapes® requirements:
a.   If size permits, the landscaped areas of the front yard and back yard
shall include a designed central open shape created by using lawn, hardscape,
groundcover, gravel, or mulch.
b.   Gathering areas shall be constructed of hardscape and placed outside of
the central open shape. In a landscape without lawn, gathering areas may
function as the central open shape.
c.   Activity zones shall be located outside of the central open shape and
shall be surfaced with materials other than lawn.
d.   Paths shall be made with materials that do not include lawn, such as
hardscape, mulch, or other groundcover.
e.   Lawn areas shall not exceed the greater of two-hundred fifty (250) square
feet, or thirty-five percent (35%) of the total landscaped area.
f.   Small residential lots, which have no back yards, which the total
landscaped area is less than two-hundred fifty (250) square feet, and which the
front yard dimensions cannot accommodate the minimum eight feet (8') wide lawn
area requirement of the landscaping requirements of subsection 9-23-030(C)(2)
are exempt from the eight feet (8') minimum width lawn area requirement.
4.   The JVWCD outdoor standards are not intended to be in conflict with other
landscaping requirements as defined by Utah law, including stormwater retention
requirements and low-impact development guidelines. Notwithstanding the JVWCD
outdoor standards, whenever any JVWCD requirement may be in conflict with Utah
law, the conflicting JVWCD requirement shall not apply. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023; Ord. 1610, 4-23-2024)
9-23-040: LANDSCAPE PLANS:
Landscape plans required by this title shall:
A.   Demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
B.   Be submitted in accordance with the administrative and development review
procedures of chapter 5 of this title; and
C.   Be sealed by a landscape architect or landscape designer licensed to
practice in the state of Utah. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-050: LANDSCAPE DESIGN CRITERIA:
Landscaping and landscape plans shall comply with the standards of this chapter
and the following design requirements:
A.   Plant Selection and Arrangement:
1.   Plants and trees shall be well-suited to the microclimate and soil
conditions of the site. Both native and locally-adapted plants are acceptable.
2.   Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together and placed on
the same irrigation circuit in order to create irrigational system efficiency
and prevent overwatering.
3.   Areas with slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall be
landscaped with deep rooting, water-conserving plants, and shall not include
turf.
4.   Tree species shall be selected based on growth characteristics and site
conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions,
exposure, and screening capabilities.
a.   Deciduous tree species with a broad canopy shall be utilized to provide
shade in parking lots and above paved areas of the site, and to help screen
large or tall objects.
b.   Where trees are required to be planted under overhead utility wires, low-
growing trees shall be selected. Recommended species include those listed in
the adopted Draper City approved tree list for use in parking strips beneath
power lines.
c.   Trees planted adjacent to vehicular or pedestrian areas of the site, or in
areas that would impede the implementation of natural surveillance as part of
efforts to incorporate CPTED design principles into the site, shall select
specimens and species that allow lower tree branches to be trimmed to maintain
the minimum clearance between the ground and the tree canopy for site safety,
without creating detrimental impact to the health or growth habit of the tree.
d.   Narrow or columnar trees shall be planted in small spaces, or where
awnings or other building features limit growth. Columnar trees may also be
placed in the area between a building and the sidewalk, or within the right-of-
way where there is no sidewalk, in order to provide greater visibility for
natural surveillance.
e.   Street trees shall be planted and maintained in compliance with section
9-23-080 of this chapter.
5.   Turf areas must be eight feet (8') wide or wider.
6.   For non-residential, multiple-family, and mixed use landscapes turf may
not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the total landscaped area not
including areas utilized for active recreation such as sports fields.
7.   All landscaped areas adjacent to buildings shall have trees, shrubs, and
other plantings, except where entries or other paving preclude it.
8.   The particular characteristics of a tree or plant species and the
locational relationship to the building, sightlines, utilities, and required
maintenance shall factor into the selection and placement of trees and plants
within the landscape.
B.   Climate: Planting layout and design shall include the placement of trees,
plants, shrubs, and other landscape features in locations that mitigate the
negative effects of extreme or elevated temperatures, sunlight, wind, and other
climatic factors.
C.   Grading: Site grading shall be designed and implemented to:
1.   Retain existing trees and vegetation within required perimeter planting
areas, land use buffers, yards and other areas of the site per the requirements
of section
9-23-070;
2.   Make use of existing natural drainage ways; and
3.   Minimize increased runoff and erosion.
D.   Water-Wise Landscape Techniques: Water-wise landscape practices are
required and shall implement at a minimum the following:
1.   Using water-wise plant species;
2.   Selecting plants on the basis of specific slope, aspect, soil and
microclimate conditions;
3.   Minimizing the amount of turf area;
4.   Planting and designing slopes to minimize runoff;
5.   Separating irrigation zones according to plant water requirements and
using drip/trickle irrigation systems to conserve water;
6.   Conserving existing topsoil and making improvements to the soil by deeply
loosening soil, and incorporating organic matter and amendments; and
7.   Using mulch in planting areas to reduce water evaporation, weed growth,
and to promote soil cooling.
E.   Storm Water Infrastructure: Detention and retention basins shall be
landscaped and maintained. The use of low impact development systems and
techniques is required.
F.   Landscape Area Amounts:
1.   Non-residential and mixed use: Except where a lesser amount is specified
elsewhere in this title, at least twenty percent (20%) of the gross area of the
development site shall be devoted to landscaping. Required landscaping in park
strips and other similar areas within the right-of-way are not included in this
total.
a.   The area of planting beds designed exclusively for annual or biennial
plants shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the landscaped area of the
site, not including area covered with turf or groundcover.
2.   Multiple-family residential: Landscaping amounts shall follow the
development standards found in chapter 32 of this title.
3.   Single-family and two-family residential: Minimum landscape area amounts
shall be as follows:
a.   Front yard:
(1)   Fifty percent (50%) of the total area of each front yard, for lots and
parcels equal to or greater than eight-thousand square feet (8,000 ft²) in
size,
(2)   Two-hundred and fifty square feet (250 ft²), for lots and parcels less
than eight-thousand square feet (8,000 ft²) in size.
b.   Side and rear yards: As determined by the homeowner(s).
G.   Plant Coverage: Live plant materials (not including trees) shall cover a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped area within the first two (2)
growing seasons following planting, and a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%)
of the landscaped area at ten (10) years. Planting beds that include annual or
biennial plantings shall be planted annually each spring with sufficient plants
to create a minimum annual coverage with live plant materials of seventy-five
percent (75%) of the area of the planting bed at the time the annual or
biennial plants reach maturity.
1.   For non-residential, mixed use, and multiple-family properties, the
landscape architect or landscape designer shall calculate and include the plant
coverage rates as notations on the landscape planting plan, in accordance with
the following:
a.   Tree and plant symbols shown within the site layout of a landscape
planting plan shall be scaled to indicate their typical coverage or spread
equivalent to their size at ten (10) years from planting, or at their full
maturity, whichever comes first.
H.   Species Diversity: Landscape planting plans, as required by this title,
shall include a variety of plant, shrub, and tree species in order to provide
visual and biological diversity within the landscape and as a safeguard against
the detrimental effects that might occur should a particular plant or species
succumb to disease. Within the landscape planting plan, the following shall
apply:
1.   No species of plant or shrub, shall account for more than twenty percent
(20%) of the total coverage area of all plants and shrubs.
2.   A single species of tree may not be utilized for:
a.   More than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of trees for sites
with ten (10) or more required trees;
b.   More than fifty percent (50%) of the total number of trees for sites with
between four (4) and ten (10) required trees;
3.   Trees may be of a single species where three (3) or fewer trees are
required.
I.   Soil Preparation: Soil preparation shall be suitable for providing healthy
growing conditions for the plants and encourage water infiltration and
penetration. Soil preparation shall include scarifying the soil to a depth of
six inches (6") or greater and amending the soil with fertilizer or organic
material.
1.   For non-residential, mixed-use, and multi-family properties, the landscape
architect or landscape designer shall have a laboratory analysis of the site
soils composition preformed and included details regarding the type, quantity,
and rate of soil amendments to be added to each planting area with respect to
the nutrient needs of the selected plants within the landscape plan.
2.   For new single-family and two-family residential sites obtaining a
laboratory analysis of the site soils to help inform the type, quantity, and
rate of soil amendments is recommended but not required. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-055: IRRIGATION:
A.   A Landscape Irrigation Plan is required to be submitted as part of a
complete landscaping plan package. The plans shall include at a minimum the
details required in this section and subsection
9-5-090(D)(1)(d)(4)(C).
B.   Pressure Regulation: In areas where the static service pressure from the
water meter exceeds eighty pounds per square inch (80 PSI), a pressure
regulating valve shall be installed as part of the irrigation system design and
shall be maintained by the property owner. The pressure-regulating valve shall
be located between the water meter and the first point of water use, or first
point of division in the pipe, and shall be set at the manufacturer's
recommended pressure for sprinklers.
C.   Irrigation Controller: Landscaped areas shall be provided with an EPA-
certified irrigation controller or equivalent which automatically adjusts the
frequency and duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather
conditions. All controllers shall be equipped with automatic rain delay or rain
shut-off capabilities.
D.   Each irrigation valve shall irrigate landscaping with similar site, slope
and soil conditions, and plant materials with similar watering needs. Lawn and
Planting Beds shall be irrigated on separate irrigation valves. In addition,
drip emitters and sprinklers shall be placed on separate irrigation valves.
E.   All non-turf landscape areas shall be irrigated by drip irrigation or
bubblers.
F.   Drip irrigation systems shall be equipped at a minimum with a pressure
regulator, filter, and flush-end assembly.
G.   Where pop-up sprinkler heads are used to irrigate turf areas they must
clear the top level of the turf.
H.   Sprinklers shall be scheduled to operate between 6 p.m. and 10 a.m.
I.   Program schedules shall be set to water plants for multiple short cycles
with a rest or soak period between cycles to reduce runoff in areas with slow
infiltration rates and where slopes are equal to or greater than fifteen
percent (15%).
J.   Areas of a site left undeveloped or as natural open space shall not
include permanent irrigation.
K.   For areas that will be revegetated with native water-wise plant species
with the intent to naturalize or restore the area to resemble natural open
space, details for any necessary temporary irrigation to support plant
establishment shall be included in the landscape irrigation plan. Temporary
irrigation systems shall be removed after plant establishment. (Ord. 1583, 6-
20-2023)
9-23-060: VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS:
Landscaping and landscape plans shall conform to the visual obstruction
requirements of section
9-27-080 of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-070: TREE AND VEGETATION PROTECTION:
A.   Development and landscape designs shall be designed to preserve existing
trees and vegetation within the areas of required perimeter plantings, land use
buffers, and yards.
B.   Existing trees and vegetation located within the areas described in
subsection 9-23-070(A) above shall be preserved and may not be removed, except
as provided for in subsection 9-23-070(F) below.
C.   Existing trees four inches (4") in caliper or greater and vegetation
located within the areas described in subsection 9-23-070(A) above shall be
identified on site plans and preliminary subdivision plat including the caliper
measurement of each tree.
D.   A minimum protection zone shall be established on the site plan or
preliminary subdivision plat around each tree or vegetated area at or beyond
the drip line of the trees or vegetation to be preserved.
E.   Prior to the commencement of grading or construction activities on a site
the developer shall install temporary protective fencing around the perimeter
of the tree and vegetation protection zones identified on the site plan or
preliminary subdivision plat. The developer shall be responsible to see that
the trees and vegetation being fenced are protected from construction
activities, including but not limited to, earthwork operations, the movement
and storage of equipment and materials, and the dumping of chemicals.
F.   The zoning administrator may permit the removal of existing trees and
vegetation under the following conditions:
1.   All existing trees and vegetation proposed for removal must be indicated
as such on the site plan or subdivision preliminary plat.
2.   Existing trees and vegetation located within the required perimeter
planting, land use buffer, or yard area may not be removed, except where:
a.   Planned vehicular or pedestrian access to or on the property necessitates
the removal of specific trees or areas of existing vegetation;
b.   Necessary site grading to control storm water requires the removal of
specific trees or areas of existing vegetation;
c.   The developer or property owner provides written certification from a
certified arborist that an existing tree is diseased, dead, dying or is an
invasive species and should be removed;
d.   Additional tree or plant installation for screening or buffering is
required in the same area and the preservation of the existing vegetation (not
including existing trees) would prevent or inhibit installation of the required
landscaping; or
e.   The location or other characteristic of an existing tree is causing or is
likely to cause a nuisance or damage to adjoining properties. The dropping or
blowing of leaves, needles, cones, or seeds shall not be considered a nuisance
under this section. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-080: PARK STRIP LANDSCAPING:
All park strips shall be landscaped pursuant to the following.
A.   Street Trees:
1.   Street trees shall be selected from the adopted Draper City street tree
guide.
2.   Street trees shall not be located within park strips less than five feet
(5') wide.
3.   Street trees shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one (1) tree for each
forty feet (40') of street frontage.
4.   Street trees shall be at least two inches (2") in caliper at time of
planting.
5.   In areas where there is no sidewalk or five feet (5') or less between the
sidewalk and curb, street trees shall be installed within fifteen feet (15') of
the right-of-way.
6.   Street trees shall be irrigated through the use of bubblers or drip
irrigation.
B.   Maintenance: Property owners are responsible for the irrigation and
maintenance of required street trees and other vegetation in park strips
abutting their property pursuant to Section
9-23-140. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-090: PERIMETER LANDSCAPING:
This section is applicable to all developments not otherwise exempted under the
provisions of section 9-23-020 of this title. Minimum perimeter landscaping
shall be required as follows:
A.   The perimeter of each development site shall be landscaped as specified in
this section and
tables 9-23-1 and
9-23-2 in section
9-23-170 of this chapter.
B.   The minimum depth of the perimeter landscaped area along front, rear and
interior lot lines shall be ten feet (10'), except:
1.   In locations where a land use buffer is required, the width requirements
of the land use buffer shall supersede;
2.   In locations not subject to a land use buffer where the building is
setback less than ten feet (10') as permitted by the zone;
3.   In locations where vehicular access or cross access touches or crosses
shared property lines as permitted or required by this code; or
4.   Along shared rear and side property lines not subject to a land use
buffers, the minimum depth adjacent to vehicular parking areas, including
applicable access aisles and drives, may be reduced to five feet (5'). (Ord.
1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-100: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
Except for developments exempted under section
9-23-020 of this title, every parking lot with more than ten (10) spaces and
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet shall contain internal
landscaped areas based on the following design criteria:
A.   Amount Of Landscaping: Except in zoning districts where a different amount
is specified, the amount of landscaping within each parking lot shall be as
follows:
1.   Multiple-family residential sites: Ten percent (10%) of total parking lot
area.
2.   Office and commercial sites: Seven percent (7%) of total parking lot area.
3.   Industrial or warehouse sites: Five percent (5%) of total parking lot
area. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
4.   For mixed-use sites, the amount shall be determined based on the
predominant use based on the square footage of the building(s) served by the
parking spaces.
B.   Calculations:
1.   Total parking lot area shall be calculated along the perimeter of the lot,
including all parking spaces, access ways, and landscaped islands within the
perimeter and at the corners of the lot, as demonstrated in
Figure 9-23-1 below. A chart with the calculations shall be included on the
site plan. Total parking lot area shall not include building footprints or
applicable loading and service areas, but shall include customer service drive-
up areas and access ways used jointly by those utilizing the parking lot and
service traffic.
2.   Landscaping areas within the parking lot area shall be calculated
exclusive of impervious paving and curbing, but shall include the area of
required outdoor amenities located within the parking lot perimeter (if any).
3.   For purposes of compliance with this section, parking area landscaping
shall be calculated independently from overall site area landscaping, but shall
also count towards the required percentage of overall site area landscaping.
Figure 9-23-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5339.png]
 
C.    Location and Design:
1.    Location: Parking lot land scaping shall be provided:
a.    As a landscaped island at the end of parking rows;
b.   Between rows of head-to-head parking stalls;
c.   As landscaped islands within rows of parking stalls;
d.   At aisle intersections; and
e.   Along major drives and access ways.
2.   Design:
a.   The design of the planting plan layout for the parking area shall:
(1)   Address expected foot traffic patterns;
(2)   Mitigate expected pedestrian safety concerns;
(3)   Provide necessary visibility for the safety of pedestrians and vehicles;
(4)   Include water-wise landscaping techniques, including but not limited to
plant selection and low impact design elements;
(5)   Include at least one (1) tree for each three-hundred square feet (300
ft²) of total overall parking lot landscape area;
(6)   Not include turf; and
(7)   Address the expected snow removal and snow storage needs of the parking
area.
b.   Landscaped islands within the parking lot area shall be at least five feet
(5') wide and one hundred (100) square feet in area, and shall include the
following:
(1)   A minimum of one tree shall be planted in each island;
(2)   Additional landscaping with shrubs, ground cover, or planting beds to
achieve a minimum of 50% coverage by plants at maturity (plants and trees may
be grouped); and
(3)   Drip irrigation adequate to meet tree and plant needs.
c.   No more than fifteen (15) parking stalls may be in a row between
landscaping islands as shown in
figure 9-23-2 below.
d.   Rows of adjacent parking shall be separated by landscaping of at least
nine feet (9') in width as shown in
figure 9-23-3 below. If wheel stops are included to prevent vehicles from
overhanging the landscaping, this minimum width can be reduced down to five
feet (5').
e.   All parking area landscaping and landscaping adjacent to parking areas
shall be bordered and separated from the parking area by minimum six inch (6")
high back concrete curbing. Sections of curbing may be non-contiguous or
eliminated in order to implement low impact development (LID) storm water
features within the development. Where high back curbing is eliminated as part
of a LID design, the installation of wheel stops will be required between the
parking stall and adjacent landscaping to prevent the intrusion of automobiles
into the landscaped areas.
Figure 9-23-2
Parking Area Landscaping Islands
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5337.png]
 
Figure 9-23-3
Parking Row Dividing Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5335.png]
 
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-110: LAND USE BUFFERS:
Except for developments exempted under section
9-23-020 of this title, land use buffers shall be provided along the side and
rear property lines of commercial, multifamily, and industrial properties to
enhance community appearance and welfare by protecting residents and visitors
from the traffic, noise, glare, trash, activity, vibration, odor, visual
disorder and other adverse or harmful effects typically associated with such
land uses.
A.   Land Use Buffer Requirements: The amount of landscaping and type of
fencing required for a land use buffer shall be as follows:
1.   A landscape buffer of twenty feet (20') shall be provided between all
commercial and office uses when located adjacent to a residential zone and when
a multi-family use is located adjacent to a single-family zone.
2.   A landscape buffer of thirty feet (30') shall be provided between
industrial uses and residential uses or zones.
3.   Trees within the buffer area described in
9-23-110(A)(1) and (2) above shall be planted at one tree per four hundred
(400) square feet of buffer area.
a.   Trees may be grouped.
b.   At least one buffer tree shall be planted between commercial, office,
multi-family and industrial uses and each single-family residential lot. Trees
shall be arranged to provide linear coverage between commercial, office and
industrial uses and adjacent residential units.
4.   The rest of the buffer area shall consist of ground covers, shrubs and
planting beds, wherein a maximum of seventy five percent (75%) of the buffer
area may be planted with ground covers.
5.   Non-residential, mixed use, and multiple-family developments shall install
a six feet (6') tall, solid, sight obscuring fence along the property perimeter
where adjacent to single-family or two-family residential zoning or
development.
a.   The fence shall be constructed of masonry, precast concrete, or
lightweight precast fiber reinforced concrete.
b.   The fence shall extend from the adjacent finish grade of the property
upward to the required height, excluding required footings and foundations. Any
gaps between the bottom of the fence panel and the adjacent finish grade of the
property may not exceed four inches (4"). Such gaps are not counted towards the
total required minimum height of the fence.
c.   The height of fences shall be reduced in clear view triangle areas or
where they may impact sight visibility with a driveway as specified in section
9-27-080.
B.   Exemptions: No land use buffer shall be required between land uses located
in the same zone.
C.   Reductions:
1.   The zoning administrator or designee may reduce land use buffer
requirements based on the character of specific uses, building orientations,
topographic features, or other unique characteristics of adjoining uses. A
reduced buffer shall consist of a minimum ten foot (10') wide landscape buffer
and an eight foot (8') tall, solid, sight obscuring fence in compliance with
all other specifications of
9-23-110(A)(5). In approving reductions under this section the zoning
administrator shall not reduce the tree and plant requirements of subsections
9-23-110 (A)(3) and (4).
D.   Relationship To Other Requirements: When the requirements of a land use
buffer exceed those of other requirements along a property line, the land use
buffer requirements shall apply.
E.   Existing Buffer Vegetation And Trees: Retention of existing shrubs, trees,
plants and groundcovers within land use buffers shall comply with the
provisions of section
9-23-070. Scraping, grading, sodding and other construction activity within the
land use buffer area shall be avoided. Where development standards call for
additional trees or shrubs to be installed in an existing landscaped land use
buffer, precautions shall be taken, to minimize disturbance to existing trees
and shrubs.
F.   Compatibility Of Plantings: Supplemental buffer plantings shall be
compatible with any existing vegetation within the buffer area.
G.   Development Within Land Use Buffers: Land use buffers may contain
nonmotorized trails. In no event shall structures or uses, such as, but not
limited to, play fields, stables, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts,
parking lots and vehicular use areas, generators, trash receptacle enclosures,
equipment storage and other open storage, or buildings be permitted within land
use buffers. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1474, 2-2-2021; Ord. 1485, 4-6-
2021; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-120: SITE FEATURE BUFFERING AND SCREENING:
Except for developments exempted under section
9-23-020 of this title, site features, such as, but not limited to, the
following, shall be effectively screened from view as seen from adjacent
roadways and sites in compliance with the site design requirements of section
9-22-050 and the following landscape standards:
A.   Trash Receptacle Enclosures:
1.   Evergreen shrubs shall be utilized and shall be provided at a minimum rate
of one (1) shrub for each five lineal feet (5') of enclosure as measured around
the perimeter, excluding gates.
2.    Evergreen shrubs utilized for screening the enclosure shall be a minimum
height of eighteen inches (18") at the time of planting, and of a species
capable of growing to a height equal to or greater than the height of the
enclosure.
B.   Service And Loading Areas:
1.   Shrubs used for the purpose of screening service and loading areas, shall
include evergreen shrubs, either exclusively or mixed.
2.   All shrubs shall be minimum height of eighteen inches (18") at the time of
planting, and of a species capable of growing to a height of at least four feet
(4').
C.   Ground Mounted Utility Boxes, Meters And Mechanical Equipment:
1.   Evergreen shrubs shall be used for the purpose of screening ground mounted
mechanical equipment, utility meters, other utility equipment and boxes, and
similar areas or appurtenances.
2.   Except as provided for in 9-23-120(C)(5) below, evergreen shrubs shall be
planted no further than five feet (5') from the appurtenance they are
screening.
a.   Minimum clearances between equipment and plantings established by utility
companies or manufacturers shall be adhered to. Where minimum clearances
require screening to be placed further than five feet (5') from the
appurtenance additional plantings will be required to achieve the same or
greater ratio of screening coverage that would have been achieved with plants
being placed within feet (5').
3.   The evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum height of eighteen inches (18") at
the time of planting, and of a species capable of growing to a height equal to
or greater than the height of the equipment, enclosure, or appurtenance they
are screening.
4.   A minimum of four (4) evergreen shrubs shall be required for each box or
appurtenance located within the landscape and plantings shall be planted with
additional evergreen shrubs so that each side of the box otherwise visible to a
street or neighboring properties is screened.
.(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-130: TREE AND LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS:
Minimum required tree and landscape material standards shall be as follows:
A.   General: Trees and plants used in landscape design pursuant to this
chapter shall be:
1.   Water-wise and drought tolerant;
2.   Planted in areas where the recommended soil nutrients, water, and sun
exposure are available;
3.   Noninvasive; and
4.   Low maintenance.
B.   Plant Quality: All plants and trees installed pursuant to this chapter
shall conform to or exceed the standards of the most recent edition of
"American Standard For Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1",. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
C.   Artificial Turf: Artificial turf installed over a permeable base surface
may be used in lieu of actual turf. Artificial turf must be regularly
maintained according to manufacturer specifications and shall be replaced once
the manufacture’s recommended lifespan or functional lifespan has been reached,
whichever comes first. No other artificial plants or vegetation shall be used
to meet any standards of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-
17-2015)
D.   Tree Diameter and Height:
1.   Deciduous trees planted to satisfy the standards of this chapter shall
have a minimum caliper of two inches (2").
2.   Evergreen trees planted to satisfy the standards of this chapter shall
have a minimum height of six feet (6'). (Ord. 999, 2-21-2012; amd. Ord. 1132,
2-17-2015)
E.   Shrubs:
1.   Shrubs utilized in a non-residential, mixed use, or multiple-family
landscape plan shall be from nursery stock, a minimum size of three (3)
gallons, or container class #3, at the time of planting.
2.   Shrubs required as part of a land use buffer or as perimeter plantings
adjacent to parking where fronting a street, shall have a minimum height of
eighteen inches (18") at the time of planting.
3.   Along the exterior of parking lots where potential light trespass from
vehicular headlights would be directed towards adjoining residential properties
or streets, evergreen shrubs shall be planted in a continuous row or hedge of
sufficient height to block such trespass.
F.   Ground Treatment:
1.   The ground area within landscape areas shall present a finished appearance
with a balanced distribution of plantings across each planting area.
2.   Bark or rock mulch shall be installed and maintained at a minimum depth of
three inches (3") on all planted areas except where ground cover plants are
fully established and provide for complete coverage of the area. Mulch may be
approved as a permanent ground treatment in landscape designs where ground
cover or turf is impractical.
3.   Rock mulch with an accompanying weed barrier may be used in a limited way
as a ground treatment in areas where typical water drainage from the site would
create conditions unsuitable for plant survival, or adjacent to buildings where
plantings could create a health, safety, or operational hazard near entrances.
The use of this type of treatment adjacent to non-residential and mixed-use
buildings may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the landscape planting area
located within ten feet (10') of the building.
4.   Landscape edging shall be used to separate planting beds from turf and
other areas predominantly planted with groundcovers, and shall also be provided
at the transition between all mulched areas, ground covers, and turf. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-140: INSTALLATION, INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT:
Required landscaping shall be installed, maintained, irrigated and replaced in
accordance with the following standards:
A.   All landscaping shall be installed according to sound nursery practices in
a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth.
B.   Designers and installers for all commercial, industrial, institutional,
civic, mixed use, and multiple-family residential sites shall meet all
applicable state and local license, insurance, and bonding requirements and be
able to show proof of such upon request.
1.   Upon completion of the landscape installation, the landscape architect or
landscape designer responsible for creating and stamping the plans shall
inspect the installation and provide a signed certificate of substantial
completion to the property owner or applicant and to the city.
2.   After receiving the certificate of substantial completion from the
landscape architect or landscape designer, the property owner or applicant
shall schedule a landscape inspection with the Community Development Department
for verification of ordinance compliance. If an improvement completion
assurance has been posted, a certificate from the landscape architect or
designer for the portion(s) installed must accompany each request for a partial
refund of the improvement completion assurance.
C.   Maintenance and Replacement:
1.   Property owners shall be responsible for the regular maintenance of all
landscape areas of their property, including adjacent park strips, in a way
that presents a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. All landscaping shall be
maintained free from disease, pests, weeds and litter. This maintenance shall
include but is not limited to weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing,
edging, mulching, and etcetera, in accordance with generally accepted
horticultural best practices.
2.   Property owners shall be responsible for maintenance, repair or
replacement of landscape structures (e.g., walls, fences) in a structurally
sound condition and in a neat appearance without substantial deterioration.
3.   Property owners shall actively prevent the establishment of undesirable
and harmful plant and tree species within landscape and preservation areas
through ongoing maintenance, including weeding, to prevent germination, growth
and establishment of such plant and tree species, and prompt removal and
disposal of such species once discovered.
4.   Property owners shall promptly replace any tree or plant material required
by this chapter or shown on approved plans that is diseased, dead or dying and
unable to be restored to health. Replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper
of two inches (2"). Any perennial landscaping required to be planted or
preserved by this chapter that dies or is otherwise removed shall be replaced
with vegetation which complies with the minimum size and other characteristics
required at the time of initial installation, or larger specimens as available.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1408, 10-15- 2019; Ord.
1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-150: SUBSTITUTION OF PLANT MATERIALS:
The zoning administrator shall have the authority to approve the installation
of comparable substitute plant species or materials to satisfy the requirements
of an approved landscape plan when the approved plants and landscape materials
are not available at the time that installation is to occur or when other
unforeseen conditions prevent the use of the exact materials shown on the
approved landscape plan. The zoning administrator may not reduce the number of
plants required. Any significant change to landscaping plans previously
approved by the planning commission shall be subject to review and approval of
the planning commission. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
9-23-160: TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF LANDSCAPING INSTALLATION:
The physical installation of live plant material required by this chapter shall
not occur during the winter months between October 1st and the following March
31st, or during a day in which the outdoor temperature exceeds ninety-nine
degrees (99°) including the following five (5) calendar days, and may be
temporarily suspended, in individual cases, by the zoning administrator during
other periods of adverse weather conditions, or when plants and landscape
materials are not available.(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-23-170: TABLES:
TABLE 9-23-1
PERIMETER PLANTINGS ALONG STREET FRONTAGES
(Not Including Park Strips)
 
Minimum Ratios
Per 100 Linear  Freeway        Arterial       Collector        Local
Feet
                               2 deciduous    2 deciduous
                               trees          trees
Adjacent to     2 deciduous    1 evergreen    1 evergreen tree 2 deciduous
building or     trees          tree           12 shrubs        trees
open area                      16 shrubs      75 sq. ft. of
                               100 sq. ft. of planting beds
                               planting beds1
                As above plus  As above plus
                evergreen      evergreen      As above plus    As above plus
                shrubs or a    shrubs or a    evergreen shrubs evergreen shrubs
                combination of combination of or a combination or a combination
Adjacent to     evergreen      evergreen      of evergreen     of evergreen
parking lot2    shrubs and a   shrubs and a   shrubs and a     shrubs and a
                berm for       berm for       berm for         berm for a
                continuous     continuous     continuous       minimum 75%
                screening of   screening of   screening of the screening of the
                the parking    the parking    parking area1    parking area1
                area           area1
Adjacent to     Trees as above Trees as above Trees as above   Trees as above
service areas   plus evergreen plus evergreen plus evergreen   plus evergreen
(loading docks, shrubs         shrubs         shrubs providing shrubs providing
outside         providing for  providing for  for 75%          for 50%
storage, and    100% screening 75% screening  screening of the screening of the
trash           of the service of the service service area2    service area2
compactors)2    area2          area2
 
Notes:
   1.    Screening shall be designed to be between three feet (3') and four
feet (4') in height after five (5) years of normal growth, and shall be
maintained so as to not exceed four feet (4') in height, or the height
limitations found in section
9-27-080 as applicable. A three feet (3') tall decorative wall or fence,
compatible with the architectural design and materials of the main building or
site fencing, may be used in lieu of shrubs for parking lot screening.
   2.    Screening shall be designed to meet the above criteria after five (5)
years of normal growth.
TABLE 9-23-2
PERIMETER PLANTINGS ALONG INTERIOR LOT LINES1
 
Minimum Ratios Per 100 Linear Side                    Rear
Feet
Adjacent to building1         1 deciduous tree        1 deciduous tree
                              5 shrubs                5 shrubs
Adjacent to parking lot2      1 deciduous tree        1 deciduous tree
                              9 shrubs                9 shrubs
Adjacent to service area3     1 Evergreen tree and 16 1 Evergreen tree and 16
                              evergreen shrubs        evergreen shrubs
 
Notes:
   1.    Where a building wall is located between ten (10) and five (5) feet
from the property line, columnar species of trees shall be utilized and the
required tree count shall be double. Where a building wall is located closer
than five feet (5') from the property line, but greater than two feet (2'), in
addition to the required shrubs, four (4) shrubs with columnar or vertical
growth characteristics that will reach at least four feet (4') in height shall
be substituted for each required tree. Where a building wall is located two
feet (2') or closer to a property line, trees and shrubs shall not be required
and the perimeter planting area shall include ground cover plantings or rock
mulch and comply with the requirements of section
9-23-130(F).
   2.    Where a perimeter planting area adjacent to a parking lot is permitted
to be less than ten feet (10') in width, the number of required trees may be
reduced by up to fifty percent (50%) to account for the adjacent tree canopy of
the adjoining property. The required shrub count shall remain the same.
   3.   Evergreen shrubs shall be of a species or variety that will grow to a
minimum height of four feet (4') at maturity. The zoning administrator may
permit a reduction in the number of evergreen shrubs upon demonstration that
the evergreen shrubs within the landscape design will provide fifty percent
(50%) screening of the service area within five (5) years of normal growth.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
CHAPTER 24
NATURAL RESOURCES INVENTORY
SECTION:
9-24-010: Purpose
9-24-020: Scope And Applicability
9-24-030: Natural Resources Inventory Requirements
9-24-010: PURPOSE:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is:
1.   To set forth the process of preparing a natural resources inventory
("NRI") for development sites; and
2.   To identify and protect natural resources that may otherwise be adversely
affected by construction activities during the development process.
B.   Intent: By identifying existing conditions on a proposed development site
the city intends to achieve a balance between accommodating the development and
protecting the city's existing natural resources. In particular, the city
intends to reach the following environmental management objectives:
1.   Maintain biologically viable and diverse streams and wetlands;
2.   Protect stream water quality;
3.   Improve degraded streams;
4.   Reduce flood potential;
5.   Conserve woodlands;
6.   Protect steep slopes;
7.   Preserve and protect wildlife habitat and corridors;
8.   Protect against development hazards on areas prone to flooding;
9.   Preserve visual amenities and areas for recreation and outdoor education
opportunities;
10.   Protect important cultural resources; and
11.   Enhance important views and vistas. (Ord. 893, 6-2-2009)
9-24-020: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
A.   Scope: Before any development plan may be reviewed for sites meeting any
of the characteristics of this section, a natural resources inventory ("NRI")
report shall be provided for the subject property. For the purposes of this
chapter, a development plan shall be considered an application for a site plan
or preliminary subdivision approval. An application for an amendment to the
same shall not require the submission of an NRI report unless determined by the
zoning administrator that the nature of the amendment is such that will affect
or change the terms of the report. The report shall present the information
regarding the factors set forth in section
9-24-030 of this chapter as they apply to the subject property and to the first
one hundred feet (100') of adjoining property.
B.   Applicability: The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall be
required as follows:
1.   Developments: An NRI report shall be a part of the application
requirements for all subdivision and commercial site plan development
applications on property where any of the following are true for any portion of
the subject property, as further detailed in section
9-24-030,
figure 9-24-1 of this chapter:
a.   Located to the east of Highland Drive north of 13200 South;
b.   Located to the east and south of the UTA light rail corridor south of
13200 South;
c.   Located within a FEMA designated A series flood zone, according to the
currently adopted mapping; or
d.   Located within the sensitive river overlay as shown on the general plan
land use map.
2.   Phasing: Projects proposed to be phased wherein any of the characteristics
of subsection B1 of this section demonstrated as a part of a future phase shall
submit an NRI report for the entirety of the project area as a part of the
application for the initial phase. In such cases, the NRI requirement shall be
considered satisfied for the application for all future phases unless good
cause can be found to necessitate an update or the submission of a new NRI
report. (Ord. 893, 6-2-2009)
9-24-030: NATURAL RESOURCES INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS:
Each NRI report shall provide written documentation to address the factors set
forth in this section with supporting information displayed graphically to the
greatest extent possible. If any of the topical items of this section are not
applicable or otherwise unable to be displayed graphically, notation shall be
provided on maps and drawings in addition to information provided in the
written documentation.
A.   Streams And Floodplains: The report shall show all streams, drainage
courses, and floodplain designations located on or within one hundred feet
(100') of the subject property shown by topographic delineation based on the
most current FEMA flood insurance rate maps or more current sources of
information. If engineering studies provide the basis for topographic or
floodplain information, they shall be reviewed by the city engineer, and may be
approved or rejected, prior to application for a development plan review.
B.   Steep Slopes: The report shall show topography of the entire site
specifically identifying existing slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%).
Slopes between fifteen percent (15%) and thirty percent (30%) shall be
distinguished from slopes greater than thirty percent (30%).
C.   Wetlands: The report shall show all wetlands as defined by the Utah
department of natural resources and the federal clean water act. Wetlands
limitations shall be shown on the associated development plan.
1.   Wetlands shall be shown in the report by a line denoting the boundary of
wetlands or a note stating that no wetlands exist on the site.
2.   Copies of all applications to the U.S. army corps of engineers for
authorization to impact or alter wetlands, when such is proposed, shall be
submitted with the development plan application. Copies of approvals or denials
for the same from the U.S. army corps of engineers shall be a required
submittal prior to the development plan being eligible for a first review by
the planning commission or city council.
D.   Shrubs And Trees: The report shall show shrub and tree stands indicated by
recent aerial photos. Such areas shall be delineated by a circumferential line
extending to the outer perimeter of the tree canopies.
1.   Tree varieties and their range of size shall be indicated through notation
on the aerial drawing sheet identifying the stands.
2.   Trees with four inch (4") or greater caliper, measured according to
standard city procedure, and located within areas proposed to be disturbed
shall be identified.
E.   Dam Or Canal Break Analysis: The NRI report shall show the danger reach of
areas subject to inundation in the event of failure of any dam regulated by the
U.S. army corps of engineers or the bank failure of any above grade canal. If
no such structures exist, this information need not be addressed other than a
statement acknowledging no such structures.
1.   For all development applications where the property is within one mile or
less downstream of a dam or canal, an applicant shall show the entire danger
reach area, footprints of existing structures, and spot danger reach water
surface elevations on the NRI.
2.   For the purpose of regulatory review by the city, a dam or canal breach
analysis shall be required:
a.   When failure of a dam or canal could result in loss of life, damage to
homes, commercial or industrial buildings; or damage or inundation of arterial
or collector highways; or interruption in the use or service of public
utilities; or
b.   When the drainage area to the impoundment is four hundred (400) acres or
more.
3.   Additional information, which may be required with a preliminary plan,
includes:
a.   Information on the dam or canal itself, including storage volume and the
hazard classification thereof;
b.   Dam break analysis using HEC-1, DAMBRK, TR-66, or other generally
recognized models; and
c.   Flow path/channel to carry such a flood.
F.   Threatened And Endangered Species: The report shall show generally the
habitat and location of flora and fauna designated as rare, threatened,
endangered, in need of conservation, or listed as watch list species, as
determined by the Utah department of natural resources or U.S. fish and
wildlife service, known to exist on the property proposed for development.
G.   Cultural And Historic Resources: The report shall identify any and all
cultural and historic resources identified by the city or the Utah
Archaeological Society.
FIGURE 9-24-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3960.jpg]
 
(Ord. 893, 6-2-2009)
CHAPTER 25
PARKING
SECTION:
9-25-010: Purpose
9-25-020: Scope
9-25-030: Parking To Be Provided
9-25-040: Parking Calculation
9-25-050: Parking Location
9-25-060: Number And Type Of Parking Spaces
9-25-070: Parking Dimensions
9-25-080: Parking Area Design And Construction
9-25-090: Deviations From Strict Compliance For Parking
9-25-100: Tables And Figures
9-25-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision and maintenance of off
street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the parking and loading
demand of adjacent land uses. The requirements of this chapter are intended to
provide useful and attractive parking and loading facilities, to protect public
safety, and to mitigate adverse land use impacts. (Ord. 986, 3-20-2012)
9-25-020: SCOPE:
This chapter is applicable to all new and existing development requiring
automobile or vehicular access under the provisions of this title. The
requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other
applicable provisions of this title, this code, and other laws. (Ord. 986, 3-
20-2012)
9-25-030: PARKING TO BE PROVIDED:
A.   Parking Required: Every land use established under the authority of this
title shall have parking as required by this chapter. Each person who
establishes any such land use shall provide the required parking. The
establishment of a land use shall include any change in use and any increase in
the capacity or intensity of an existing use.
B.   Continuing Obligation To Provide Parking: Provision of parking as required
by this chapter shall be a continuing obligation so long as a use continues
which requires parking. It shall be unlawful for any building owner, land use
operator, or person responsible for providing parking to discontinue or
dispense with required parking facilities without providing an alternate
parking area which meets the requirements of this chapter.
C.   Alteration Where Parking Insufficient: A building, structure, or use which
lacks sufficient parking as required by this chapter may not be altered,
enlarged, or changed unless additional parking for the alteration, enlargement,
or change is supplied that meets the requirements of this chapter.
D.   Parking Continually Available: Except as specifically authorized elsewhere
in this title, each designated parking space shall be used solely for the
parking or storage of one motor vehicle. Dual use of parking spaces for public
safety and emergency access aisles, internal vehicular circulation aisles,
queuing lanes, or similar uses is prohibited. Internal vehicular circulation
aisles providing access to parking spaces may not be encumbered by required
queuing spaces or other waiting/loading areas, with the exception of emergency
access lanes, that could impede access to and from the parking spaces. (Ord.
986, 3-20-2012; amd. Ord. 1471, 1-19-2021)
9-25-040: PARKING CALCULATION:
The following provisions shall be used to calculate the total number of parking
spaces required by this chapter:
A.   Fractional Numbers: Any fractional parking space requirement resulting
from a parking calculation shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
B.   More Than One Use On Lot: If a lot or parcel contains more than one use,
parking spaces shall be provided in an amount equal to the total of the
requirements for each use unless shared parking is approved pursuant to this
chapter.
C.   Square Foot Basis: Parking requirements based on square footage shall be
calculated using gross floor area unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
D.   Employee Basis: Parking requirements based on the number of employees
shall be calculated using the largest number of persons working on any shift,
including owners and managers.
E.   Uses Not Listed: If a development application is received for a use not
specifically included in this chapter, the zoning administrator shall apply the
parking requirements for the use deemed most similar to the use proposed in the
application. (Ord. 986, 3-20-2012)
9-25-050: PARKING LOCATION:
A.   On Site Parking: Except as allowed in subsection B of this section, all
required parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use to which
it is appurtenant. In the case of a multi-tenant nonresidential development in
which multiple parcels are covered by the tenant uses and their associated
parking, the parking shall be considered on site for all of those tenant uses.
B.   Off Site Parking: Where practical difficulties exist in providing on site
parking or if public safety, convenience, or both, would be better served by
locating parking on a separate lot or parcel, the planning commission may
authorize such off site parking subject to the following conditions:
1.   Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall not
be located in an off site parking area;
2.   Off site parking areas shall be located in the same or a more intensive
zone which applies to the property where the use served is located;
3.   No off site parking space shall be located more than six hundred feet
(600') from a public entrance of the use served, measured along the route of
the shortest practical walking distance;
4.   Off site parking shall not be separated from the principal use by a street
right of way of a collector or arterial class;
5.   Availability of each off site parking area shall be assured by an
agreement reviewed and accepted by the city which requires at least the
following:
a.   The parking area shall be continuously available unless an alternative
parking area is provided;
b.   All parking spaces shall be available without charge; and
c.   All parking spaces shall be available perpetually to all uses utilizing
the parking; and
6.   Before approving any off site parking area, the planning commission must
find that such parking is conveniently usable without causing unreasonable:
a.   Hazard to pedestrians;
b.   Hazard to vehicular traffic;
c.   Traffic congestion;
d.   Interference with safe and convenient access to other parking areas in the
vicinity;
e.   Detriment to the appropriate use of any business in the vicinity; and
f.   Detriment to any residential neighborhood.
C.   Shared Use Parking: A shared use parking study must be submitted for
review for approval of shared use parking. The study must be reviewed by the
zoning administrator to determine whether the uses will make use of the shared
spaces at different times of the day, week, month, or year. The planning
commission, following a recommendation from the zoning administrator, may
authorize shared use of a parking area subject to the following conditions:
1.   The uses sharing the parking area are unlikely to produce competing
demands that exceed the available parking during the same hours;
2.   Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall not
be reduced; and
3.   Ongoing shared use of the parking area is assured by an agreement reviewed
and accepted by the city which provides at least the following:
a.   The parking area shall be continuously available unless an alternative
parking area is provided;
b.   All spaces shall be available without charge;
c.   All parking spaces shall be available perpetually to all uses utilizing
the parking; and
d.   Additional parking shall be provided up to the amount otherwise required
under this chapter if the zoning administrator determines, based on parking
counts, that a shared parking area does not satisfy the off street parking
demand of the uses involved.
D.   Temporary Parking:
1.   Temporary parking, when approved as part of a temporary use or special
event, shall be exempt from the landscaping requirements of this chapter, but
must comply with access and surfacing requirements. Temporary parking may only
be utilized for parking during the same time period that the temporary use
permit or special event permit is issued for.
2.   The city may allow a temporary use or special event to occupy or use
parking areas ordinarily required for a permanent use if it is found that the
temporary use will not cause a shortage in parking needed for the permanent
use.
3.   Parking rows and drive access aisles associated with temporary parking
shall be clearly marked and comply with the minimum size requirements of
sections
9-25-070 and
9-25-100,
table 9-25-2.
E.   Vacant Lots And Open Land: Vacant lots and open land areas shall not be
used as parking areas, except as allowed for a temporary use or special event.
F.   Parking For Residential Uses: All parking associated with residential uses
shall be according to the following:
1.   All residential uses shall provide on-site hard surfaced parking in
accordance with section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter.
2.   Front yards and side yards of residential uses shall not be used for
parking unless hard surfaced.
3.   There shall be no permanent on street parking in residential zones.
4.   Required parking for single-family dwellings shall be provided within an
enclosed garage.
5.   Required parking for an approved accessory dwelling unit shall not be
required to be within an enclosed garage but shall be provided in a hard
surfaced area.
6.   Multi-family dwellings designed to include enclosed garages may count the
number of spaces within the garage toward the parking requirement when the
garage is designed in compliance with subsection
9-25-070(A)(3) of this chapter and approved as a part of a site plan or site
plan amendment.
G.   Parking Of Recreational Vehicles And Trailers In Residential Zones:
Personal recreational vehicles, including, but not limited to, trailers, travel
trailers, boats, watercraft, utility trailers, and motor homes parked in
residential zones shall be parked behind the front wall plane of the primary
structure on the same property and conform to the design and construction
requirements of subsection
9-25-080. Where residential developments contain approved off-street
recreational vehicle parking areas, parking of recreational vehicles shall be
allowed only within those designated areas.
H.   Heavy Vehicle Parking:
1.   Fifteen Thousand Pounds Or Less: Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight
rating or gross vehicle weight of fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds or less may
be parked in any zone according to the terms of this code.
2.   More Than Fifteen Thousand But Less Than Twenty Six Thousand: Vehicles,
other than recreational vehicles, with a gross vehicle weight rating or gross
vehicle weight of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds and twenty six
thousand (26,000) pounds or less may be parked in residential zones when said
vehicles are parked within an enclosed building or:
a.   Are operable;
b.   Maintain proper and current licensure and registration;
c.   Are located on a property containing an occupied primary structure;
d.   Are parked on a hard surfaced area of the property;
e.   Are parked behind the front wall plane of the primary structure on the
property; and
f.   Are parked behind a site obscuring fence at least six feet (6') in height.
3.   Commercial Vehicle Parking: Commercial vehicles, commercial trailers, and
semitrailers shall not be parked in any residential zone, on any public right
of way in any zone, or along any collector or arterial street in any zone,
except while actually loading or unloading cargo on or in said vehicle.
a.   An owner of residential property may park a truck-tractor on their
property in any residential zone when it is detached from any trailer and
parked subject to the provisions of subsection H(2) of this section.
b.   An owner of residential property desiring to locate up to three (3)
commercial vehicles, other than truck-tractors, on property they own may apply
and be approved for a conditional use permit when the planning commission
finds:
(1)   The property is located within the RA1 or RA2 zone;
(2)   Commercial vehicles to be parked on the property remain operable and
licensed at all times;
(3)   The property is of sufficient size to accommodate the number of
commercial vehicles requested;
(4)   The commercial vehicles will be parked on the property in accordance with
subsection H(2) of this section; and
(5)   The allowed commercial vehicles will not be in addition to any approved
equipment vehicles allowed under the terms of subsection H(4) of this section
or commercial trailers allowed under the terms of subsection H(5) of this
section.
4.   Contracting And Earthmoving Equipment: Contracting and earthmoving
equipment not legal for over the road travel shall not be parked in a
residential zone even if parked on a trailer hauling or transporting said
equipment unless they are parked outside of any right of way on the site of an
active construction or development project and are being used as a part of that
construction or development work. An owner of residential property desiring to
locate up to three (3) backhoes, loaders, excavation, or similar equipment
vehicles on property they own may apply and be approved for a conditional use
permit when the planning commission finds:
a.   The property is located within the RA1 or RA2 zone;
b.   Equipment vehicles to be parked on the property remain operable at all
times;
c.   The property is of sufficient size to accommodate the number of equipment
vehicles requested;
d.   The equipment vehicles will be parked on the property in accordance with
subsection H(2) of this section;
e.   The equipment vehicles have an engine horsepower rating below one hundred
(100) horsepower or a load lifting capacity below seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) pounds, whichever is lower; and
f.   The allowed equipment vehicles will not be in addition to any approved
commercial vehicles allowed under the terms of subsection H(3)(b) of this
section or commercial trailers allowed under the terms of subsection H(5) of
this section.
5.   Trailers: Trailers of any size not hitched to a pulling vehicle shall not
be parked within any right of way. Semitrailers and commercial trailers may not
be parked in any residential zone unless hitched to a truck-tractor or pulling
vehicle that is actually loading or unloading cargo on or in said vehicle. An
owner of residential property desiring to locate up to three (3) commercial
trailers on property they own may apply and be approved for a conditional use
permit when the planning commission finds:
a.   The property is located within the RA1 or RA2 zone;
b.   Commercial trailers to be parked on the property remain operable and
licensed at all times;
c.   The property is of sufficient size to accommodate the number of commercial
trailers requested;
d.   The commercial trailers will be parked on the property in accordance with
subsection H(2) of this section; and
e.   The allowed commercial will not be in addition to any approved commercial
vehicles allowed under the terms of subsection H(3)(b) of this section or
equipment vehicles allowed under the terms of subsection H(4) of this section.
I.   Parking On Park Strips And Sidewalks: Vehicles, trailers, recreational
vehicles or other motorized forms of transportation shall not be parked on,
over, or within the sidewalk or park strip area between the sidewalk and the
street in any zone.
J.   Development Parking: Parking areas for nonresidential and mixed use
developments shall be located and designed to facilitate cross access between
both existing and anticipated abutting developments. Placement of parking for
abutting nonresidential and mixed use developments shall locate parking between
buildings and away from streets frontages to the greatest extent possible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3962.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3964.jpg]
 
(Ord. 986, 3-20-2012; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022; Ord. 1566,
10-18-2022)
9-25-060: NUMBER AND TYPE OF PARKING SPACES:
A.   Parking Required: Off street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter for every land use authorized by this title except
as otherwise expressly allowed by this title. The total number of parking
spaces required shall be a sum of the requirement for each individual use on
any one site, as determined by section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter, and subject to the provisions of section
9-25-090 of this chapter.
B.   Parking Space Calculations: Standard parking spaces shall be provided as
set forth in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter. Formulas and calculations shown in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter, represent both the maximum and minimum parking
requirements subject to the provisions of section
9-25-090 of this chapter. Uses and terms listed in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter, shall have no affect on the permissibility or
definition of uses.
C.   Accessible Parking Spaces: Parking spaces compliant with ADA regulations
shall be provided as required by the current building codes adopted by the city
and any other standards officially adopted by the city. Accessible spaces shall
be counted toward the fulfillment of the on site parking requirement for each
use.
D.   Queuing Spaces: Queuing spaces shall be provided as follows:
1.   Banks, pharmacies, and retail uses with drive-through lanes, including
automated teller machines, shall provide two (2) queuing spaces per lane,
including the vehicle positioned to communicate with the teller or automated
teller machine.
2.   Car washes shall provide queuing spaces as follows:
a.   Self-wash bays shall provide three (3) queuing spaces per bay, including
the space for the vehicle actively using the bay;
b.   Automatic wash bays as an accessory use shall provide three (3) queuing
spaces per bay in addition to the space for the vehicle being washed; and
c.   Automatic wash bays as a primary use shall provide five (5) queuing spaces
per bay in addition to the space for the vehicle being washed.
3.   Gasoline pump islands shall provide one queuing space per pump, in
addition to the space for the vehicle at the pump.
4.   Restaurant drive-through lanes shall provide three (3) queuing spaces per
lane from the ordering location or the first building window, whichever is
greater, in addition to the space for the vehicle at the window or ordering
station. Queuing spaces shall not block parking spaces on the site.
5.   Queuing spaces for tandem uses. Sites which incorporate a tandem design
for features of the site requiring queuing may divide the required number of
queue spaces between the features according to the following:
a.   That no deviation to required number of queuing spaces listed in this
subsection D be permitted;
b.   That the number of queuing spaces for sites utilizing tandem features be
provided in an amount for a single feature; and
c.   That the number of queuing spaces for sites utilizing tandem features of
three (3) or more be provided in an amount of one and one-half (11/2) times the
requirement for a single feature.
6.   Where queuing spaces are proposed on any site for the purpose of
facilitating the drop off or pick up of passengers, the queuing spaces
including queuing lanes or aisles may not block or impede access to or from the
street and the on-site parking spaces required by this title.
7.    Queuing spaces may not impede any public safety and emergency access
aisle.
FIGURE 9-25-1
QUEUING
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4968.png]
 
    E.   Off Street Loading Spaces: When buildings or uses are designed to
include delivery loading areas or docks, such spaces shall not be located
facing a public street unless specifically approved by the planning commission.
When approved, such spaces shall be provided in an amount as follows:
1.   One space for buildings containing a total gross floor area up to twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; and
2.   One additional space for every additional twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet or portion thereof.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3968.jpg]
 
    F.   Tandem Parking Spaces: Tandem parking spaces shall count toward
required parking as only a single parking space per pairing. Both spaces in a
tandem pairing may be counted toward required parking in the following
instances:
1.   Multi-family dwellings with garages and driveways of at least the minimum
dimensions of standard parking spaces may count toward resident resident
parking requirements but shall not count toward guest parking requirements; or
   2.   Valet parking services.
G.   Recreational Vehicle Parking: Adequate and accessible recreational vehicle
parking storage areas shall be required in each multi-family and planned
residential development project unless the premises are subject to restrictive
covenants or other means limiting the parking of such vehicles. (Ord. 986, 3-
20-2012; amd. Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1471, 1-19-2021)
9-25-070: PARKING DIMENSIONS:
A.   Parking Space Dimensions: Minimum parking space and related dimensions
shall be as set forth herein and as shown on section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-2 and
figure 9-25-4 of this chapter:
1.   Standard parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide by
eighteen feet (18') deep.
2.   Carports shall have a minimum inside dimension of nine feet (9') wide by
twenty feet (20') deep for each parking space.
3.   Garages shall have a minimum inside dimension of ten feet (10') wide by
twenty feet (20') deep and a minimum door width of eight feet (8') for each
parking space.
4.   ADA accessible parking spaces shall be provided and designed according to
the provisions and requirements of the adopted building and fire code.
5.   Angled parking spaces shall be sized based on the angle of parking spaces
shown in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-2 and
figure 9-25-4 of this chapter.
6.   Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide by
twenty two feet (22') deep.
7.   Loading spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide by twenty five
feet (25') deep.
8.   Queuing spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide by twenty feet
(20') deep.
9.   Sites containing fifty (50) or more parking spaces may provide compact
parking spaces for a portion of the required parking for the site. Compact
parking, when proposed, shall adhere to the following:
a.   Compact parking spaces may be utilized to provide up to a maximum of ten
percent (10%) of the total parking requirement for the site.
b.   All compact parking spaces shall:
(1)   Measure no less than eight feet six inches (8'6") wide and sixteen feet
(16') deep;
(2)   Be located near the primary entrance of each building on site;
(3)   Be clearly identified and shown on an approved site plan or site plan
amendment; and
(4)   Be marked on the surface as “Compact”.
B.   Nonresidential Access And Egress: Access and egress driveways for
nonresidential uses shall be provided as follows:
1.   Divided or one-way access and egress driveways shall maintain a minimum of
a twelve foot (12') wide travel lane, measured curb face to curb face,
exclusive of tapered areas.
2.   Driveways for two-way access and egress shall maintain a minimum of a
twenty four foot (24') width and a maximum of a thirty six foot (36') width,
measured curb face to curb face, exclusive of tapered areas.
3.   Driveways which provide access and egress to and from a street controlled
by the Utah department of transportation (UDOT) must be reviewed and approved
by UDOT and shall be sized according to administrative rule R930-6, as amended,
and all other applicable UDOT standards. (Ord. 986, 3-20-2012; amd. Ord. 1479,
2-16-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-25-080: PARKING AREA DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
A.   Parking Plans: Parking plans for any proposed parking area shall be
submitted to the zoning administrator as a part of a site plan or site plan
amendment application. The plan shall clearly indicate the proposed
development, including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting,
landscaping, and other features and appurtenances of the proposed development.
B.   Access To Public Street: Every parking area shall have access to a public
street or an approved private street. Except for approved on street parking,
access to any parking space within a parking area shall be from a drive aisle
and not directly from a public street. Such access may be established through
platted or recorded easements, designed parking areas as a part of an approved
site plan, reciprocal arrangements, or other guaranteed means.
C.   Curb Cuts:
1.   (Rep. by Ord. 1025, 9-18-2012)
2.   Spacing: Except as otherwise provided in this subsection C, minimum
spacing for all curb cuts and driveways with access to or from a public street
right of way shall be as follows:
Street From To Access Spacing (Feet)
Street            From              To                Access Spacing (Feet)
Bangerter Parkway Bangerter Highway Highland Drive    500
Bangerter Highway Jordan River      Bangerter Parkway No access allowed1
Highland Drive    14600 South       Sandy City border 200
State Street      11400 South       12300 South       3501
700 East          11400 South       12300 South       3501
11400 South       Jordan River      700 East          2001
12300 South       Jordan River      State Street      500
12300 South       State Street      700 East          350
12300 South       700 East          1700 East         200
Other arterial streets                                200
Major collector class streets                         200
Minor collector class streets                         150
Local streets                                         No minimum
 
Note:
   1.   As specified by the Utah department of transportation.
3.   Right Turn Access: Right in right out restricted accesses may be allowed
within the minimum access spacing when approved by the city engineer.
4.   Spacing Measurement: Minimum curb cut spacing shall be measured from the
centerline of one curb cut opening to the closest edge of the next curb cut
opening.
5.   Curb Cut And Driveway Design: Curb cuts and driveway access shall be
provided and designed according to the adopted standard detail drawings of the
Draper City engineer and the following:
 
Land Use                                    Approach Width  Curb Return Radius
                                            Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
Residential                                 10 ft.  28 ft.  2.5 ft. 10 ft.
Commercial, retail, multi-family, mixed use 24 ft.  36 ft.  10 ft.  30 ft.
 
6.   Residential Curb Cuts And Driveways: Curb cuts and driveway accesses onto
public rights of way shall:
a.   Be limited to one curb cut or driveway access per street frontage; and
b.   Be located a minimum of forty feet (40') from the closest point of the
intersection for corner lots.
D.   Parking Setback: All on site parking areas shall be set back at least ten
feet (10') from any public or private right of way. The setback area shall be
established with bermed vegetative ground covers or plantings that provide
screening of the parking area from the right of way.
E.   Cross Access:
1.   Cross access between existing, proposed, or anticipated nonresidential and
mixed use developments shall comply with the following standards:
a.   Parking areas associated with all nonresidential and mixed use
developments shall be designed to accommodate cross access to existing and
anticipated abutting nonresidential and mixed use developments;
b.   Nonresidential and mixed use developments on individual parcels which have
access onto a street of a major collector or arterial class shall provide cross
access for parking areas to abutting sites;
c.   Cross access required under this section shall also comply with the
standards listed in subsections
9-22-050(F)(6) through
9-22-050(F)(8).
2.   Deviation from the requirement to provide cross access: The planning
commission shall approve a deviation from the requirement to provide cross
access upon finding that the required cross access:
a.   Would result in the slope of the cross access drive exceeding twelve
percent (12%);
b.   Would result in a violation or nonconformity with other requirements of
this title;
c.   Creates a hazard to health, safety, or welfare by linking two uses, such
as industrial and residential, that would be incompatible with each other;
d.   Would require connection to an abutting development which:
(1)   Was not previously designed and required to provide reciprocal cross
access to the subject property; or
(2)   Includes required site improvements that physically impede the ability to
create a cross access drive between both properties.
F.   Internal Circulation:
1.   Vehicular Circulation: Each parking area shall provide for traffic
circulation on the property to access all parts thereof without the necessity
of exiting onto any street.
2.   Pedestrian Circulation: Each parking area shall provide for safe
pedestrian travel to and through parking areas. Parking areas shall also be
designed with safety features in areas where pedestrians cross vehicular drive
aisles.
G.   Backing Space: Backing space shall be provided for all parking areas so
that cars will not back onto any street, except for approved on street parking
spaces. Sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, and queuing spaces shall not be used as
a part of the required backing area. Separate exits shall be provided for
angled and one-way parallel parking so that vehicles will not exit by backing
onto any street. Backing space for parking areas shall comply with the
applicable aisle widths specified in
table 9-25-2.
H.   Landscaping: Parking areas shall be designed to incorporate landscaping
specified in chapter 23 of this title.
I.   Lighting: Lights used to illuminate a parking area shall be arranged to
reflect the light away from adjacent lots or parcels and shall be consistent
with the standards set forth in chapter 20 of this title.
J.   Paving: Every area used as a parking space or area shall be paved or
surfaced as follows:
1.   Permanent parking areas shall be; paved with asphaltic cement or concrete,
maintained so as to eliminate dust or mud, and graded so as to drain and
dispose of all surface water according to city standards. Surface water
drainage from parking lots shall not cross a public sidewalk or walkway.
2.   The surface of temporary parking areas shall be maintained so as to
eliminate dust, mud, and weeds or other vegetation that present a fire hazard
or other danger to the public. Surface runoff of storm water shall be contained
on site in accordance with applicable city standards.
3.   Parking areas for trailers, travel trailers, boats, watercraft, utility
trailers, and motor homes in residential zones shall be constructed of asphalt,
concrete, brick, rock, or permeable pavers and shall be maintained free of
weeds, loose dust, and mud. The parking area shall be graded so as to drain and
dispose of all surface water according to city standards.
K.   Public Safety And Emergency Access Aisles: Every lot or parcel that
includes a parking area with internal vehicular aisles for access to parking
spaces shall provide public safety and emergency access aisles. Public safety
and emergency access aisles shall conform to the international fire code. The
location and details of public safety and emergency access aisles shall require
approval of the Draper City Fire Marshal. (Ord. 986, 3-20-2012; amd. Ord. 1132,
2-17-2015; Ord. 1471, 1-19-2021; Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022; Ord. 1566, 10-18-2022;
Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-25-090: DEVIATIONS FROM STRICT COMPLIANCE FOR PARKING:
A.   Natural Adjustment Range: In recognition that many factors can be unique
to various potential uses of land in the city, parking requirements established
in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter, may be modified to increase or decrease the
parking calculation requirements by a maximum ten percent (10%) without
necessity of requesting a formal modification as outlined in this section.
Parking requirements for residential uses listed in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 may not be modified under the provisions of the natural adjustment
range.
B.   Deviations From Strict Compliance: The number of parking spaces required
under section
9-25-060 of this chapter, or the parking calculation requirements shown in
section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter, may be deviated in accordance with the provisions
in this section. The purpose of such a deviation is to provide flexibility
beyond natural adjustments to this chapter in order to adapt to specific
circumstances, reduce potential environmental impacts, and conserve resources.
In cases where parking in amounts other than required herein may be
appropriate, the planning commission may approve a request for a modification,
by way of a parking study, to increase or reduce parking requirements based on
findings found in subsection C of this section. When a deviation from strict
compliance is approved by the planning commission, parking shall be provided
according to the standard approved under that deviation with a natural
adjustment that only provides for parking closer to the requirement being
deviated. A deviation from strict compliance as outlined in this section is not
necessary for a proposed increase in parking for residential uses.
C.   Parking Study: When a parking study is required for a request to deviate
from the parking requirements calculated according to section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter, or when an applicant requests a deviation in the
number of parking spaces required under section
9-25-060 of this chapter, a parking study shall be prepared and submitted by
the applicant for review. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed to work in the state of Utah and reviewed as a part of a site
plan application.
1.   Requirements: The study shall provide:
a.   Planning and traffic engineering data, including estimates of parking
demand based on the most current recommendations from the Institute Of
Transportation Engineers;
b.   Data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or
highly comparable to the proposed application as indicated and justified by
density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location;
c.   The source of data used to develop the study's recommendations;
d.   A recommendation for parking requirements or calculations applicable to
the site for which the study is being prepared based on site specific factors,
data, circumstances, and conditions compared against study collected data; and
e.   The name and qualifications of the persons preparing the study.
2.   Review And Recommendation: City staff shall review the study and make a
recommendation to the planning commission concerning the validity of the
parking study, the appropriateness of the conclusions reached, and the
appropriate number of parking spaces that should be required.
3.   Number Of Parking Spaces: The planning commission shall determine the
required number of parking spaces after:
a.   Considering the recommendations of the parking study and city staff; and
b.   Making the findings required under subsection C(4) of this section,
according to the type of application.
4.   Findings Required: The planning commission may approve a deviation from
strict compliance for the number of parking spaces required or the calculation
used only after making the findings of this subsection:
a.   For commercial, retail, office, and mixed use developments, the planning
commission must find that:
(1)   Adequate parking will be provided;
(2)   The total number of spaces that would otherwise be required for each
individual establishment in the development is overly burdensome for the site
specific factors of the application;
(3)   Estimated trade offs between businesses which are open when others are
closed will not overburden the parking provided;
(4)   There is an adequate availability of shared parking for all associated
uses;
(5)   Site or use specific conditions or factors do not provide for compliance
with the parking calculation used or parking requirements outlined in section
9-25-100,
table 9-25-1 of this chapter;
(6)   Transportation alternatives, including proximity to transit stations,
provide adequate transportation to offset any reduction in parking; and
(7)   Any potential for future expansion or addition to the development will
have or will provide adequate parking for that expansion or addition;
(8)   ADA compliant parking requirements are not proposed for adjustment; or
b.   For multi-family or planned residential developments, the planning
commission must find that:
(1)   Adequate parking will be provided;
(2)   The size of housing units, considered by the number of bedrooms and
required visitor parking, does not support the calculated parking requirements
of this chapter;
(3)   The size of project does not warrant the calculated parking requirements
of this chapter;
(4)   The specific parking dedicated for use by visitors and recreational
vehicles is appropriate;
(5)   Any potential for future expansion or addition to the development will
have or will provide adequate parking for that expansion or addition;
(6)   Transportation alternatives, including proximity to transit stations,
provide adequate transportation to offset any reduction in parking;
(7)   ADA compliant parking requirements are not proposed for adjustment; and
(8)   Restrictive covenants specific to the development make provisions to
control parking such that parking for the development will not impact
neighboring properties or public rights of way.
(Ord. 986, 3-20-2012; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord.
1498, 8-3-2021)
9-25-100: TABLES AND FIGURES:
TABLE 9-25-1
PARKING REQUIREMENT FORMULAS
Land Uses Parking Calculation Standards
Land Uses                               Parking Calculation Standards
Agricultural uses:                       
Agricultural business                   1 space for each person employed on
                                        highest employment shift
Agricultural industry                   1 space for each person employed on
                                        highest employment shift
Agricultural processing                 1 space for each person employed on
                                        highest employment shift
Agricultural sales and service          2 spaces per 10,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Animal specialties                      1 space for each person employed on
                                        highest employment shift
Residential uses:                        
Boarding house                          1 space per 3 boarding tenants
Dwelling, multi-family:                  
Studio and 1 bedroom units              2 spaces per unit
2 bedroom units                         2 spaces per unit
3 or more bedroom units                 2 spaces per unit
Visitor parking                         1 space for every 4 units
Dwelling, single-family:                 
No accessory dwelling                   2 spaces
With accessory dwelling                 3 spaces
Guesthouse                              1 space per guesthouse
Residential facilities for elderly
persons or persons with a disability,   1 space per 2 residential units
convalescent care facility
Public and civic uses:                   
Auditorium or stadium                   1 space per 4 people based on maximum
                                        occupancy
Bus terminal and transit stops          15 spaces per 100 daily boardings
Cemetery                                4 spaces per acre
Church or place of worship              6 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Club or service organization             
College, university, or higher          1 space per 3 students based on maximum
education facility                      occupancy
Cultural service                        2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Funeral home                            4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Golf course                             5 spaces per hole plus restaurant
                                        parking
Government service and Municipal use    4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Hospital                                4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Park                                    12 spaces per acre
Riding academy or stable                1 space per stable stall or unit
School:                                  
Elementary school                       1 space per 4 students based on maximum
                                        student population
Middle school                           1 space per 4 students based on maximum
                                        student population
High school                             1 space per 1.25 students based on
                                        maximum student population
Trade or vocational school              1 space per 1.25 students based on
                                        maximum occupancy
Commercial uses:                         
Auto, truck, RV and equipment:           
Storage                                  
                                        2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
Rental or sale                          building floor area in addition to
                                        stock parking
Repair                                  4 spaces per service bay
Bank or financial institution, bail     2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
bond service, cashing service,          building floor area
pawnbroker, pawnshop
Bar establishment                       5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Car wash:                                
                                        5 spaces plus queuing spaces per lane
Full service                            per subsection
                                        9-25-060D of this chapter
Self-service                            Queuing spaces per lane per subsection
                                        9-25-060D of this chapter
Construction sales and service          2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Convenience store:                       
                                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
With gasoline sales                     building floor area plus queuing spaces
                                        per gasoline pump
Without gasoline sales                  4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Daycare, preschool:                      
General                                 1 space per 4 students based on maximum
                                        occupancy
Limited                                 Per chapter 34 of this title
Temporary uses                          Per title 6, chapter 16 of this Code
Gas and fuel, storage and sales         1 space per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Grooming service, kennel                1 space per 4 animals based on maximum
                                        occupancy
Hotel, motel, motor lodge, bed and      1 space per room
breakfast inn
Laundry or dry cleaning                 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Media service                           2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Medical or dental laboratory, medical   3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
service, research service               building floor area
Nursery, garden center                  10 spaces per acre
Office:                                  
Call center                             6 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
General                                 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Limited                                 Per chapter 34 of this title
Medical, dental, veterinary             4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Personal care or instruction service,    
tattoo establishment:
General                                 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Limited                                 Per chapter 34 of this title
Printing and copying:                    
General                                 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Limited                                 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Reception center                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Recreation and entertainment, indoor/   3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
outdoor                                 building floor area
Recycling collection station            3 spaces
Repair service                          2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Restaurant:                              
Fast food                               10 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
General                                 8 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Retail                                  2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Seasonal farm stand                     2 spaces
Secondhand or thrift store:              
Large, no outside storage or drop off   2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Large, with outside storage or drop off 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Small                                   2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Transportation service                  1 space per employee plus company
                                        vehicle stock parking
Warehouse, self-service storage         2 spaces per 100 units, but not less
                                        than 2 spaces total
Industrial uses:                         
Automobile wrecking yard, junk or       4 spaces per acre, but not less than 4
salvage yard                            spaces total
Freight terminal                        6 spaces per acre, but not less than 6
                                        spaces total
Manufacturing                           1 space per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
Mineral extraction                      1 space per acre, but not less than 10
                                        spaces total
Wholesale and warehousing               0.5 space per 1,000 square feet gross
                                        building floor area
 
TABLE 9-25-2
PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
Parking Stall Stall Aisle Curb   Wall   Interlock Stall
Angle   Width Depth Width Length Module Module    Depth To Interlock
A       B     C     D     E      Width  Width     H
                                 F      G
Parking Stall Stall Aisle Curb   Wall   Interlock Stall
Angle   Width Depth Width Length Module Module    Depth To Interlock
A       B     C     D     E      Width  Width     H
                                 F      G
Two-way aisle:
90°    9.0'  18.0' 24.0' 9.00'  60.0'  60.0'     18.0'
75°    9.0'  20.3' 24.0' 9.5'   64.0'  55.0'     18.7'
60°    9.0'  20.1' 24.0' 10.4'  64.2'  59.8'     17.9'
45°    9.0'  19.1' 24.0' 12.7'  62.2'  55.8'     15.9'
One-way aisle:
75°    9.0'  20.3' 17.0' 9.5'   57.6'  54.4'     18.7'
60°    9.0'  20.1' 15.0' 10.4'  55.2'  50.8'     17.9'
45°    9.0'  19.1' 13.0' 12.7'  51.2'  44.8'     15.9'
 
FIGURE 9-25-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3980.jpg]
 
(Ord. 986, 3-20-2012; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1328, 6-5-2018; Ord.
1479, 2-16-2021; Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
CHAPTER 26
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-26-010: Purpose
9-26-020: Scope
9-26-030: Definitions
9-26-040: Requirement Of Conformity
9-26-050: Approvals, Permits, Applications And Enforcement
9-26-060: General Provisions
9-26-070: Permitted On Premises Permanent Signs
9-26-080: Temporary Signage
9-26-090: Areas Of Special Designation
9-26-100: Signs Not Requiring A Permit
9-26-110: Nonconforming Signs
9-26-120: Prohibited Signs
9-26-130: Severability
9-26-140: Exhibits
9-26-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and
welfare of city residents and businesses by regulating the design,
construction, and installation of signs in a content neutral manner that does
not favor any type of speech over another in order to achieve the following
objectives:
A.   To provide a reasonable system for controlling signs within the community;
B.   To permit signs that are well designed and pleasing in appearance, while
allowing latitude for variety, good design relationships, and spacing between
signs and adjacent uses;
C.   To foster a community character that has a minimum of visual clutter;
D.   To enhance the economic strength of the city;
E.   To provide on site identification for private enterprises;
F.   To provide for public convenience by directing persons to various
activities and enterprises;
G.   To encourage signs that are compatible with land uses;
H.   To minimize light pollution, glare, visual obstructions, distraction, and
traffic and safety hazards with the free flow of travel and activity for
vehicles and pedestrians;
I.   To provide business owners the flexibility to have signs that meet the
needs of the individual businesses;
J.   To provide aesthetic protection for entry areas and primary corridors of
Draper City;
K.   To provide protection from visual clutter;
L.   To promote public safety; and
M.   For the protection and promotion of community appearance. (Ord. 963, 2-15-
2011)
9-26-020: SCOPE:
Nothing in this chapter is intended or interpreted to favor any one type of
sign or content and where necessary should be interpreted to be content
neutral. The intent of this policy is to provide flexibility in the allowance
of signs as a part of the possible range of communication options available
while being narrowly tailored to achieve the purposes identified in section
9-26-010 of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
display, construction, erection, alteration, use, location, and maintenance of
signs in the city. The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to
prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or the
Utah Code Annotated (UCA). In the instance where provisions of this chapter
conflict with other provisions of this code, the terms of this chapter shall
govern. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-030: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as provided in this section for the
purpose of use within this chapter:
ALTERATION OF SIGN: Changing or rearranging, other than the sign copy, any
structural part, enclosure, lighting type, component, or location of a sign.
ANIMATION OR ANIMATED SIGNS: A sign which exhibits any of the following:
A.   The movement or the optical illusion of movement of any part of the sign
structure, design, or a pictorial segment, including the movement of any
illumination;
B.   Flashing or strobe effects; or
C.   The spinning or other movement of a sign, or portion thereof;
However, electronic message center signs, digital time and temperature signs,
and analog time devices shall not be considered animated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3982.jpg]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-3984.jpg]   [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3996.jpg]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4028.jpg]
 
AREA OF A SIGN:
A.   For signs designed with a cabinet, the area of the sign will be that of
the cabinet face, excluding the outer edge of any border.
B.   For signs not designed with a cabinet, the area of the sign is ninety
percent (90%) of the area enclosed within the smallest regular geometric shape
needed to completely encompass all letters, logos, and insignias of the sign,
including horizontal spacing between letters, logos, and insignias. Words,
abbreviations, logos, and insignias may be calculated independently to
determine the area of such signage.
AWNING SIGN: Signs, placed on or integrated into canopies mounted on the
exterior of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4040.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4072.jpg]
 
BACKLIGHTING: Illumination, the source of which is not itself visible,
positioned inside or behind a sign face such as behind raised letters and
awnings or inside sign cabinets where the illumination is seen through the
letters or sign face.
BANNER: Plastic, fabric, or any other pliable material intended to be hung
either with or without a frame, typically placed between two (2) poles or hung
on the wall of a building, but does not apply to flags and emblems of
political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations
flown on a flagpole.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4088.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4096.jpg]
 
BILLBOARD: A high profile freestanding ground sign on one or more poles
typically located along freeways or major highways designed or intended to
direct attention to a business, product, or service that is not sold, offered,
or existing on the property where the sign is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4098.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4108.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3986.jpg]
 
CABINET: The enclosure of a sign, not including the mounting structure or
decorative elements of the sign structure, upon which text, logos, and insignia
are mounted and within which the majority of electrical components, if needed,
are located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3988.jpg]
 
CHANGE OF COPY PANEL: A sign or portion of a sign designed to permit regular
manual change of copy with language other than the name of the business.
CHANGE OF SIGN FACE: The changing of the face of a sign or the sign face which
does not affect the structural elements of the sign and only affects the name
or logo shown on the sign structure.
CLEAR VIEW AREA: A triangular space at the intersection of the driveway and
adjoining curb determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured
thirty feet (30') equidistant from the point of the intersection along the curb
and the driveway, then connecting those points to form a triangle.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3990.jpg]
 
COMMERCIAL SPEECH: Any speech which bears advertising, reference to a specific
product, or commercial transaction on behalf of a company or individual who is
economically motivated for the speech.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGN: An on premises sign capable of displaying
words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically or mechanically
changed by remote or automatic means.
FACE OF SIGN OR SIGN FACE: The surface of a sign cabinet upon, against, or
through which letter, logos, or insignias are displayed or illustrated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4284.png]
 
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any permanent sign type that is constructed independent of
and not connected to a building or other structure.
HALO OR REVERSE CHANNEL ILLUMINATION: Illumination, the source of which is not
itself visible, positioned inside or behind the text of a sign where the
illumination is seen around and not through the letters of the sign.
HANDBILL: A poster, flier, handout, brochure, leaflet, or other advertisement,
typically made of non- or semi-durable materials, attached to permanent
signage, traffic signage, utility elements, vehicles, or passed out to persons.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3998.jpg]
 
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical dimension of a sign.
ILLEGAL SIGN: Any sign:
A.   Erected without first obtaining a sign permit that would otherwise be a
permitted sign;
B.   Not otherwise established to be a legal nonconforming sign by the terms of
this chapter; or
C.   Erected after the effective date of this chapter that has been determined
to be a nonpermitted sign type.
INDIRECT LIGHTING: A source of external illumination located away from the
sign, which lights the sign, but which may or may not itself be visible.
INFLATABLES: Any device supported by heated air, forced air, or other gases for
the purpose of drawing attention to a business.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4000.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4002.jpg]
 
INFORMATIONAL SIGN: A sign which provides information, such as directional flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, entrance, exit, no parking, handicapped
parking, loading area, and does not exceed four (4) square feet of sign area.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign no longer allowed under this chapter, but
which, when first constructed, was legally allowed.
LOGO: A graphic symbol representing an activity, use, or business.
MAINTENANCE OF A SIGN: The replacing, repairing, or repainting of a portion of
a sign structure made undesirable by ordinary wear and tear, weather, or
accident. Maintenance does not include the changing of colors or materials of
any part of the sign.
MASTER SIGN PROGRAM: Sign specifications and details approved as a package that
define or identify allowed signage allotted to individual businesses throughout
a multibusiness commercial center.
MONOLITHIC SIGN: A high profile, on premises sign where the sign face and
supports are within the same cabinet structure, independent of any building or
other structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4004.jpg]
 
MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding, typically low profile sign mounted on a base,
detached from the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4006.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4008.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4010.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4012.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4014.jpg]
 
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign located outside of the property or development
boundary where the referenced business is located, the referenced product is
sold, or the referenced service is offered.
ON PREMISES SIGN: Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person,
activity, goods, product, or service located within the property or development
boundary where the sign is located.
PAN FORMED/CHANNEL LETTER: An individual letter, which is three- dimensional
and is constructed by means of a three-sided channel, the open side of which
may face a wall or be faced with a translucent panel, which is placed away from
the wall.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any permitted sign type which is:
A.   Intended to be and is so constructed:
1.   Of a lasting and enduring material;
2.   To remain unchanged in character, position, and condition exclusive of
wear and tear;
3.   As a freestanding sign or wall or building; and
B.   Identified as a permanent sign type within this chapter.
POLE SIGN: A permanent freestanding sign mounted atop one (1) or more poles
where the bottom of the banner is at least six feet (6') from the ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4016.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4018.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4020.jpg]
 
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign designed for the purpose of supporting or opposing a
candidate, proposition, or other measure at an election or for any other
noncommercial expression not related to the advertisement of any product,
service, or the identification of any business.
PORTABLE, MOVABLE, AND HANDHELD SIGN: Any sign which varies its location basis,
not otherwise classified in this chapter as a permanent or temporary sign,
which may or may not be carried, worn, maneuvered, or manipulated as a means to
draw attention from passers-by, including the use of vehicles.
POST AND PANEL SIGN: A free-standing sign supported by two (2) posts or
columns, one (1) on each side of the sign. The sign itself does not have a base
and does not contact the ground. A post and panel sign may be permanent or
temporary.
PYLON SIGN: A freestanding, high profile, on-premises sign completely self-
supported where the cabinet is significantly elevated above the ground and of a
larger size than freestanding signs allowed by this chapter. By reference,
pylon sign also includes pole signs and tower signs.
SHINGLE SIGN: A sign identifying the tenant of the adjoining space and which:
A.   Is suspended from a roof overhang, covered porch, or covered walkway; or
B.   Hangs or swings freely from a support mounted to the wall of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4022.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4024.jpg]   [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-
4026.jpg]
 
SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration, or device which is in view
of the general public and which directs attention to a person, place,
commodity, activity, institution, organization, or business. Sign shall include
any and all structural and supportive apparatus, identification, description,
illustration, or device. Sign shall not include any flag or insignia of the
United States, State of Utah, Salt Lake County, Draper City, official
historical plaques of any governmental agency, or emblems of professional,
religious, educational, or corporate organizations flown on a flagpole.
SIGN ALLOWANCE: The total cumulative sign type and area for all signs allowed
to any one (1) business, development, or applicant.
SNIPE SIGN: A sign or other advertisement, typically made of non- or semi-
durable materials, mounted to a tree, or utility pole, or to the ground by
nails, staples, a wire frame, or similar device within a right-of-way,
including public or private park strips and medians or on public property.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4030.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4032.jpg]
 
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground, wall, or
building, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
TOWER SIGN: A high profile, on premises sign completely self- supported by
supports or other sign apparatus independent of any building or other structure
with architectural or decorative elements incorporated into the supports as
well as the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4034.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4036.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4038.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4042.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4044.jpg]
 
VEHICLE SIGN: Any magnetic, painted, permanently attached, or temporarily
attached sign which is affixed to a vehicle or trailer. This definition does
not apply to banner signs attached to vehicles, signs or lettering on public
transit vehicles, taxis or company vehicles operating during the normal course
of business or parked in a legally designated on site parking space at the
location of the company owning the vehicle.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4046.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4048.jpg]
 
WALL SIGN: An on premises sign attached to or erected against a wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4050.jpg]
 
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, graphic, or visual presentation which is placed to be
read from the exterior of a building that is:
A.   Painted or drawn onto a windowpane;
B.   Mounted onto the outside of a windowpane; or
C.   Mounted within three feet (3') of the windowpane on the inside of the
building.
(Ord. 963, 2-15-2011; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1258, 5-2-2017; Ord.
1351, 9-18-2018)
9-26-040: REQUIREMENT OF CONFORMITY:
No sign for which a permit is issued after the effective date of this chapter,
may be placed or maintained in the City, except as provided in this chapter.
All signs maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter are declared to
be nonconforming and, as such, may be dealt with or removed as provided herein.
Any sign that poses a public safety hazard may be removed as specified in
subsection
9-26-050H4 of this chapter. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-050: APPROVALS, PERMITS, APPLICATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Signs Associated With New Development: Development projects which are
intended to contain signage shall identify and be reviewed for a sign allowance
as a part of the development review according to the following:
1.   Sign Allowance Approval: All development applications for nonresidential
projects shall also be approved, as a part of the application for site plan
approval, for the development's desired sign allowance. Development sign
allowance approval need only identify the location and size of all on site
permanent signs. Signage allowance approval shall not constitute approval of a
sign permit. All signage shall require application for and approval of a sign
permit prior to installation.
2.   Master Sign Program Approval: Nonresidential multi-tenant developments
shall pursue development signage approval by way of a master sign program as a
part of the application for site plan approval. Master sign program approval
need only identify the location and size of all desired on site permanent signs
for each unit, pad, or business within the development. The master sign program
shall also include details regarding a signage theme. Approval of a master sign
program shall not constitute approval of a sign permit. All signage shall
require application for and approval of a sign permit prior to installation.
3.   Amendments: Amendments to approved sign allowances or master sign programs
shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator if the amendments fully comply
with this chapter. Amendments which do not fully conform to this chapter may be
reviewed for possible approval by the Planning Commission by way of a site plan
amendment.
B.   Signs Not Associated With New Development: Signs associated with an
existing building or developments, or for new developments that do not have an
approved sign allowance, need only pursue a sign permit and will be reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator or their designee based on independent sign allowances
for each sign.
C.   Sign Permit Review:
1.   Sign Permit Required: Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, every
sign within the City shall require a sign permit prior to its erection,
installation, or use. Such permit is separate and distinct from any building
permit or other permit that may be required by applicable provisions of this
Code.
2.   Conditions Of Permit Issuance:
a.   If a specific occupancy or use displays an illegal or nonconforming sign,
a new sign permit may not be issued for that occupancy or use without
modifications to or removal of the nonconforming sign resulting in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
b.   If there is a requesting tenant having an illegal or nonconforming sign
displayed within a multi-tenant development or shopping center, new permits may
not be issued for that space without modifications or removal of nonconforming
signs resulting in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
c.   A permit for a freestanding sign may be issued for a multi- tenant
building, development, or shopping center, provided the terms thereof specify
modification or removal of all nonconforming freestanding signs resulting in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
D.   Applications For Sign Permit:
1.   Sign Permit Application: To obtain a permit, the applicant must submit a
complete sign permit application to the Community Development Department on a
form prescribed by the City. A sign permit application may include all signs
associated with a property that has received site plan or plat approval, or has
a master sign program associated with approved development guidelines. The
application must be accompanied by the information specified in this section.
Additional information may be required on a case specific basis when determined
to be necessary to verify the engineering or construction of the sign or to
assure the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, tenant, or
business.
2.   Submission Requirements: The following drawings and information must be
submitted with each sign permit application based on the type of permit
requested:
a.   Monument And Freestanding Signs:
(1)   Two (2) copies of a plot plan for the entire site, drawn to scale,
showing the distance of the sign to all buildings, dimensioned property lines,
and sign setbacks from public and private rights-of-way, intersections,
easements, and driveways.
(2)   Two (2) fully dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings showing height,
color, area dimensions, sign design, type of illumination, and aesthetics of
the sign as will appear from the street. Elevations must be provided for all
four (4) sides of the sign.
(3)   One complete set of detail drawings of the sign's construction including
name of sign maker, electrical plan, foundation scheme, and name of the
licensed contractor who will install the sign.
b.   Wall Signs:
(1)   Two (2) fully dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings showing the linear
and area dimensions of the sign and the building elevation on which the sign is
to be placed, color, sign design, type of illumination, and aesthetics of the
sign as will appear from the street.
(2)   Details of the sign's construction and attachment to the wall or
building, including an electrical plan, the name of sign maker, and the name of
the licensed contractor who will install the sign.
c.   Temporary Signs:
(1)   Two (2) fully dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings showing the linear
and area dimensions of the sign and the building elevation on which the sign is
to be placed, color, sign design, and aesthetics of the sign as it will appear
from the street.
(2)   Statements related to the length of time for display.
d.   Change Of Sign Face:
(1)   Two (2) fully dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings showing the linear
and area dimensions of the sign and the building or structure elevation on
which the sign is to be placed, color, and sign design as it will appear on the
building or sign structure.
e.   Additional Information Required: The following information shall be
required for all sign permit applications:
(1)   Written consent of the owner, lessee, agent, or trustee having charge of
the building or property on which the sign is proposed to be located.
(2)   Proof of application for or issuance of a current Draper City business
license.
(3)   Address and phone number of the property owner, lessee, agent, or trustee
having charge of the building or property on which the sign is proposed to be
located.
(4)   The license number, phone number, and address for the general or
electrical contractor who will install the sign.
3.   Permits In Conformance: Permits authorizing the use, construction,
reconstruction, or alteration of any sign may be withheld when inadequate
information is submitted to determine if the proposed action is in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
E.   Review And Approval Procedures:
1.   Permit Issued: Upon submittal, the application will be reviewed for
conformance with the standards of this chapter. A permit will be issued,
provided the proposed sign meets all applicable requirements of this chapter
and the required fees are paid.
2.   Inspections: All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to
the following inspections:
a.   A footing or structural inspection on all freestanding signs;
b.   An electrical inspection on all illuminated signs;
c.   An inspection of braces, anchors, supports, and connections on all wall
signs; and
d.   A final inspection to ensure the sign has been located and constructed
according to the approved sign permit.
3.   Inspection Markings And Tags:
a.   Certification Tags: Each permanent and temporary sign requiring a sign
permit shall have a certification tag issued by the community development
department affixed to the sign.
b.   Tag Number And Date: Each certification tag shall be of weatherproof
material and will have a tag number and date which corresponds to the issuance
date and permit number.
c.   Tag Installation: The Draper City inspector shall apply tags only to signs
for which a permit has been issued at a designated place on the sign where it
may be readily seen by Draper City inspectors. The tag certifies to the
community development department that the placement and construction of the
signs are in conformance with representations made in permit applications and
that the work is completed.
F.   Permit Fees: Sign permit fees shall be assessed according to the current
Draper City consolidated fee schedule. When a permit is obtained in order to
voluntarily bring a legal nonconforming sign into compliance with the terms of
this chapter, there will be no fees assessed to the permit.
G.   Permit Limitations:
1.   Transferability: Permits, permit numbers, permit applications, and
supporting information shall not be transferable to other sites or signs and
shall be valid only for a specific sign at the designated location. If at any
time a sign or sign structure is altered, removed, or relocated in a manner
different from the terms of an issued sign permit, such existing sign permit
will become void and a new application must be made for the sign as altered or
relocated. Signs associated with a business that has its ownership transferred
with no proposed alteration to the business name, building, or signage shall,
upon notification to the city, have its permits transferred to the new business
owner without need of a new application.
2.   Sign A Nuisance: No permit for a sign may be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain a public or private nuisance, nor shall
any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in any action to abate a
nuisance.
H.   Enforcement:
1.   Violations: If the zoning administrator finds a sign for which a permit
has been issued violates any applicable provision of this chapter, the
administrator shall pursue correction of the violation, including revocation of
the permit and removal of the sign, at the cost of the permit holder, as
outlined in this subsection.
2.   Penalties For Violations: Any person, firm, corporation, or entity
violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any
regulation hereunder shall be considered a violation of this title, punishable
as outlined in section
9-7-060 of this title.
3.   Revocation Of A Sign Permit: The zoning administrator may, in writing,
revoke a sign permit issued under provisions of this section, upon determining
that the sign was constructed in violation of the terms of this chapter, the
permit was issued on the basis of a material omission or misstatement of fact,
or the permit was issued in violation of this chapter. Revocation of a sign
permit which is to include or involve removal of a sign shall also comply with
the provisions of subsection H4 of this section.
a.   Notice: Notice of the zoning administrator's decision to revoke a sign
permit shall be served to the holder of the permit:
(1)   By delivering in person a copy of the notice to the holder of the permit,
or their agent when specified;
(2)   By leaving a copy of the notice with any person in charge of the
premises; or
(3)   In the event no such person can be found on the premises, by the
certified mailing of a copy of the notice to the permit holder.
b.   Illegal Sign: If no appeal has been made at the end of the fifteen (15)
days, the permit will be considered revoked and the sign illegal. The zoning
administrator shall then initiate the process for the removal of the illegal
sign at the permit holder's cost.
4.   Removal Of Signs:
a.   Authority: The zoning administrator is hereby authorized to require
removal of any sign.
(1)   Written Notice: Before bringing action to require removal of any sign,
the zoning administrator shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or
the owner of the premises on which such sign is located. The notice shall state
the violation charged and the reasons and grounds for removal, specifying the
deficiencies or defects and what repairs, if any, will make the sign conform to
the requirements of this chapter. The notice shall also specify that the sign
must be removed or made to conform with the provisions of this chapter within
the notice period. Service of notice shall be made personally on the owner or
lessee, or by certified mail addressed to the owner or lessee at the address
specified in the permit or the last known address.
(2)   Notice Period:
(A)   The notice period for permanent signs shall be fourteen (14) days.
(B)   The notice period for temporary signs shall be forty eight (48) hours.
(3)   Prosecution: If the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign
is located has not demonstrated to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator
that the sign has been removed or brought into compliance with the provisions
of this chapter by the end of the notice period, the zoning administrator shall
submit the violations to the city prosecutor for prosecution.
(4)   Continuing Violation: Reerection of any sign or substantially similar
sign on the same premises after a notice of violation has been issued shall be
deemed a continuation of the original violation.
b.   Removal Of Temporary Signs: The zoning administrator may remove any
illegal temporary sign which is maintained or reerected after the expiration of
the notice period, if the owner or lessee of the premises has been issued a
notice of violation at least once before for the same violation involving the
same or similar sign. When temporary signs are removed by city staff, the
responsible party shall be notified within two (2) business days of the reason
for the removal and the location from which the sign was removed. Removed signs
shall be made available for the responsible party to pick up for three (3)
calendar days. After that time, removed signs will be destroyed.
c.   Safety Hazard: Notwithstanding other provisions of this subsection H4, the
zoning administrator may cause the immediate removal, following notice to the
owner of the sign or the property on which it is located, of any unsafe or
defective sign that creates an immediate hazard to persons or property.
d.   Costs Of Corrective Action: The costs of removal of a sign by the city
shall be borne by the owner of the sign.
5.   Cost Of Enforcement: The city shall be entitled to recover all costs
incurred, including attorney fees, in the enforcement of actions under this
chapter and in accordance with Utah Code Annotated sections 10-9a-802 and 803,
as amended.
6.   Liability For Damages: The provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to relieve or limit in any way, the responsibility or liability of
any person, firm, or corporation which erects or owns any sign for personal
injury or property damage caused by the sign. In addition, this chapter shall
not be construed to impose upon the city, its officers, or its employees any
responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any sign under the
provisions of this chapter.
I.   Appeal: An applicant for a sign permit or a permit holder may appeal the
decision of the zoning administrator to revoke the permit to the appeals and
variance hearing officer by filing an appeal application within fifteen (15)
days of the date when the notice was served or the date of the certified
mailing.
(Ord. 963, 2-15-2011; amd. Ord. 1351, 9-18-2018; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-26-060: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A.   Sign Area Measurement: Signs which use a cabinet shall have their area
determined to be the area of the entire cabinet face, excluding its border,
visible from the outside of the sign. In the case of individual letters used as
a sign, the area is ninety percent (90%) of the area enclosed within the
smallest regular geometric shape needed to completely encompass all letters,
insignias, and symbols of the sign, including horizontal spacing between
letters, insignias, symbols, and any extension of support structures not
enclosed within the area of all individual letters. Sign measurements shall
also be subject to the following:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4052.jpg]
 
1.   The supports, uprights, or structure on which any sign is supported shall
not be included in determining the sign area unless such supports, uprights, or
structure are designed in a manner as to form an integral background of the
display.
2.   Sign area shall be calculated for one sign face, except as otherwise
stated for particular sign types in this chapter.
3.   Sign allowances shall include all on premises signs unless under this
chapter a particular type of sign:
a.   Is expressly excluded from the calculation of sign allowances; or
b.   Has a separate basis for calculating sign area.
4.   For signs using individual letters, the area of the entire sign shall be
calculated using a single regular geometric shape, albeit words, abbreviations,
logos, and insignias may be calculated independently to determine area of such
signage. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
B.   Sign Height Measurement:
1.   Freestanding Signs: Sign height for all freestanding signs is the distance
measured from the average finished grade at the base of the sign to the topmost
portion of a sign, excluding decorative embellishments.
2.   Building And Wall Mounted Signs: The height of any building or wall
mounted sign is the vertical distance measured for the cabinet or geometric
shape used to determine the sign's area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4054.jpg]
 
C.   Clearance Requirements:
1.   No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any
portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use
of any fire escape, exit, or standpipe.
2.   No permanent or temporary sign shall obstruct any door or window opening.
3.   Freestanding signs shall not extend over any pedestrian or vehicular
access area unless specifically approved by the city engineer and the fire
department.
4.   No sign shall be erected or maintained which has less clearance from
communication lines and energized electrical power lines than that prescribed
by the laws of the state of Utah.
5.   No sign shall be located on publicly owned land or inside or over street
rights of way, except as specifically authorized in this chapter.
D.   Setback Requirements: To determine setback distances, measurements shall
be taken from the point of the sign or sign structure which is closest to the
street, right of way, district line, or property line from which the sign is to
be set back (see illustration).
1.   All freestanding and monument signs shall be set back a minimum of fifteen
feet (15') from the back of the curb to allow for park strip and sidewalk.
Setbacks from property lines are in addition to minimum curb setback.
2.   Signs in any commercial or manufacturing zoning district shall be located
not less than twenty feet (20') from any adjacent residentially zoned property.
3.   No signs greater than three feet (3') in height shall be permitted in the
triangular clear view area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4056.jpg]
 
E.   Traffic Safety: No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected
which in any manner may be confused with an official traffic sign or signal or
which bears words normally used in such signs, i.e., stop, go slow, caution,
danger, warning, etc., in a manner that resembles traffic signs. No sign shall
have lighting which impairs the vision or anyone traveling upon a public or
private street or distracts any driver so as to create a public nuisance. No
sign or group of signs may exceed one foot-candle in brightness as measured at
the property line.
F.   Design, Construction, And Maintenance:
1.   All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of all codes, including
building and electrical codes adopted by the city.
2.   Permanent signs shall be constructed of permanent material and shall be
attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment
to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
3.   All signs shall be maintained in good and safe structural condition. The
landscaped area in which any freestanding sign is placed shall be kept free
from weeds, garbage, and debris.
4.   Permanent signs shall be designed so as to be an integral part of the
overall design of a site and architecturally compatible with the buildings to
which they relate.
G.   Illumination Requirements: Permanent signs may be illuminated according to
this subsection unless otherwise specified in this chapter. Illumination may be
either by direct, internal, or internal indirect means and shall be so
installed according to all applicable codes and regulations.
1.   Any external light source used for the illumination of a sign shall be
shielded so all direct light shines onto the sign area only.
2.   Neither direct nor reflected light from any source shall create a traffic
hazard, distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares, or
create a nuisance to surrounding properties.
3.   For signs illuminated from an internal light source:
a.   The light source shall not be visible from the exterior of the sign; and
b.   No direct lighting shall shine beyond the sign area.
4.   The following illumination types shall be prohibited for all signs:
a.   Flashing, blinking, or rotating lights;
b.   Exposed neon or similar tube type illumination, except as specifically
permitted elsewhere in this chapter;
c.   Visible bare incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, or high or low
pressure sodium light bulbs; and
d.   Mercury vapor lights.
5.   All applicable illumination standards of chapter 20 of this title shall be
adhered to at all times.
H.   Standards For Permitted Sign Types:
1.   Sign Integration And Design Standards: Sign locations shall be integrated
with landscape plans to avoid obstruction of the sign and traffic.
a.   Wall sign copy is strongly recommended to be designed with individual
letters and logos rather than cabinets.
b.   Signage located facing residential areas or which present the risk of
light nuisances to adjacent properties shall utilize signage consisting of
reverse pan channel lettered and lit designs.
c.   Where tower signs are permitted, the poles and other structural supports
shall be covered or concealed with pole covers architecturally and
aesthetically designed to match the building.
d.   Monument signs shall have at least a one foot (1') opaque pedestal
designed as part of the foundation which conceals supports. The pedestal shall
run at least seventy five percent (75%) of the horizontal length of the sign
and no space may be exposed between the pedestal and the ground or landscaped
area.
2.   Sign Faces: Signs, other than banners, desired to be multifaced may have a
maximum spread of forty five degrees (45°) between the faces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4058.jpg]
 
3.   Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be placed on the wall of the business which
the sign identifies. No wall sign shall be larger than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet.
4.   Freestanding And Monument Signs:
a.   Traffic Hazard: Freestanding and monument signs shall be placed in a
manner so as to not interfere with traffic in any way, confuse drivers, or
present any traffic hazard.
b.   Curb Setback: All freestanding and monument signs shall be set back a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from back of curb or in compliance with sign
distance triangles when physical conditions prohibit compliance with this
fifteen feet (15') setback requirement. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-070: PERMITTED ON PREMISES PERMANENT SIGNS:
Permitted signage described in this section is for specified zones, unless
otherwise outlined in section
9-26-090 of this chapter where the provisions therein will govern. The area of
wall, freestanding, and monument signs are added together in order to arrive at
the total sign allowance.
A.   Nonresidential Zones:
1.   Wall Signs:
a.   For any one side of a building the maximum sign area for each one linear
foot of building wall shall be one square foot.
b.   When the wall on which the sign is placed is more than two hundred feet
(200') from any public right-of-way, the maximum sign area for each one linear
foot of building wall shall be one and one-half (11/2) square feet.
c.   No part of a building wall sign shall extend above a roofline.
d.   No part of such signs shall project from a building wall a distance
greater than twelve inches (12").
2.   Freestanding And Monument Signs:
a.   The maximum number of signs per street frontage shall be one, except as
follows:
(1)   A Commercial Center having a minimum of six hundred fifty feet (650') of
linear frontage along a single public street may have additional monument signs
in accordance with the following:
(A)   No more than four (4) monument signs; and
(B)   A minimum of two hundred (200) linear feet between signs.
b.   The maximum sign area shall be twenty four (24) square feet.
c.   The maximum height shall be six feet (6').
d.   The maximum vertical dimension of the cabinet or panel shall be four feet
(4').
e.   The maximum horizontal dimension of the cabinet or panel shall be ten feet
(10').
f.   Such signs shall be placed within a landscaped setting of not less than
two hundred forty (240) square feet.
g.   Up to fifty percent (50%) of the allowed sign area may be used for a
change panel sign in conjunction with the freestanding monument sign.
3.   Tower Signs:
a.   Tower signs are permitted only for developments or multiple tenant
complexes with one hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet of building
floor area, inclusive of all pads within the development, subject to the
following.
b.   Such signs shall identify the project, building, business or businesses
within the development, or development.
c.   The maximum area of such sign shall be seventy five (75) square feet.
d.   The maximum height of such sign shall be twenty feet (20').
e.   The maximum number of such signs per complex or development shall be one
sign.
f.   Such sign shall be placed within a landscaped area of four (4) square feet
for each one square foot of sign area.
4.   Informational Signs:
a.   The maximum number of such signs each for driveway entrance from a public
or private right of way shall be one sign.
b.   The maximum height of such sign shall be three feet (3').
c.   The maximum area of such sign shall be four (4) square feet.
d.   The maximum area of business name or logo on such sign shall be one square
foot.
e.   Where a driveway is shared the maximum area of such sign shall be eight
(8) square feet.
f.   Where a driveway is shared the maximum combined area of the sign copy
shall be two (2) square feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4060.jpg]
 
5.   Properties Developed As A Multibuilding Complex: Properties developed as a
multibuilding complex shall be allowed on site freestanding signs, in addition
to that otherwise permitted by this section, subject to the following
requirements:
a.   The maximum number of signs for a complex shall be determined by the
following:
(1)   Complexes of two (2) or three (3) buildings shall be allowed one
additional sign.
(2)   Complexes of four (4) or more buildings shall be allowed up to one
additional sign for every two (2) buildings.
b.   The maximum height of such signs shall be seven feet (7').
c.   The maximum area of such sign shall be thirty two (32) square feet.
d.   Such signs shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of a public right
of way.
6.   Awning Signs: Signs may be permitted on awnings if the following
conditions have been met:
a.   The awning is compatible with the color, architectural character, and
design of the building upon which the awning is mounted, the location is
appropriate, and the materials used are durable.
b.   If the awning is mounted on a multi-tenant building, the awning sign shall
comply with the approved master sign program, if one has been approved,
regarding its place, color, size, material, and letter style.
c.   The maximum area the awning sign shall cover is twenty percent (20%) of
the total front face area of the awning.
d.   Sign letters or logos may be placed on the awning valance only.
e.   If sign letters or logos are placed on the awning, only the face area of
the letters or logos may be illuminated. All illumination must be internal
behind the surface of the awning.
7.   Restaurant Uses: Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall be
allowed one on site freestanding sign per drive-through lane, in addition to
that otherwise permitted by this section, according to the following
requirements:
a.   The additional freestanding sign shall be located more than thirty feet
(30') from the closest public right of way property line.
b.   The additional freestanding sign shall not be located more than five feet
(5') from the drive-through lane.
c.   The maximum area of such sign shall be forty five (45) square feet.
d.   Such sign shall not be taller than seven feet (7').
e.   Such signs shall be illuminated internally, backlit, or illuminated
digitally by means of EMC or LCD subject to requirements in section
9-26-060(G) and the illumination standards found in section
9-26-090(D)(1)(f) and section
9-20-040(B).
f.   Such signs shall be identified and accommodated in the approved sign
allowance and shall require a sign permit prior to installation.
B.   Residential Zones:
1.   Commercial uses within residential structures shall be allowed signage
according to the following requirements:
a.   No part of a building wall sign shall extend above a roofline.
b.   Such sign shall be installed with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the face of the building wall.
c.   Such signs shall not project from a building wall a distance greater than
twelve inches (12").
d.   Such signs shall have a maximum area of two (2) square feet.
2.   Subdivisions and residential developments shall be allowed signage
according to the following requirements:
a.   The maximum number of signs shall be two (2) per vehicular entrance into
the development.
b.   Such signs shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
c.   Such signs shall be a maximum of five feet (5') in height.
d.   Such signs shall be located a maximum of twenty five feet (25') the
closest right of way property line inside the development.
e.   Such signs shall be mounted on or integrated into a wall surrounding the
development. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011; amd. Ord. 1389, 4-16-2019; Ord. 1435, 4-21-
2020)
9-26-080: TEMPORARY SIGNAGE:
Temporary signage outlined in this section are allowed subject to the filing of
an application for and issuance of a temporary signage permit, unless expressly
exempted in this section.
A.   General Requirements: The following shall apply to all temporary signage
as outlined herein:
1.   Such signs shall not be illuminated unless by way of permanently installed
indirect lighting sources.
2.   Such signs shall not be placed in any public or private right of way, park
strips, medians, or roundabouts.
3.   Such signs shall not be placed so as to create a traffic hazard in a clear
view area.
4.   Such signs shall require application for an issuance of a temporary sign
permit prior to installing or erecting a temporary sign, unless expressly
exempted in this section.
5.   All temporary signage must be set back beyond the farthestmost part of the
permanent ground mounted signage on the same property that fronts the same
property line.
6.   Businesses utilizing electronic message centers as provided within this
chapter shall not be allowed the use of temporary signage as outlined within
this section.
B.   Special Event Signs: Temporary signs for events that have been issued a
special events permit may be erected as allowed in this subsection.
1.   Such signs shall be permitted in all zones following application for and
approval of a temporary signage permit.
2.   Such signs are subject to the following requirements:
a.   Such signs may be posted for a period not to exceed twenty one (21) days,
including days after the event.
b.   Special event signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size,
and shall not have more than two (2) faces, and must be securely attached to
the ground by posts with a stabilizing crossbar between the ground posts at the
top of the sign.
c.   Up to thirty five (35) signs are allowed per event.
d.   Permission for the placement of such signs from property owners shall be
required as a part of an application for a temporary signage permit.
e.   Special event signs for the same special event shall be placed no less
than seventy (70) yards apart along a street.
f.   Special event signs may be placed no more than one (1) time in six (6)
months for the same event.
g.   Special event signs shall not be placed in areas designated by Draper City
as “not permissible” on specific Draper City owned property.
C.   Properties Subject To Development Or Construction: Properties which have
been approved for a subdivision or site plan are subject to the following
guidelines:
1.   Properties subject to development or construction shall be allowed one on
site sign.
2.   The maximum area of such sign shall be forty eight (48) square feet.
3.   The maximum height of such sign shall be eight feet (8').
4.   Such sign may be illuminated by indirect lighting only.
5.   Such sign shall be removed immediately upon issuance of the final building
permit for residential properties or the final certificate of occupancy for
nonresidential properties.
D.   Banners: Banners may be used subject to the following provisions:
1.   Such signs may be used in all nonresidential zones and the RM1 and RM2
residential zones.
2.   Such signs shall be allowable for the following holiday periods without a
permit:
Presidents Day and Valentine's Day February for 5 days including the holiday
Easter                             March or April for 5 days including the
                                   holiday
Memorial Day                       May for 5 days including the holiday
July 4                             5 days including the holiday
July 24                            5 days including the holiday
Labor Day                          September for 5 days including the holiday
Thanksgiving                       November for 7 days including the holiday
Holiday season                     For 23 days starting December 10 and ending
                                   January 2
 
3.   Such signs shall be allowable for an additional four (4) occurrences per
calendar year up to fourteen (14) days per occurrence. Occurrences may run
consecutively, upon issuance of a temporary sign permit for such, but shall be
considered independent occurrences.
4.   Businesses which have received a new business license shall be allowed a
banner sign for thirty (30) days during a grand opening upon issuance of a
temporary sign permit. This permit shall not count as an occurrence.
5.   One banner per street frontage may be a maximum of thirty two (32) square
feet.
6.   Such signs must be securely attached to a structure, fence, or to ground
posts. When mounted to the ground, banners may be not higher than forty eight
inches (48") from the ground to the top of the sign and must have a stabilizing
crossbar between the ground posts at the top of the sign.
7.   Such signs shall not be located within any public or private right-of-way,
park strips, medians, or roundabouts.
8.   Such signs shall not be placed where they obstruct the view of any sign
identified in subsection
9-26-100A of this chapter.
9.   Banners may be two (2) faced but may not be split faced as identified in
subsection
9-26-060H2 of this chapter.
10.   Permission for the placement of such signs from property owners shall be
required as a part of an application for a temporary signage permit. (Ord. 963,
2-15-2011; amd. Ord. 1098, 8-8-2015; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020)
9-26-090: AREAS OF SPECIAL DESIGNATION:
In an effort to complement and enhance the experience and aesthetics of certain
areas of the community, these areas have been identified to have unique signage
allowances. The signage allowances outlined for these special districts shall
not be construed as cumulative to the allowable signage identified elsewhere in
this chapter, but rather the exclusive signage allowable within the areas
identified herein.
A.   Town Center District Special: The intent of this subsection is to enhance
and protect the character of the historic and largely pedestrian areas of the
Town Center area where it exists and is intended to be uniquely distinct from
the other more intense commercial and gateway areas of the City. As such, the
following special sign standards shall apply within the TC Zone only:
1.   Wall Signs:
a.   For any one side of a building the maximum sign area for each one linear
foot of building wall shall be one square foot.
b.   No part of a building wall sign shall extend above a roofline or the eave
line for buildings with a pitched roof. Gable areas shall not be considered to
be above the eave line and for the purpose of this section, dormers shall not
be considered gable areas. (Ord. 1258, 5-2-2017)
c.   No part of such sign shall project from a building wall a distance greater
than twelve inches (12").
d.   Wall signs shall be illuminated through reverse channel halo illumination
techniques only.
e.   No cabinet style construction shall be permitted for wall signage.
2.   Shingle Signs:
a.   Shingle signs no larger than two feet (2') high by three feet (3') wide
shall be permitted.
b.   Such signs shall be suspended from a roof overhang, covered walkway,
covered porch, open lattice walkway, or attached to a building wall fascia.
c.   Such signs shall identify the business.
d.   No part of a shingle sign shall extend further than four feet (4')
horizontally from the building fascia.
e.   Such signs shall be on or adjacent to the business the sign identifies.
f.   The maximum number of such signs perpendicular or parallel to the business
front shall be one sign.
g.   Suspended signs shall maintain a minimum clearance between the bottom of
the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk of seven feet six inches (7'6").
3.   Post And Panel Or Engraved Stone Monument Signs:
a.   Developments shall be allowed to install one post-and-panel or engraved
stone monument sign per street frontage, providing the sign complies with the
development standards herein. The maximum area of such signs shall be twenty
four (24) square feet. The maximum vertical dimension of the cabinet or panel
shall be four feet (4'), and the maximum horizontal dimension of the cabinet or
panel shall be ten feet (10'). For a post and panel sign, the posts shall be no
wider than two feet (2'). The maximum overall height of the sign structure
shall be six feet (6').
b.   Signs allowable according to this subsection shall be made of quality,
long-lasting materials that are compatible with and complement those of the
building they represent.
c.   Signs allowable according to this subsection shall have no setback
requirement from the property line. Such signs shall not be located within the
right-of-way and shall not obstruct the view of vehicular traffic approaching,
at, or leaving any intersection or access to a parking area. Since buildings in
the Town Center have no minimum front setback, there shall be no minimum
landscaping requirement for post and panel or engraved stone monument signs in
the TC Zone.
d.   Signs allowable according to this subsection shall only be illuminated
through means of ground illumination or a back- lighting system, or lights
attached to the top of sides of the sign that shine back onto the face of the
sign. Any illumination must be done in a manner which satisfies the
requirements of chapter 20 of this title.
4.   Signage For Redeveloped Buildings: Existing buildings within the TC Zone
which are converted into uses allowed within the zone may qualify for
additional signage if the front wall plane of the building is located more than
twenty five feet (25') from the property line to which it is oriented. This
additional signage shall be limited to one (1) post and panel or engraved stone
monument sign per street frontage which meets all of the following
requirements:
a.   The maximum area of such signs shall be twenty four (24) square feet.
b.   The maximum height of such signs shall be six feet (6').
c.   The sign shall have no setback requirement from the property line.
d.   The sign shall not be located within the right-of-way nor obstruct the
view of vehicular traffic approaching, at, or leaving any intersection or
access/egress for any parking area.
e.   The sign shall be illuminated only through means of ground illumination or
a back-lighting system which satisfies the requirements of chapter 20 of this
title.
5.   Temporary Signage:
a.   Form: All temporary signage shall be in the form of A-frame or pole banner
signs only. The temporary signage described in this section is allowed only in
the Town Center. Signage allowed under subsections
9-26-080B, C, and D of this chapter shall also be allowed.
b.   A-Frame Signs:
(1)   A-frame signage shall be no larger than three feet (3') total sign height
and three feet (3') total sign width.
(2)   There shall be no limitations on the frequency of temporary A-frame
signage availability except as explicitly stated herein.
(3)   A-frame signage may be displayed during hours of operation.
(4)   There shall be no permit required for A-frame signage.
(5)   A-frame signage shall be limited to two (2) such signs per business
location.
(6)   A-frame signage may be located within the parkstrip fronting the business
for which the signage is displaying advertisement.
(7)   A-frame signage may not be located as to obstruct the view of vehicular
traffic approaching, at, or leaving any intersection or access/egress for any
parking area.
(8)   A-frame signage may not be located on any sidewalk or pedestrian pathway.
In the case where the right-of-way area between the building and the curb line
is developed entirely as pedestrian area with no landscaping, the A-frame
signage shall be located to allow not less than six feet (6') of clearance
between the building and the A-frame signage for pedestrians.
(9)   There shall be no illumination permitted specifically for A-frame
signage.
c.   Pole Banner Signs:
(1)   Such signage shall have a permanently installed black metal pole which is
twelve feet (12') in height with a two and one-half inch (21/2") to three inch
(3") diameter or square pole with a cap and include extending arms on which
banners can be installed. The metal pole may be placed in a sleeve permanently
installed in a footing but must be secured by a bracket and fasteners.
(2)   A sign permit shall be required for the installation of the permanent
pole portion of pole banner signage, but is not required for the installation
of banners on the pole.
(3)   The height and width of the banner allowed for pole banner signage shall
be five feet (5') high and two feet (2') wide.
(4)   All four (4) corners of a banner installed on pole banner signage shall
be attached to the extending arms of the pole at both the top and bottom of the
banner, and replaced when the banner becomes faded or torn. There are no
limitations for the length of time any banner shall be displayed if such banner
is in conformance with the requirements of this subsection.
(5)   Such signage shall have a setback of two feet six inches (2'6") from the
right-of-way with the ends of the extending arms directed perpendicular towards
the right-of-way.
(6)   Such signage shall not be located within or overhang onto the right-of-
way, nor obstruct the view of vehicular traffic approaching, at, or leaving any
intersection or access/egress for any parking area.
(7)   There shall be no illumination device or mechanism permitted specifically
for the direct or indirect lighting of such signs.
(8)   Such signage shall be limited to one such sign per business location, and
shall be spaced by a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the nearest such signage
in the same commercial site or development.
6.   Clearance: All temporary signage which is building-mounted shall maintain
a clearance of at least seven feet six inches (7'6") above any pedestrian
pathway.
7.   District Entry: The City Council may approve City signage which varies
from the terms of this subsection for the purpose of implementing signage which
delineates and announces the entrance into the Town Center District. Such
signage may only be located along primary transportation corridors into the
district.
8.   Other Signs: Signage identified in section
9-26-100 of this chapter shall be allowed.
B.   Freeway Frontage Road: The intent of this subsection is that the areas of
the community directly oriented and related to the I-15 freeway warrant
specialized standards for signage where those properties possess limited and
unique visibility constraints due to higher speeds of traffic and differences
in elevation between businesses and passersby. Any freestanding business or
group of businesses shall be allowed the signs described in this subsection. In
addition to subsections B1a and B1b of this section, to qualify for such signs
the business or group of businesses, if located on more than one lot or parcel,
must have a common driveway and unrestricted cross access between the adjoining
lots or parcels.
1.   To qualify for such signs the business or group of businesses shall:
a.   Abut or have direct access to those designated sections of Pony Express
Road, Minuteman Drive, State Street, 165 W (Election Road), or Bangerter
Highway depicted in section
9-26-140, exhibit A of this chapter;
b.   Be located on a lot or parcel that abuts Interstate 15. When property
abuts I-15 and is not abutting on a designated section of a freeway frontage
road, any qualifying freeway frontage road sign must be placed in such a
location that it is clearly visible from I-15 traffic and in no case shall the
sign be located more than two hundred feet (200') from the I-15 right-of-way;
or
c.   Be located within development areas identified within section
9-26-140, exhibit B of this chapter, where the entirety of the development area
is entitled to a maximum of one sign identified in subsection B2 of this
section, in addition to all other allowed signage, except commercial properties
on the south side of 11400 South from I-15 to the east property line of the
Draper Plaza Shopping Center where only one tower sign per property is
permitted, provided all such signs are spaced at no closer than two hundred
feet (200') to each other. Said allowed signs shall also conform to subsection
B2 of this section.
2.   Businesses or a group of businesses within a single development which meet
the qualifications of subsection B1 of this section and would otherwise qualify
for a tower sign in accordance with section
9-26-070(A)(3) may be allowed one of the sign types in this subsection.
Businesses located within Freeway Frontage Zones A, B, C, and D may have such
sign, providing the property on which they are located has a minimum two and
one-half (2.5) acres and a minimum four hundred (400) linear feet of lot
frontage.
a.   One monolithic sign, where:
(1)   The maximum height shall be forty feet (40') in the freeway frontage road
designated area A; the maximum height shall be thirty feet (30') in the freeway
frontage road designated area B; the maximum height shall be seventy feet (70')
in the freeway frontage road designated area C;
(2)   The ratio of width to height does not exceed 1:4.5;
(3)   The sign is internally lit; and
(4)   The sign face area shall not exceed three hundred sixty (360) square
feet, nor two hundred (200) square feet measured around the lettered copy
within the sign face; or
b.   One tower sign where:
(1)   The maximum height shall be seventy feet (70') in the freeway frontage
road designated area C; the maximum height shall be forty feet (40') in the
freeway frontage road designated area A; the maximum height shall be thirty
feet (30') in the freeway frontage road designated area B; the maximum height
shall be sixty five feet (65') in the freeway frontage road designated area D;
(2)   The tower sign's structural support shall be a minimum width of five feet
(5') or a minimum of thirty six inches (36") each for signs with two (2) or
more structural supports located near the outside width dimensions of the sign;
(3)   The structural supports of the tower sign shall be finished
architecturally with detailed masonry products exclusive of concrete masonry
units, brick, or stone, which shall be architecturally and aesthetically
designed to match the building or development to which it is associated;
(4)   The tower sign shall be finished with architectural or decorative
elements that serve to relate the sign to the building or development to which
it is associated; and
(5)   The sign area shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in the
freeway frontage road designated area C; the sign area shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet in the freeway frontage road designated area A; the
sign area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in the freeway
frontage road designated area B. The sign area for area D shall not exceed four
hundred fifty (450) square feet, which may include electronic sign area.
3.   Properties eligible for freeway frontage signage allowances outlined
within this subsection and which have frontage on two (2) public rights-of-way
shall be allowed one monument sign along the nonfreeway frontage street.
4.   Properties eligible for freeway frontage signage allowances shall be
allowed wall signs outlined in subsection
9-26-070A1 of this chapter.
5.   Properties eligible for freeway frontage signage allowances shall be
allowed banner signs not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. All
other provisions outlined in subsection
9-26-080D of this chapter regarding banner signs shall apply.
6.   Businesses or a group of businesses within a single development which meet
the qualifications of subsection B1 of this section, which are located in the
CBP, CR, CI, CC, or MARF Zones, and which have two and one-half (2.5) acres and
have a minimum of four hundred (400) linear feet of lot frontage shall be
allowed one electronic message sign. Such signs shall be subject to the
provisions of subsection D1 of this section.
7.   Signage outlined in subsections
9-26-070A4, A5, A6, and A7 of this chapter shall be allowed as outlined in
those subsections.
8.   Other signs: Signage allowable under this section and section
9-26-100 of this chapter shall be allowed with the added requirements of this
subsection.
C.   12300 South/Draper Parkway Corridor: The 12300 South/Draper Parkway
Corridor Commercial District is the most intense commercial area in the City,
as well as a primary gateway into and through the community, which possesses a
unique intensity of uses and signage which provides a distraction for motorists
and pedestrians, thereby maintaining a distinct health, safety, and welfare
concern. In order to enhance and protect the character and safety of this
principal gateway into the City, experiencing one of the highest traffic
volumes in the City, the following sign standards shall apply to properties
along the entire corridor of 12300 South/Draper Parkway Street:
1.   General Provisions:
a.   The provisions of this subsection C shall apply to all properties and
developments which face, front, or have access from the 12300 South/Draper
Parkway right of way.
b.   The provisions of this subsection C shall constitute the sum total of
signage allowed for each business or development as a means to reduce the
visual clutter experienced along the 12300 South/Draper Parkway corridor.
c.   Temporary and permanent signage, with the exception of wall signs, shall
be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the right of way property line.
2.   Wall Signs: Wall signage, as outlined in subsection
9-26-070A1 of this chapter, shall be allowed.
3.   Tower Signs: Tower signs shall not be allowed within the 12300 South/
Draper Parkway corridor.
4.   Freestanding And Monument Signs: Freestanding and monument signage, as
outlined in subsection
9-26-070A2 of this chapter, shall be allowed with the following additional
requirements:
a.   Properties with four hundred feet (400') or more of direct frontage on the
12300 South right of way shall be allowed one additional monument sign
separated by a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from any other ground mounted
permanent sign on the same property;
b.   Freestanding and monument signs shall be located a minimum of one hundred
feet (100') from the next closest ground mounted permanent sign on an adjacent
property;
c.   Buildings containing multiple units in attached construction shall be
allowed signage specified in this subsection for the building as a whole rather
than for the individual units;
d.   Developments containing multiple buildings, with or without units in
attached construction, shall be allowed signage specified in this subsection
for the development as a whole rather than for the individual buildings or
units;
e.   Any legally nonconforming ground mounted permanent sign, regardless of the
type of sign, shall count as one of the allowable freestanding and monument
signs; and
f.   Any illegal sign shall prevent the installation of any allowable
freestanding or monument sign on the same property until such time as the
illegal sign is removed.
5.   Freeway Signs: Properties eligible for freeway signage allowances
according to subsection B of this section shall be allowed the signage
identified therein with the added requirements of this subsection C.
6.   Other Signs: Signage allowable under this section and section
9-26-100 of this chapter shall be allowed with the added requirements of this
subsection.
7.   Allowed Signage: Signage outlined in subsections
9-26-070A4, A5, A6, and A7 of this chapter shall be allowed as outlined in
those subsections with the added requirements of this subsection.
8.   Vehicle Signs: Vehicle signs shall not require a permit and shall be set
back from a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any public or private right of
way, park strips, medians, or roundabouts.
D.   Electronic Message Centers (EMC): A business which qualifies for a
monument sign as described in this chapter and which has frontage along 12300
South/Draper Parkway may qualify for an electronic message center, subject to
the following:
1.   All electronic message centers are subject to the following standards:
a.   Such signs shall display full color messages or images only and the use of
single colored text and images is prohibited.
b.   Each message/advertisement displayed on an EMC shall remain static for a
minimum of eight (8) seconds. Animation, flashing, starburst or other similar
frame effects are prohibited.
c.   Pixel pitch shall be as follows:
(1)   EMCs along 12300 South/Draper Parkway may shall have a true pixel pitch
between one millimeter (1 mm) and ten millimeters (10 mm) due to closer
proximity of travelers to signs.
(2)   EMCs in freeway frontage areas as depicted in the exhibits of this
chapter shall have a true pixel pitch between one millimeter (1 mm) and sixteen
millimeters (16 mm) due to higher speeds and distance between travelers and
signs.
d.   No EMC shall utilize a white or solid colored background for greater than
or equal to fifty percent (50%) of the sign area.
e.   EMCs may only be allowed as part of a monument, monolithic or tower sign,
as allowed in this chapter. Such signs shall comply with size restrictions set
forth in this chapter.
f.   All EMCs are required to comply with the following LED sign illumination
requirements:
(1)   All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that
automatically determines the ambient illumination and is programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot- candle measurements. In addition, EMCs
must have a default mechanism to turn off the sign within twenty four (24)
hours of a reported malfunction.
(2)   Sign illumination levels for EMCs shall never, at maximum display
intensity, exceed 0.3 foot-candle over ambient lighting conditions when
measured at the distance based on the formula of square root of area of sign
times one hundred (100) ( area of sign x 100). Light cutoff devices shall
minimize light above the sign.
(3)   The illuminance of an EMC shall be measured with an illuminance meter set
to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two (2) decimals. Illuminance
shall be measured with the EMC off, and again with the EMC displaying a white
image. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the EMC at
the distance determined by the total square footage of the EMC as set forth in
subsection D1f(2) of this section.
(4)   The applicant shall submit a photometric matrix (showing the dispersal in
foot-candles) showing that the sign meets all the requirements of this code.
(5)   The owner shall be required to submit written certification from the sign
manufacturer that the light intensity shall not exceed the maximum levels
specified in the above table and photocell dimming prior to the issuance of a
sign permit.
2.   Businesses utilizing EMCs as described in this section shall not be
allowed the use of temporary signage as described in section
9-26-080 of this chapter.
3.   Electronic message center monument signs must have a minimum ten foot
(10') setback from any right of way. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011; amd. Ord. 1098, 8-8-
2015; Ord. 1258, 5-2-2017; Ord. 1338, 9-4-2018; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020)
9-26-100: SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT:
Signage outlined in this section are allowed and does not require a sign permit
or fee.
A.   Official Signs: Signs required or authorized for by law, statute, or
ordinance, including: 1) traffic control and devices to identify streets; 2)
signs associated with and limited to information and directions required by the
building code, fire code, or other city codes; 3) signs specifically designed
to meet the requirements of the Americans with disabilities act; 4) signs
erected by public utility companies or construction area signs to warn of
danger or hazardous conditions; and 5) cornerstones, commemorative tablets, and
historical signs.
1.   Such signs may be of the type, number, area, height, location, or
illumination authorized by the applicable law, statute, or ordinance.
2.   No such sign shall be placed in a public right of way unless specifically
authorized or required by law, statute, or ordinance.
3.   On premises street address identification cannot exceed two (2) square
feet in area and is limited to one such sign per use or building, whichever is
greater.
4.   Cornerstones, commemorative tablets, and historical signs cannot exceed
four (4) square feet in area per face and four feet (4') in height if
freestanding, and such signs must be nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated.
B.   Flags: Flags of any nation, organization of nations, state, county, city,
religious group, civic group, fraternal organization, or any educational
institution in a number and specification as follows:
1.   In residential zones:
a.   A maximum of one flagpole not to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height
may be installed for every single-family detached residential unit; or
b.   A maximum of two (2) flagpoles not to exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height each may be installed for every multi-family development.
2.   In nonresidential zones:
a.   Lots or developments of less than one acre may install one flagpole not to
exceed sixty feet (60') in height;
b.   Lots or developments of greater than one acre but less than two (2) acres
may install up to two (2) flagpoles not to exceed sixty feet (60') in height
each; or
c.   Lots or developments greater than two (2) acres may install up to three
(3) flagpoles not to exceed sixty feet (60') in height each, one of which may
be increased to not more than eighty feet (80') in height.
3.   All flagpoles of twenty feet (20') or more in height shall obtain a
building permit from the city for the footing structure.
4.   The size of the flag, when measured diagonally, shall not exceed one-third
(1/3) of the height of the flagpole. Flagpoles, if designed to accommodate
such, may hold more than one flag so long as the combined size of all flags,
when measured diagonally, do not exceed one-half (1/2) of the height of the
flagpole.
5.   Flags may be illuminated using directional uplighting only as specified in
chapter 20 of this title.
C.   Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zones:
1.   Window signs when:
a.   The total area of such signs does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the total window area;
b.   The windows in which the signs are placed are on the ground floor level of
the building or business unit; and
c.   One exposed neon sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area shall be
allowed per street frontage as a part of allowed window signage.
2.   Two (2) A-frame signs when:
a.   Not taller than three feet (3') high;
b.   Not wider three feet (3');
c.   Displayed during hours of operation for any licensed business;
d.   Not be placed within any right of way unless the building is located less
than five feet (5') from the right of way property line in which case A-frame
signs may be placed within the park strip area;
e.   Not located on or over any sidewalk or pedestrian walkway or to obstruct
the view of vehicular traffic approaching, at, or leaving any intersection or
access/egress for any parking area; and
f.   Not illuminated.
3.   A single portable sign, not to exceed two feet (2') in vertical dimension
and two feet (2') in horizontal dimension, on private property, subject to the
following:
a.   Such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any right of
way property line;
b.   Such signs shall not be located within the parking area of any
nonresidential property or within any clear vision area;
c.   Such signs shall not rest upon or be attached to any other signage,
utility pole or device, or sign identified by subsection A of this section;
d.   Such signs shall not be located within or obstruct any public or private
sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway; and
e.   Such signs shall be located:
(1)   On the property containing the enterprise for which the sign represents;
or
(2)   In the case of a multi-tenant property, within one hundred feet (100') of
the enterprise for which the sign represents.
4.   Vehicle signs when set back from a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any
public or private right of way, park strips, medians, or roundabouts.
D.   Holiday Decorations: Holiday decorations or displays associated with any
national, local, or religious holiday or celebration when:
1.   Displayed for not more than forty five (45) days prior to and not more
than fourteen (14) after the holiday;
2.   Contained entirely within the boundaries of the lot or premises where they
are erected;
3.   Placed so as to avoid confusion with authorized traffic control device;
and
4.   Conforming to all traffic safety standards, including restrictions in
clear view areas.
E.   Signs On Residential Properties Subject To Sale, Lease, Rent Or Auction:
Properties subject to sale, lease, rent, or auction shall be allowed the
following signage without necessity of an application for or issuance of a sign
permit:
1.   Residentially Zoned Properties:
a.   Properties subject to sale, lease, rent, or auction shall be allowed one
on site sign of one of the following types:
(1)   One "T" shaped post sign subject to the following requirements:
(A)   Such sign shall be a maximum of nine (9) square feet hanging from a "T"
shaped mounting post;
(B)   Such sign shall be set back from the property line not less than five
feet (5');
(C)   Such sign shall be allowed, without necessity of a permit, for the
duration of the property's sale, lease, rent, or auction.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4062.jpg]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4064.jpg]   [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-
4066.jpg]
 
(2)   One yard sign subject to the following requirements:
(A)   The maximum area of each such signs shall be four (4) square feet;
(B)   The maximum height of such signs shall be three feet (3');
(C)   Such sign shall be set back from the property line not less than five
feet (5'); and
(D)   Such sign shall be allowed, without necessity of a permit, for the
duration of the property's sale, lease, rent, or auction.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4068.jpg]
 
b.   Properties subject to sale, lease, rent, or auction shall be allowed off
site signs as follows:
(1)   Such signs may be used to direct traffic to a residence for sale, lease,
rent, or auction.
(2)   Such signs shall be used only when a representative is on duty at the
residence for sale, lease, rent, or auction or the property owner is present at
the property for inspection.
(3)   The maximum number of such signs shall be three (3), as follows:
(A)   One sign at the intersection of the arterial or collector street closest
in driving distance to the property; and
(B)   Two (2) signs at intersections leading from the first sign to the
property.
(4)   The placement of such signs shall require permission of the owner of
properties on which the signs are to be placed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4070.jpg]
 
(5)   The maximum area of each such signs shall be four (4) square feet.
(6)   The maximum height of such signs shall be three feet (3').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4074.jpg]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-4076.jpg]   [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/IMAGES/0-0-0-
4078.jpg]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4080.jpg]
 
2.   Nonresidentially Zoned Properties: Properties subject to sale, lease,
rent, or auction shall be allowed signs as follows:
a.   Window signs according to the provisions of subsection C1 of this section;
or
b.   One freestanding sign for which:
(1)   The maximum area of such sign shall be forty eight (48) square feet;
(2)   The maximum height of such sign shall be eight feet (8');
(3)   Illumination is by indirect lighting only; and
(4)   Removal is required immediately upon issuance of a sign permit for a new
occupant or a building permit to renovate the subject space.
F.   Political Signs: Political signs may be erected prior to any election
without necessity of a permit subject to the following requirements:
1.   Such signs must be located on private property, with the owner's
permission.
2.   Such signs may not be located within any public right of way, public
roundabout, or triangular clear view area.
3.   Such signs are subject to all requirements and provisions of the Utah Code
Annotated and other laws as may be applicable.
G.   Temporary Banner Signs During Period Of Street Construction:
1.   Temporary banner signs may be placed in the public right of way to mark
points of ingress and egress.
2.   The maximum display period for temporary banner signs used during periods
of street construction shall only be for the duration of the construction
period.
3.   Businesses may qualify for this exception only if the street construction
is materially impairing the primary access to the business.
4.   Such signs shall be removed within ten (10) business days after
construction is done and the material impairment to the primary access to the
business is concluded. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-110: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
To minimize confusion and avoid unfair competitive disadvantage to businesses
required to satisfy the standards of this chapter, the city intends to apply
regulation of existing nonconforming signs with a view toward their eventual
elimination. This goal shall be achieved by imposing limits on change,
expansion, alteration, abandonment, and restoration of legally existing
nonconforming signs. Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of
chapter 6 of this title regarding nonconforming uses and structures shall apply
to nonconforming signs, except where the terms of this chapter conflict, in
which case the terms of this chapter shall govern.
A.   Legal Nonconforming Signs: A sign legally established prior to the
enactment of this chapter which does not fully comply with the terms of this
chapter shall be regarded as a legal nonconforming sign. Such signs may be
continued subject to being properly repaired and maintained, so long as the
existing sign is not expanded in size, relocated, or altered in any way unless
the relocation or alteration brings the sign into compliance with this chapter.
The following alterations are exempt from this provision:
1.   Panel changes for a new business in a legal nonconforming sign; and
2.   Copy changes in nonconforming permanent signs which were originally
approved by the city with a changeable copy feature.
B.   Destroyed Or Damaged Sign: Whenever a legal nonconforming sign is
destroyed or damaged by explosion, fire, windstorm, flood, earthquake,
vandalism, act of God, or any other means beyond the control of the sign owner,
such sign may be restored to its exact size and design immediately prior to its
damage or destruction or brought into full and complete compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
1.   Any destroyed or damaged legal nonconforming sign requiring repairs, must
be repaired back to its exact size and design immediately prior to its damage
or destruction within one hundred eighty (180) days. If a destroyed or damaged
sign is not repaired within one hundred eighty (180) days it will be considered
abandoned and must be repaired to conform to the provisions of this chapter,
removed, or it may be dealt with or removed as specified under subsection
9-26-050H4 of this chapter.
2.   A sign destroyed or damaged as a result of a public improvement project
may be replaced to its exact size and design immediately prior to its damage or
destruction, maintaining its legal nonconforming status, and all permitting
fees shall be waived. Such replacement may also include relocation. Any such
relocation must be to an on site location fully complying with the terms of
this chapter.
C.   Abandonment: Abandonment of a sign shall occur after one hundred eighty
(180) days from the first issuance of a notice of abandonment from the city.
Any nonconforming sign deemed abandoned must be removed or brought into
compliance with this chapter by the property owner. If removal or compliance
does not occur, the city may have the nonconforming sign removed through the
processes specified in subsection
9-26-050H5 of this chapter. An abandoned sign shall not regain any legal
nonconforming status under any circumstance.
D.   Voluntary Conformance Fee Waiver: When any existing legal nonconforming
sign is voluntarily brought into conformance with the provisions of this
chapter, all fees associated with application and permitting procedures for any
resulting conforming replacement sign shall be waived by the city. If multiple
signs are to be replaced, only nonconforming signs shall be eligible for the
fee waiver.
E.   Signs Rendered Nonconforming By Capital Improvements Projects Or Public
Action: Sites experiencing a reduction in setback for the benefit of a capital
improvements project or public action shall be allowed:
1.   To maintain existing signage as legal nonconforming signage; or
2.   If a sign is altered or required to be relocated by the action, the site
shall be allowed the signage opportunities allowed by this chapter.
F.   Billboards: Billboards may be relocated, removed, or altered according to
the terms of Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-120: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected, or maintained within the
city:
A.   Animated signs or signs with:
1.   Visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical or
electrical movement of any kind;
2.   The optical illusion of movement or giving the illusion of motion; or
3.   Lights or illumination which flash, move, rotate, blink, flicker, or use
intermittent electrical pulsations;
B.   Strings of light bulbs other than that needed to illuminate outdoor
seating or patio areas or traditional holiday decorations during a holiday
season, applicable to nonresidential uses only;
C.   Signs which:
1.   Emit or are designed to emit a sound intended to attract attention, by any
means;
2.   Involve the use of live or preserved animals; or
3.   Create unsafe glare;
D.   Any sign determined to be abandoned or illegal;
E.   Any sign which is installed or erected in or projects into or over any
public or private right of way, park strips, medians, or roundabouts, except as
expressly permitted by the terms of this chapter;
F.   Signs not permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any
structure except for temporary signs expressly permitted by this chapter;
G.   Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to safety or health
by reason of inadequate installation, maintenance, or dilapidation;
H.   Any sign or sign structure which:
1.   In any way obstructs the view of, may be confused with, or purports to be
an official traffic sign, signal, or device or any other traffic control,
warning, or public safety device; or
2.   Creates an unsafe distraction for or obstructs the view of vehicle
operators entering a public roadway from any parking area, service drive,
private driveway, alley, or other thoroughfare;
I.   Any sign which obstructs the free ingress to or egress from any door,
window, fire escape, or other building entrance or exitway;
J.   Any sign with a changeable or removable text or panel feature, except
where specifically allowed by the provisions of this chapter;
K.   Off premises advertising signs or any other sign not pertinent and clearly
incidental to the permitted use on the property where located, except as
expressly provided for elsewhere in this chapter;
L.   Portable signs or signs not otherwise permanently affixed to any structure
on the site, permanently mounted to the ground, or otherwise located on one or
more wheels;
M.   Signs for the purpose of general outdoor advertising of products or
services, or signs advertising a use, service or attraction not located in the
city, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter;
N.   Flags, banners, pennants or strings of pennants, wind or forced air
powered signs, or other devices designed or allowed to wave, flap, or rotate
with the wind except for flags, pennants, and insignias expressly permitted by
this chapter;
O.   Banners of any size for which a temporary sign permit has not been issued
according to this chapter;
P.   Inflatables, unless expressly permitted by this chapter;
Q.   Roof mounted signs or signs which project above the roofline or the bottom
of the eaves of a building whichever is lower, but signs within a gable shall
not be considered above the eaves and, for the purpose of this subsection,
dormers shall not be considered a permissible gable area for signage;
R.   Sign of an advertising nature posted or glued directly on an exterior
wall, roof or affixed directly on the same by any means of a similar adhesive
substance. No paper, cloth, vinyl, or other nonrigid material sign, except for
flags as provided for elsewhere in this chapter, shall be tacked directly on
any exterior wall, or roof, except those allowed as temporary signs as defined
elsewhere in this chapter;
S.   Off premises advertising signs and billboards, except for those legally
existing prior to the adoption of this chapter;
T.   Graffiti;
U.   Handbills and snipe signs;
V.   Business signs in residential and agricultural zones, or on properties
containing a residential use except as expressly permitted in this chapter for
an operating and licensed home occupation on the same property;
W.   Any sign not in compliance with this chapter or any applicable provisions
of this title;
X.   Any sign type not expressly permitted by this chapter;
Y.   Electronic message center signs containing video animation, flashing, or
the appearance of movement of any kind, but this provision does not prohibit
electronic message center signs operating in accordance with this chapter; and
Z.   Portable signs within any public or private right of way, sidewalks, park
strips, medians, or roundabouts. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-130: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, part or provision of this chapter is held invalid or
unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any other
portion of this chapter, and all sections, parts and provisions of this chapter
shall be severable. (Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
9-26-140: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   FREEWAY FRONTAGE ROAD DESIGNATED STREETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4082.jpg]
 
         Election Road
(Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5237.jpg]
 
 
(Ord. 1237, 12-20-2016)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5233.jpg]
 
Pony Express Road and Minuteman Drive
North of Bangerter Highway
(Ord. 968, 5-3-2011)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4290.png]
 
(Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5239.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5241.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1237, 12-20-2016)
   EXHIBIT B
   FREEWAY FRONTAGE ROAD DESIGNATED DEVELOPMENT AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4296.png]
 
(Ord. 963, 2-15-2011)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4102.jpg]
 
         Bartenger Highway - I-15 Interchange Area
            13490 South to 13800 South
 
   FREEWAY FRONTAGE DESIGNATED DEVELOPMENT AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5297.png]
 
(Ord. 1338, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 1568, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 27
SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-27-010: Purpose
9-27-020: Scope
9-27-030: Abandoned, Wrecked, Or Junked Vehicles
9-27-035: Use Of Recreational Vehicles As A Residence
9-27-040: Accessory Uses And Structures
9-27-050: Animals And Fowl
9-27-055: Keeping Of Chickens For Familial Gain
9-27-060: Condominium Projects
9-27-070: Easements
9-27-080: Fences And Visual Obstructions
9-27-085: Retaining Walls
9-27-090: Flag Lots
9-27-100: Frontage Improvements
9-27-110: Frontage Improvements; Methods Of Providing
9-27-120: Height Limitations And Exceptions
9-27-130: Location Of Gasoline Pumps
9-27-140: Lots And Yards
9-27-150: Private Rights-Of-Way
9-27-160: Driveway Slope Limits; Front Setback Maximum Rise
9-27-170: Storage Of Trash And Debris Prohibited
9-27-180: Swimming Pools
9-27-190: Impound Lots
9-27-200: Gating
9-27-210: General Preschools And Private Schools In Residential And
Agricultural Zones
9-27-220: Construction Trailers And Model Homes
9-27-230: Outdoor Storage And Display
9-27-240: Ownership And Maintenance Of Apiaries
9-27-250: Deviations For Government Buildings
9-27-260: Seasonal Farm Stand
9-27-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for several miscellaneous land
development standards which are applicable throughout the city regardless of
zone. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply in addition to the development and
use standards set forth in other chapters of this title, including base zones,
special purpose and overlay zones, development regulations of general
applicability, and regulations for specific uses. The requirements of this
chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions
of this title, this code, and other laws; provided, that the requirements of
this chapter shall prevail over conflicting provisions of any other requirement
in this title unless a different standard is expressly authorized. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2001)
9-27-030: ABANDONED, WRECKED, OR JUNKED VEHICLES:
A.   Abandoned Vehicles Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park or permit the
parking of any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind or parts
thereof, in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperative or abandoned
condition, whether attended or not, upon any private or public property within
the city for longer than seventy two (72) hours, except in the case of the
following:
1.   In a residential or agricultural zone, two (2) or less such vehicles or
parts thereof may be stored within a building or be completely screened by a
six foot (6') high opaque, sight obscuring fence.
2.   In a commercial or industrial zone, any number of such vehicles or parts
thereof may be permitted if:
a.   Such use is authorized in the zone where the use is located, and
b.   Vehicles or parts thereof are stored within a building or are completely
screened by a six foot (6') high opaque, sight obscuring fence.
B.   Nuisance: The accumulation and storage of more than the permitted number
of vehicles or parts thereof, as defined above, on private or public property
except as set forth above shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It shall be the duty
of the owner of such vehicle or parts thereof, or lessee, or other person in
possession of private property upon which such vehicle or parts thereof is
located, to remove the same from such property. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-035: USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AS A RESIDENCE:
A "recreational vehicle", as defined in section
9-3-040 of this title, which is located on private property, not designated as
a manufactured housing community and/or a recreational vehicle community, may
be occupied by a person or persons for up to twenty (20) days per calendar
quarter. All recreational vehicles are to be in good repair and maintained
regularly. The community development director or designee may grant a permit
allowing greater time allowances for good cause shown on a case by case basis.
Time extension permits shall be granted in increments not exceeding thirty (30)
days. (Ord. 861, 10-7-2008)
9-27-040: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in all zones, provided they
are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the principal use or
structure. No accessory building or structure nor group thereof shall be
located in any required front yard unless expressly authorized by a provision
of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-050: ANIMALS AND FOWL:
No accessory building for animals or fowl in excess of one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area shall be constructed in any agricultural or
residential zone closer than fifty feet (50') from any dwelling on the same
parcel or seventy five feet (75') from a dwelling on an adjacent parcel, nor be
closer than fifty feet (50') from any street right of way or proposed street
right of way. No accessory building for animals and fowl that is one thousand
(1,000) square feet or less shall be kept, constructed, or maintained closer
than fifty feet (50') from any dwelling on the same parcel or seventy five feet
(75') from a dwelling on an adjacent parcel, nor be closer than forty feet
(40') from any existing or proposed street. These regulations do not apply to
the keeping of horses which is regulated by section
7-5-280 of this code. (Ord. 868, 11-18-2008)
9-27-055: KEEPING OF CHICKENS FOR FAMILIAL GAIN:
A.   Purpose and Intent: The guidelines and provisions of this section are
intended to:
1.   Minimize nuisances to neighboring property owners;
2.   Prevent rodent, insect, vermin, and pest proliferation;
3.   Prevent the spread of disease; and
4.   Provide the ability for residents to provide for themselves and produce
food for the exclusive benefit of their families without the need for a
conditional use permit.
B.   Keeping of Chickens: Exclusive and independent of the terms and
requirements of section
9-27-050 of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this code regarding
animal rights, residents may keep and maintain chickens on their property
subject to the standards and guidelines of this section. Keeping of chickens
according to this section shall be permitted in all residential and
agricultural zones; provided, that all standards and provisions of this section
can be fully maintained.
C.   Standards of Care: The following standards for care of chickens shall be
required in all cases where the provisions of this section are applied:
1.   Chickens may be kept strictly for familial gain of those residing on the
property. There shall be no sale of eggs, poultry or poultry products resulting
from the keeping of chickens under this section.
2.   Up to six (6) chickens may be kept on any one lot or parcel that is less
than or equal to eleven thousand five hundred square feet (11,500 ft2) in size.
An additional one (1) chicken is permitted for each additional one thousand
five hundred square feet (1,500 ft2) in overall lot or parcel size, up to a
maximum of twenty five (25) chickens. Chicks and juvenile chickens (pullets)
under the age of six (6) months shall not count toward this limit, however the
number of chicks and juvenile chickens being raised simultaneously while
keeping chickens shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the maximum number of
chickens allowed for the lot or parcel.
3.   Chickens may be kept on properties containing a detached single-family
dwelling or a detached single-family dwelling with a detached accessory
dwelling only, although vacant properties directly adjacent to a lot or parcel
containing a detached single-family dwelling or detached single-family dwelling
with a detached accessory dwelling under the same ownership may be used for the
keeping of chickens. When chickens are kept on a property containing a detached
single-family dwelling with a detached accessory dwelling the total number of
chickens kept on the property may not exceed the limits based upon lot or
parcel size set forth in
9-27-055(C)(2) above.
4.   There shall be no roosters or crowing hens.
5.   Chickens may not be kept or allowed to roam within the living quarters of
a detached single-family dwelling or a detached single-family dwelling with a
detached accessory dwelling.
6.   All enclosures, pens, coops, and run areas shall be maintained in good
condition at all times so as to keep it rodentproof from all sides, including
burrowing.
7.   Manure shall be removed from the pens, coop, and run areas at least weekly
or as necessary to prevent insect breeding, vermin attraction, offensive odor,
or any other nuisance per Salt Lake Valley health department standards.
8.   Compost piles must be at least five feet (5') from the nearest property
line and shall be managed in a way that prevents the spread of disease, the
propagation or harboring of insects or rodents, the creation of any nuisance,
offensive odor at the property line, or any other condition that might
adversely affect public health, including noise, as required by Salt Lake
Valley health department regulations.
9.   All enclosures, pens, coops, and run areas shall be kept and maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition.
10.   All enclosures, pens, coops, and run areas shall be located to the rear
of the primary detached single-family dwelling on the property and the yard
shall be completely fenced using site obscuring fencing so as to prevent sight
of such areas to the greatest degree possible.
11.   All animal food storage and feeding areas shall be completely secured
from insects, rodents, and other vermin per Salt Lake Valley health department
standards.
12.   Clean water shall be available to the chickens at all times.
13.   All enclosures, pens, coops, compost, and run areas shall be located at
least thirty feet (30') from the primary detached single-family dwelling or
habitable dwelling on adjoining properties, at least five feet (5') from the
property line, and at least ten feet (10') from any structure containing a
habitable dwelling on the same property.
14.   Dead birds and discarded or rotting eggs shall be removed from the lot or
parcel and be properly disposed of within twenty four (24) hours.
15.   Chickens may not be permitted to roam beyond the locational requirements
for enclosures, pens, coops, and run areas.
16.   To prevent disease, all chickens should be vaccinated yearly and
appropriate biosecurity measures should be in place using the guidelines of the
United States department of agriculture.
D.   Runs, Structures, And Coops:
1.   Required: The keeping of chickens shall require the provision of a run
area and a coop. The coop shall be constructed such that it provides adequate
shelter and space for chickens to roost. Run areas shall be connected to the
provided coop and provide some method by which chickens are not allowed to
freely roam beyond the run area, including flying out of run area.
2.   Structures: Structures and coops used for the keeping and feeding of
chickens according to this section shall be designed and constructed:
a.   With solid walls on all sides, exclusive of openings for animals and
access to animals;
b.   With a solid roof;
c.   So as to prevent intrusion, including by burrowing, from all types of
rodents, vermin, and predatory animals; and
d.   Such that they resemble typical accessory buildings and are not unsightly.
3.   Permits: Structures or coops of a large enough size, or that are being
altered, that would require a building permit shall apply for and be issued
such a permit by the city prior to construction or alteration for use for the
keeping of chickens.
E.   Violations: Violation of any provision of this section may result in
immediate removal of any or all chickens. Violations may also be subject to
other civil or criminal penalties based on the nature of the violation. (Ord.
892, 6-23-2009; amd. Ord. 1475, 3-2-2021)
9-27-060: CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS:
A.   State Law Requirements: The owner or owners of real property may construct
a new condominium project or convert existing land and/or structures into a
condominium project by complying with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
title 57, chapter 8, as amended, and applicable provisions of this title and
other titles of this code.
B.   Uses Permitted: Uses permitted within a condominium project shall be
limited to those uses permitted within the zone in which the project is
located. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-070: EASEMENTS:
No dwelling, main building, or permanent accessory building shall be located
within a recorded easement area unless the property owner either produces
evidence satisfactory to the zoning administrator that the easement has been
abandoned, or executes a recordable document, in a form approved by the city
attorney, indicating that notwithstanding apparent abandonment of the easement,
the structure may be subject to the superior interest of the easement holder
and may be required to be relocated at the property owner's expense to
accommodate such interest.
A.   Location: Any structure in an easement area shall be located pursuant to
the setback and other applicable requirements of this title.
B.   No Expansion Of Legal Rights: Nothing in this section is intended to
expand or restrict the rights or obligations of any party to any recorded
easement. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-080: FENCES AND VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS:
All fences, walls, and similar structures or landscaping that obstruct
visibility must meet the following requirements:
A.   Height: A fence, wall, or other visual obstruction, excluding trees, shall
comply with the following:
1.   When located within the required front yard a fence, wall, or other visual
obstruction, not including trees shall not exceed four feet (4') in height
unless a greater height is allowed by a conditional use permit or as otherwise
permitted in this title.
2.   When located behind the front wall plane a fence, wall, or other visual
obstruction, not including trees, shall not exceed six fee (6') in height
unless a greater height is allowed by a conditional use permit or as otherwise
permitted in this title.
B.   Driveways: No obstruction to view in excess of three feet (3') in height
shall be placed at any driveway or automobile accessway within the triangular
area formed by connecting the points of intersection of the side driveway or
accessway line and the property or side street line with points twelve feet
(12') along the property line and twelve feet (12') along the driveway line.
C.   Corner Lots: In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction to
view in excess of three feet (3') in height shall be placed on any corner lot
within a triangular area formed by the right of way boundary and the line
connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the right
of way boundary line, except for:
1.   A reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to permit unobstructed
vision to an automobile driver; or
2.   Monument identification signs when permitted by this title.
3.   For purposes of locating fences, walls, landscaping and other similar
visual obstructions, a corner lot shall have one "front", which is defined as
parallel with the side of the residential structure which contains the primary
entrance.
D.   Trees: All mature trees located within fifteen feet (15') from a street
curb, or the edge of the street pavement where there is no curb, shall be
pruned to remove all branches to a height of at least nine feet (9') above the
elevation of the curb or street pavement. New trees planted within fifteen feet
(15') of the curb or edge of street pavement shall be of a type that allows for
the required pruning when maturity is reached.
1.   Visibility within the public right of way must not be restricted in a
manner that creates unsafe conditions as determined by the city engineer.
2.   If a tree is deemed unsafe by the city engineer, it may be removed by
either the property owner or the city without the requirement for a replacement
tree to be planted.
E.   Other Visual Obstructions: Fences, walls, and other visual obstructions,
not including trees, between six feet (6') and ten feet (10') in height shall
be allowed only behind the front wall plane, and shall require a conditional
use permit. Any such visual obstruction over six feet (6') in height must meet
the setback requirements for accessory buildings unless otherwise permitted by
a conditional use permit, except that no wall shall be constructed within a
utility easement without the prior written permission of all affected utility
companies. No fences, walls, or other visual obstructions over ten feet (10')
in height are allowed, excluding trees.
F.   Figure 1, Corner Lot Fencing Guidelines:
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4110.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1642, 4-1-2025)
9-27-085: RETAINING WALLS:
A.   Applicability: This section applies to all "retaining walls", as defined
in section
9-3-040 of this title.
B.   Building Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of
this section, all retaining walls require a building permit prior to
construction or alteration. Permit applications shall be processed and issued
in accordance with building permit procedures and applicable provisions of this
section. Building permit review fees will be assessed and collected at the time
the permit is issued.
C.   Building Permit Exemptions: The following do not require a building
permit:
1.   Retaining walls less than four feet (4') in exposed height with less than
ten horizontal to one vertical (10H:1V) (horizontal:vertical) front and back
slopes within ten feet (10') of the wall;
2.   Nontiered retaining walls less than three feet (3') in exposed height with
back slopes flatter than or equal to two horizontal to one vertical (2H:1V) and
having front slopes no steeper than or equal to four horizontal to one vertical
(4H:1V);
3.   Tiered retaining walls less than three feet (3') in exposed height per
wall and which have front slopes and back slopes of each wall no steeper than
or equal to ten horizontal to one vertical (10H:1V) within ten feet (10') of
the walls; and
4.   Retaining walls less than fifty (50) square feet in size.
D.   Geologic Hazard Ordinance Applicability: The Draper City geologic hazard
ordinance, section
9-19-161-3, "Appendix C, Minimum Standards For Slope Stability Analysis", of
this title, section 1.2, requires global stability analysis of modified natural
slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3H:1V) and cut or fill
slopes of two horizontal to one vertical (2H:1V) or greater.
E.   Engineer Design Required: All retaining walls required to obtain a
building permit shall be designed by an engineer licensed by the state of Utah.
F.   Height, Separation And Plantings:
1.   For the purposes of this subsection, the height of a retaining wall is
measured as the exposed height (H) of wall. If a retaining wall has a varying
height along its length, the height is the largest value of the measured height
along the length of the wall.
2.   For the purposes of this subsection, front setback area shall mean the
setback area adjacent to a street. For corner lots, as defined in 9-3-040, the
two (2) front setback areas shall be the two (2) front yards.
3.   A single retaining wall shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height. Within
the front setback area, each retaining wall shall not exceed four feet (4') in
height, except in the Hillside Sensitive Lands Overlay Zone where each
retaining wall within the front setback area shall not exceed nine feet (9') in
height.
4.   Terracing of retaining walls is permitted, but the combined height of all
walls shall not exceed eighteen feet (18'). Walls with a separation of a
distance of at least two times the height of the tallest wall (2 x height,
height of largest of 2 walls) from face of wall to face of wall shall be
considered as separate walls. In a terrace of retaining walls, a minimum
horizontal separation of at least half the height of the tallest wall of the
terraced retaining walls group (height of largest wall/2) is required as
measured from back of lower wall to face of higher wall. See figure 9-27-085-1.
5.   Walls within thirty feet (30') of a street:
a.   The area in front of each retaining wall shall require a minimum of five
(5) shrubs for every twenty (20) linear feet of planting area. Shrubs shall be
watered by drip irrigation to minimize erosion.
b.   Retaining walls shall be colored, feature decorative or architectural
finishes such as, but not limited to, rock wall, board form, or split face.
Plain exposed poured concrete shall not be permitted.
6.   Retaining walls shall be located at least seven feet (7') away from any
property line that is adjacent to a street.
7.   A maintenance plan is required for a retaining wall permit.
   FIGURE 9-27-085-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4863.png]
 
G.   Submittals: The following documents and calculations prepared by a
licensed engineer of the state of Utah shall be submitted with each retaining
wall building permit application:
1.   Profile drawings if the retaining wall is longer than fifty (50) linear
feet, with the base elevation, exposed base elevation and top of wall labeled
at the ends of the wall and every fifty (50) linear feet or change in grade;
2.   Cross sectional drawings, including surface grades and structures located
in front of and behind the retaining wall a distance equivalent to three (3)
times the height of the wall and if the wall is supporting a slope, then the
cross section shall include the entire slope plus surface grades and structures
within a horizontal distance equivalent to one times the height of the slope;
3.   A site plan showing the location of the retaining walls with the base
elevation, exposed base elevation and top of wall labeled at the ends of the
wall and every fifty (50) linear feet or change in grade;
4.   Material strength parameters used in the design of the retaining wall,
substantiated with laboratory testing of the materials as follows:
a.   For soils, this may include, but is not limited to, unit weights, direct
shear tests, triaxial shear tests and unconfined compression tests;
b.   If laboratory testing was conducted from off site but similar soils in the
area, the results of the testing with similar soil classification testing must
be submitted;
c.   For segmented block walls, the manufacturer's test data for the wall
facing, soil reinforcement, and connection parameters shall be submitted in an
appendix;
d.   Minimum laboratory submittal requirements are the unit weight of retained
soils, gradation for cohesionless soils, Atterberg limits for cohesive soils,
and shear test data;
e.   Soil classification testing shall be submitted for all direct shear or
triaxial shear tests;
f.   If a Proctor is completed, classification testing shall be submitted with
the Proctor result; and
g.   Laboratory testing shall be completed in accordance with applicable
American Society For Testing And Materials (ASTM) standards;
5.   Design calculations ensuring stability against overturning, base sliding,
excessive foundation settlement, bearing capacity, internal shear and global
stability as follows:
a.   If geogrids are used, additional calculations for pullout, tensile
overstress, internal sliding, facing connection and bulging shall be completed,
and other calculations used to meet design standards for that particular
material are required;
b.   The design engineer shall indicate the design standard used and supply a
printout of the input and output of the files in an appendix;
c.   Calculations shall include analysis under static and seismic loads, which
shall be based on the characteristic earthquake or maximum credible earthquake
(MCE), with spectral acceleration factored for site conditions in accordance
with the IBC;
d.   Mechanically stabilized earth (MSE) walls shall be designed in general
accordance with 2001 FHWA NHI-00-043 "Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls And
Reinforced Soil Slopes" or the National Concrete Masonry Association (NCMA)
"Design Manual For Segmental Retaining Walls";
e.   Rock walls shall be designed in general accordance with the 2006 FHWA-CFL/
TD-06-006 "Rockery Design And Construction Guidelines"; and
f.   Concrete cantilever walls shall be designed in general accordance with
specifications provided in current American Concrete Institute or American
Society Of Civil Engineers publications;
6.   A global stability analysis demonstrating minimum factors of safety of at
least 1.50 under static conditions and at least 1.10 under seismic loading
conditions as follows:
a.   Factors of safety results shall be presented to the nearest hundredth;
b.   Seismic loads shall be based on the characteristic earthquake, with
spectral acceleration factored for site conditions in accordance with IBC;
c.   The cross sectional view of each analysis shall be included, and the
printout of the input and output files placed in an appendix; and
d.   The global stability analysis may be omitted for concrete cantilever
retaining walls that extend to frost depth, that are less than nine feet (9')
in exposed height, absent of supporting structures within thirty feet (30') of
the top of the wall, and which have less than ten horizontal to one vertical
(10H:1V) front and back slopes within thirty feet (30') of the retaining wall
structure;
7.   A drainage design, including a free draining gravel layer wrapped in
filter fabric located behind the retaining wall with drainpipe day lighting to
a proper outlet or weep holes placed through the base of the wall, however:
a.   A synthetic material designed for the application may be used in lieu of
the gravel;
b.   If the engineering can substantiate proper filtering between the retained
soils and the drain rock, then the filter fabric may be omitted; and
c.   If the retaining wall is designed to withstand hydrostatic pressures or
the retained soils or backfill is free draining as substantiated through
appropriate testing, then drainage material may be omitted from the design;
8.   The design engineer's acknowledgment of the soil strength parameters used
in the design and the engineer's acceptance of the site for use of the
retaining wall and if a separate geotechnical report was prepared and used by
the design engineer, the geotechnical report shall be submitted, substantiating
the values used for the materials strength analysis; and
9.   An inspection frequency schedule.
H.   Preconstruction Meeting: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
construction of any approved retaining wall, a preconstruction meeting shall be
held as directed by the building official. The meeting shall include the city's
reviewing engineer, the building official or a member from the community
development department, the design engineer, and the project manager or
property owner.
I.   Inspections And Final Report: The design engineer shall make all
inspections needed for final approval and acceptance of the retaining wall when
construction is complete. A final report from the engineer shall state that the
retaining wall was built according to the submitted design. The report shall
include details of the inspections of the wall in accordance with the
inspection frequency schedule. All pertinent compaction testing shall also be
included with the final report.
J.   Maintenance: All retaining walls must be maintained in a structurally safe
and sound condition and in good repair. (Ord. 937, 4-20-2010; amd. Ord. 1431,
5-5-2020)
9-27-090: FLAG LOTS:
The primary purpose of this section is to outline the regulations that a flag
lot must adhere to:
A.   Factors: When property is subdivided, flag lots shall only be allowed
under the following circumstances:
1.   When development of the property on a private lane utilizing existing
zoning and subdivision regulations is not possible;
2.   As a lot split or within subdivisions of fewer than ten (10) lots;
3.   Where creation of a flag lot does not foreclose the possibility of future
development of other large interior parcels that would be developable if a
street were extended to them subject to the street connection requirements
found within section
17-5-030(A); and
4.   The flag lot does not have frontage on a classified street as defined by
and illustrated in the Draper City Master Transportation Plan.
B.   Development Standards: When flag lots are permitted, they shall be subject
to the following conditions:
1.   A flag lot as defined in section
9-3-040 shall be comprised of a narrow staff portion that is contiguous with a
wide flag portion.
2.   The staff portion of the lot shall front on and be contiguous to a local
street, whether public or private.
3.   Two (2) flag lots with contiguous staffs are prohibited.
4.   The minimum width of the staff portion at any point shall be twenty feet
(20') of paved access width. Greater staff width may be required by the fire
marshal based on the access width requirements of the International Fire Code
(IFC).
5.   The maximum length of the staff shall be five hundred feet (500') as
measured from the street right of way line to the beginning of the flag portion
of the lot. The flag portion of the lot shall begin at the property line or
line segments which define the minimum front yard depth per the minimum listed
setbacks for main buildings.
6.   The driveway access within the staff shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete to a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Design of the driveway shall
provide a manner for controlling drainage water acceptable to the city
engineer. The load bearing capacity of the driveway may be required to be
designed to support the weight of fire and emergency vehicles as required by
the fire marshal and city engineer.
7.   The maximum grade of the staff shall not exceed ten percent (10%) except
in the Hillside Sensitive Lands Overlay Zone where the maximum grade shall not
exceed twelve percent (12%).
8.   For lots where the staff portion is over one hundred fifty feet (150') in
length, sufficient turnaround space for emergency vehicles shall be provided
and an easement for access by emergency vehicles will be required. The fire
marshal shall review and approve the design and location.
9.   No building or structure shall be located within the staff portion of a
flag lot.
10.   The size of the flag portion of the lot shall conform to the minimum lot
size requirement of the zone in which the lot is located, but in no case be
less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. The staff portion of the lot
shall not be included in this minimum lot size calculation.
11.   The front yard of a flag lot shall be on the side of the flag portion
which connects to the staff and which is most closely parallel to the street
the staff connects to. Setbacks for all main buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from all property lines for all flag lots less than or
equal to twenty thousand square feet (20,000 ft²) in size, and thirty feet
(30') for all flag lots greater than twenty thousand square feet (20,000 ft²
12.   All accessory buildings and structures shall follow the regulations
contained in section
9-10-040 except that accessory buildings and structures over two hundred square
feet (200 ft²) in size can be built no closer than fifteen feet (15') to a
neighboring property line.
13.   Fencing and landscaping shall comply with the limitations related to view
obstructions listed in section
9-27-080. Fencing along or around the staff portion shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height when abutting the front yard of an adjacent lot or parcel.
14.   Fire hydrants shall be provided to serve the flag lot as required by the
International Fire Code. Any fire hydrants located in the public rights of way
shall be dedicated to the water provider for access to and maintenance of the
hydrant.
15.   The maximum height of main buildings on flag lots is limited to two (2)
stories and a maximum of thirty feet (30').
16.   Total lot coverage of flag lots is limited to no more than thirty five
percent (35%) of the area contained within the flag portion of the lot.
17.   Clear address signage must be installed and maintained at the street.
18.   The developer shall construct frontage improvements in accordance with
the requirements set forth in section
9-27-100 of this chapter and subsection
17-5-060B of this code.
   FIGURE 9-27-090-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4987.png]
(Ord. 998 , 2-7-2012; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1456, 10-6-2020)
9-27-100: FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS:
Planned street improvements as shown on the city's master traffic and
transportation plan, including swales, curb, gutter, sidewalk, paved street,
turnabout space, and fire hydrants shall be installed on all public street
frontages as shown on such plan and in conformance with city construction
standards as condition of issuing a building permit for new development or
remodeling of a structure that exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure's
value, when such improvements do not exist or are not financed for
construction.
A.   Use Changes: Use changes from lesser to greater intensity shall require
the installation of frontage improvements consistent with the intended use as
reasonably determined by the planning commission.
B.   Extent Of Improvements: When the size of a lot or parcel exceeds minimum
zone requirements, the planning commission may determine the extent of the
required improvements if the frontage adjoining a public street is, in its
judgment, excessive based on cost calculations reviewed by the city engineer.
However, frontage improvements shall be provided for no less than the minimum
lot width required by the zone in which the lot or parcel is located.
C.   Dedication And Construction Of Improvements: When widening of a public
street is planned, as shown on the city's master traffic and transportation
plan, street right of way and frontage improvements associated with proposed
development shall be dedicated to the public and improved without cost to the
city to the extent the development creates a demand for such improvements as
determined by the planning commission after receiving a recommendation from the
city engineer.
D.   Appeals: If a street dedication and improvement requirement is alleged to
not be proportional to the demand created by new development, such requirement
may be appealed pursuant to section
2-4-060 of this code. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-110: FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS; METHODS OF PROVIDING:
In lieu of requiring full frontage or right of way improvements, including,
without limitation, curb and gutter, parking strips and associated landscaping,
sidewalk, and paved street improvements, the city may authorize a developer to
satisfy street frontage improvement obligations in one of the following ways:
A.   Install Improvements: Install a fair share of improvements according to
the city engineer's calculations, of the developer's obligation applied to one
or more of the full frontage improvements that extend beyond the developer's
property to complete a tie-in or to a logical terminus.
B.   Form An Assessment Area: Form an assessment area, pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated, to complete the developer's fair share of improvements and
additional improvements to benefit the neighborhood.
C.   Pay Assessment: Place funds in an escrow account equal to the estimated
cost, as determined by the city engineer's calculations, and as approved by the
city council, of the developer's obligation for frontage improvements. Such
funds shall go to the installation of street and frontage improvements in
projects determined by the city according to its discretion of priority.
Placement of the funds into an escrow account shall not be construed to imply
or guarantee to the developer a specific time when improvements will be
installed on the frontage or right of way with funds from a city sponsored
improvement project. However, such escrow shall exempt the developer from
participating in a special improvement district formed by the city for the same
improvements. Any interest which may accrue on escrowed funds shall be
available to the city for use in the improvement project. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-
2015)
9-27-120: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Method Of Measurement: Except as provided elsewhere in this title, height
shall be measured as follows:
1.   Fences, walls, and hedges shall be measured from the average finished
grade of the fence, wall, or hedge line.
2.   Where there is a difference in the grade of the properties on either side
of a fence or wall located on the boundary line of a lot or parcel, the height
of a fence or wall shall be measured from the upper grade of the adjoining
properties wherein the measured height may equal six feet (6') at the upper
grade.
3.   Measurement of height of an accessory building shall be as outlined in
subsection
9-10-040A of this title.
B.   Additional Height Allowed: The provisions of this title shall not apply to
restrict the height of integral architectural features that are not used for
human occupancy, including but not limited to spires, towers, belfries,
cupolas, domes, monuments, chimneys, water tanks, elevator bulkheads, or
properly screened mechanical appurtenances located on the roof of a building.
In the TC zone additional height may be approved by the planning commission per
the standards of subsection
9-11-090(D)(2)(a). No additional height is allowed for buildings in the CN
zone. In all other commercial zones the zoning administrator may approve
additional height for integral architectural features of buildings in
compliance with the following standards:
1.   The overall proposed height of the architectural feature shall not exceed
fourteen feet (14') above the applicable building height limitations of the
zone.
2.   The architectural feature shall not create a detrimental impact to public
health, safety, or general welfare.
3.   The overall area of the architectural feature may not exceed ten-percent
(10%) of the gross floor area of the uppermost story of the building.
4.   The architectural feature shall not create additional habitable area or
usable building floor space.
5.   The overall building design shall include one or more of the following:
a.   Architectural details that emphasize the pedestrian level of the building,
including but not limited to, a cordon or belt course, sign band, awnings or
porticos, a change in building materials, or a change in window shapes;
b.   Architectural detailing of the façade that includes a projecting cornice
at the roofline and cordons or belt courses between floors, or accentuated
building façade zones, as fitting to the architectural style of the building;
or
c.   Other architectural features at the roof level that create a distinctive
form or skyline, including, but not limited to, rooftop gardens, viewing
platforms, shading or daylighting structures, renewable energy systems, and
other similar features.
6.   For a church, place of worship, or public building only the standards
listed in
9-27-120(B)(2) and
9-27-120(B)(4) of this subsection shall apply to integral architectural
features that are not used for human occupancy.
C.   Minimum Height Of Main Buildings: No dwelling shall be erected to a height
less than one story above grade, except that the planning commission may
authorize dwellings designed to be completed with earth mounds when all
applicable building and safety code regulations are met.
D.   In zones where the maximum building height is less than thirty-five feet
(35') a permitted Municipal Use, Franchise Municipal Use, Government Service,
and Operations Center may be erected up to thirty-five feet (35') in height if
the building is set back from each property line an additional one foot (1')
for each additional one foot (1') of building height above the standard height
limit for the zone. Additional height of integral architectural features
subject to the provisions of
9-27-120(B) shall not be included in the additional setback calculation. (Ord.
1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022)
9-27-130: LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS:
Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than eighteen feet (18') from a
property line to which the pump island is perpendicular and twelve feet (12')
from a property line to which the pump island is parallel, and not less than
twenty feet (20') from any residential or agricultural zone boundary line.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-140: LOTS AND YARDS:
A.   Every Building On Legally Created Lot: Every building shall be located and
maintained on a legally created lot or parcel as defined in this title, unless
such lot or parcel is legally nonconforming as set forth in chapter 6 of this
title. Not more than one single-family residence or commercial structure shall
occupy any one lot or parcel except as authorized pursuant to the provisions of
this title.
B.   Sale Or Lease Of Required Land: No land needed to meet the size, width,
yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this title shall be
sold, leased, or otherwise transferred away so as to create or increase the
nonconformity of a lot, building, or site development.
C.   Substandard Lots: No lot or parcel having less than the minimum width and
area required by the zone where it is located may be divided from a larger
parcel of land, whether by subdivision or metes and bounds, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of building or development as a lot except as
permitted by this section or by the appeals and variance hearing officer
pursuant to the requirements of this title.
1.   If a portion of a lot or parcel of land which meets minimum lot area
requirements is acquired for public use by condemnation or purchase, and such
acquisition reduces the minimum area required, the remainder of such lot or
parcel shall nevertheless be considered as having the required minimum lot area
if all of the following conditions are met:
a.   Such lot or parcel contains a rectangular space of at least thirty by
forty feet (30 x 40') exclusive of applicable front and side yard requirements,
and exclusive of one-half (1/2) of the applicable rear yard requirements, and
such rectangular space is usable for a principal use or structure.
b.   The remainder of such lot or parcel of land has an area of at least one-
half (1/2) of the required lot area of the zone in which it is located.
c.   The remainder of such lot or parcel of land has access to a public street
with a width of not less than twenty feet (20').
d.   The acquisition or dedication of land for public use is not connected with
an application filed under Title 9 or Title 17 of this code.
D.   Adjacent Lots When Used As One Building Lot: When a common side lot line
separating two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels is covered or proposed to
be covered by a building, such lots shall constitute a single building site and
the setback requirements of this title shall not apply to such common lot or
parcel line if a document is recorded indicating the owner's intent to use the
combined lot or parcel as a single development site. The setback requirements
of this title shall apply only to the exterior side lot lines of the contiguous
lots or parcels so joined. Final occupancy of a building or dwelling on
adjacent residential lots or parcels to be developed as a single lot or parcel
shall be subject to recording with the Salt Lake County recorder a lot line
adjustment by application to the city, to combine the lots or parcels into a
single lot or parcel.
E.   Double Frontage Lots: Lots having frontage on two (2) or more streets
shall be prohibited, except for corner lots and double frontage lots in
subdivisions which back onto streets shown on the city's master traffic and
transportation plan. Such double frontage lots shall be accessed only from an
internal subdivision street. Frontage on lots having a front lot line on more
than one street, shall be measured on one street only.
F.   Setback; Decks And Patios: Any part of a deck or patio covered with a roof
or enclosed on two (2) or more sides, or which exceeds three feet (3') in
height at any point above finished, shall conform to applicable yard setback
requirements.
G.   Setback Measurement: The depth of a required yard abutting a street shall
be measured from the lot line, except as set forth below:
1.   Minimum Front Yard Requirement For New Construction: In blocks where more
than fifty percent (50%) of the buildable lots or parcels have main buildings
which do not meet the current front yard setbacks of this title, the minimum
front yard requirement for new construction shall be equal to the average
existing front yard size on the block. In no case shall a front yard of more
than thirty feet (30') be required.
2.   Yard Abutting Public Street: Whenever a front, side, or rear yard is
required for a building on a lot or parcel abutting a public street proposed to
be constructed or widened as shown on the city's master traffic and
transportation plan, the depth of such yard shall be measured from a line which
is one-half (1/2) of the proposed right of way width from the centerline of the
street to be constructed or widened, or from the current lot line, whichever is
greater.
3.   Minor Collector Additional Setback: For any main building on a lot or
parcel, the minimum front yard, side yard or rear yard setback from any
existing or proposed minor collector street rights of way as shown on the most
recently amended version of the city's official street map, except those in
subsection G4 of this section, shall be an additional ten feet (10');
4.   Exceptions To Minor Collector Setbacks: Exceptions, for which the standard
front, rear and side yard setbacks shall apply:
125 East between 13800 South and the Draper Irrigation Canal;
150 East north of 12300 South;
12150 South between State Street and 300 East;
12200 South between Draper Parkway and 2000 East;
12450 South between Minuteman Drive and 300 East;
13400 South between 300 East and Fort Street;
14000 South between Minuteman Drive and 125 East;
Stokes Avenue;
Golden Pheasant Drive;
Willow Springs Lane/Walden Lane between 300 East and 1300 East.
5.   Private Right Of Way Or Access Easement: For a lot on a private right of
way or encompassing an access easement for another lot or parcel, the setback
shall be the distance on a lot between a building and the private right of way
line or access easement boundary closest to the building.
H.   Yard Reduction; Lots In Separate Ownership: The requirements of this
chapter as to minimum lot area or lot width shall not be construed to prevent
the use of any lot or parcel for a single- family dwelling if such lot or
parcel was a legally created lot or parcel when it became nonconforming as to
area or width.
I.   Yards To Be Unobstructed; Exceptions: Every part of a required yard shall
be open to the sky, unobstructed except for:
1.   Accessory buildings and structures located in a rear or side yard that
comply with the accessory building setbacks for the zone;
2.   The ordinary projections of window bays, roof overhangs, skylights, sills,
belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues and other ornamental features, which
project into a required yard not more than two and one-half feet (21/2');
3.   Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes and fire tower balconies or
vestibules that project into a required yard not more than five feet (5');
4.   Any part of an uncovered deck, patio, or walkout porch less than three
feet (3') in height, excluding nonopaque railings; or
5.   Uncovered exterior landings, balconies, and stairways that comply with
fire and building code requirements and all the following:
a.   Are located in a rear or side yard;
b.   Are no more than thirty two (32) square feet in size;
c.   Connect to and provide for ingress to and egress from a dwelling; and
d.   Project into a required yard not more than five feet (5').
J.   Public Utility Easements Within Setbacks: Regardless of minimum setback
allowances, no main building, accessory building requiring a building permit,
deck, swimming pool, building projection, retaining wall, or other permanent
obstruction shall be constructed within a public utility easement, typically
located along the front, side and/or rear property lines of a lot or parcel,
without the prior written permission of all affected public and private utility
managers or shall comply with section 9-27-070 of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001; amd. Ord. 815, 4-1-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1479,
2-16-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1624, 9-17-2024)
9-27-150: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
A.   Maximum Number Of Accessing Units: In any residential subdivision, a
private right-of-way shall provide access for no more than twenty (20) single-
family or two-family residential dwellings. Private rights-of-way for for
townhome units and multiple-family dwelling developments, shall be approved
consistent with chapter 32 of this title.
B.   Width And Cross Section: The minimum right-of-way width and cross section
design of a private right-of-way shall be:
1.   Twenty four feet (24') wide for two (2) to five (5) single-family or two-
family residential dwellings;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4977.png]
2.   Thirty one feet (31') wide for six (6) to ten (10) single-family or two-
family residential dwellings; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4979.png]
3.   Thirty seven feet (37') wide for eleven (11) to twenty (20) single- family
or two-family residential dwellings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4981.png]
C.   Compliance With Standards And Specifications: Each private roadway
structural pavement section shall be constructed in compliance with the Draper
City development standards and technical specifications and a geotechnical
analysis of the load bearing capacity of the soils under the proposed roadway.
All private right of way improvements shall be inspected for compliance with
the approved plans prior to any applicant applying for a building permit.
D.   Underground Utilities To Be Privately Owned And Maintained: Water and
stormwater utilities underneath a private right of way shall be deemed private
utilities for ownership and maintenance purposes. Utilities under a private
right of way which are provided by special service districts or private
companies are subject to their rules and regulations.
E.   Fire Hydrants And Turnaround: Each private right of way more than one
hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall have fire hydrants and a turnaround
or a hammerhead constructed to standards in the adopted fire code.
F.   On Street Parking: On street parking shall be prohibited on a private
right of way cross section less than twenty six feet (26') wide. Parallel
parking may be allowed on one side of a private right of way if the cross
section of asphalt is at least twenty six feet (26') wide. Parallel parking may
be allowed on both sides of a private right of way if the cross section of
asphalt is at least thirty two feet (32') wide. Enforcement of on street
parking restrictions shall be the responsibility of the owners of the private
right of way.
G.   Ownership: Each private right of way shall be established in one of the
following ways:
1.   As an easement acceptable to the Draper City attorney and recorded with
the county recorder.
2.   As a separate piece of property owned in common by all property owners who
access the road.
H.   Maintenance: An applicant proposing a subdivision with access from a
private right of way shall submit a document detailing the method for
maintaining the private right of way, private utilities and any common areas,
and estimating the annual expenses therefor. The document shall be in a form
acceptable to the Draper City attorney and shall be recorded in the county
recorder's office.
I.   Setbacks: Minimum setback requirements shall apply to all buildings
fronting, siding or rearing on any private right of way and shall be measured
from the boundary of the private right of way nearest the building and its
extension through the applicable lot. This requirement shall not apply to lots
abutting but not accessing the private right of way.
J.   Expansion Of Existing Subdivisions: Residential subdivisions approved
prior to 2010 and which are accessed by a private right of way may add more
residential units consistent with subsection B of this section. Deviations from
adherence to the curb, gutter and sidewalk requirements in subsection B of this
section in such existing subdivisions may be granted by the planning commission
if:
1.   The existing subdivision has six (6) or more units; and
2.   The increase in the number of units does not exceed twenty five percent
(25%) of the existing single-family homes within the subdivision.
K.   Council's Discretion To Require A Public Street: The establishment of a
private right of way shall be evaluated by the city engineer and may, at the
discretion of the city council, be required to be dedicated as a public street
constructed to city street standards to make logical street connections or to
provide access to abutting properties that may otherwise have no access or
limited access to the detriment of the property.
L.   Change Of Private Right Of Way To Public Ownership: A private right of way
may be considered for a change to public ownership if:
1.   There is a compelling public interest;
2.   The right of way owners sign a petition so requesting; and
3.   The right of way satisfies the city's public street width, cross section,
and construction standards. (Ord. 954, 12-7-2010; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
9-27-160: DRIVEWAY SLOPE LIMITS; FRONT SETBACK MAXIMUM RISE:
A.   Driveways: No driveway shall exceed a slope of ten percent (10%), except
in the Hillside Sensitive Lands Overlay Zone where the maximum grade shall not
exceed twelve percent (12%). When a driveway slopes downward from a street, the
driveway shall be designed to prohibit surface water drainage from entering a
building.
B.   Front Setback Maximum Rise:
1.   If fill is added to a lot, a maximum rise of two feet (2') is allowable
within the front setback area excluding any portion required for parking lot
screening. Maximum rise is reset at each retaining wall.
2.   Maximum rise limitation does not apply to Hillside Sensitive Lands Overlay
Zone. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1431, 5-5-2020)
9-27-170: STORAGE OF TRASH AND DEBRIS PROHIBITED:
No yard or other open space shall be used for the accumulation of trash,
debris, or abandoned equipment and no land shall be used for such purposes,
except as authorized by and in compliance with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-27-180: SWIMMING POOLS:
A.   Outdoor Pools:
1.   Private residential swimming pools, residential swimming pools, or public
swimming pools (collectively "pools") of permanent construction not enclosed
within a building shall comply with section 305 Barrier Requirements and
section 321 Lighting Requirements of the International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code (ICC-ISPSC) as currently adopted by the State of Utah.
2.   Pools accessory to multi-family dwellings and public swimming pools shall
submit evidence of plan approval from the respective health department at the
time of the building permit.
B.   Setbacks and Location:
1.   Pools not enclosed within a building shall be set back from property lines
a minimum of five feet (5').
2.   Pools which are accessory to a dwelling unit shall not be located within
the front yard setback. Exceptions for Corner lots are permitted as described
in
9-27-180(C) below.
3.   Pools and pool equipment shall not be located within a clear view area as
described in section
9-27-080 of this chapter or a public utility easement located along the side or
rear property lines without prior written permission of all affected utility
companies or in accordance with section
9-27-070 of this chapter.
C.   Corner Lots:
1.   For purposes of locating pools on corner lots, each front yard shall be
designated as either the primary front yard or a secondary front yard. The
primary front yard shall be the front yard most parallel with the side of the
structure containing the primary entrance.
2.   A pool may be located within a secondary front yard setback on a corner
lot as designated in
9-27-180(C)(1) above. (Ord. 988, 11-15-2011; amd. Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
9-27-190: IMPOUND LOTS:
All impound lots are required to enclose the storage portion of the lot with an
eight foot (8') masonry wall and have a site obscuring security gate at its
entrance. No long term storage of salvaged, dismantled or inoperable vehicles
is allowed on the site. The required parking stalls shall be paved and striped
to meet zoning and engineering regulations. If a dumpster is used, it shall be
located within the walled area. (Ord. 650, 9-3-2005)
9-27-200: GATING:
A.   Gates Across Public Streets: Gates shall not be permitted across any
public street.
B.   Single Site Commercial Developments: A commercial use located on a single
lot or parcel in a nonresidential zone may be permitted to include gates when
approved by the planning commission as a part of a site plan or site plan
amendment, as applicable, for the development pursuant to section
9-5-090 of this title. In addition to the site plan approval standards and
criteria, an applicant desiring to include a gate as part of a single site
commercial development shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning
commission that the primary purpose of the gate is to provide safety and
security for the property located within the gated area by regulating access
for motor vehicles to the area. Any gate approved under this subsection should
be equipped and maintained with an operating device as approved and provided
for under subsection D3 of this section to ensure safety.
C.   Subdivisions: Subdivisions, whether commercial or residential, may be
permitted to include gates across private streets when approved as a
conditional use in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 9-5-080
of this title regarding conditional use permits, and when the applicant can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that:
1.   The gates will not block or impede vehicular or pedestrian transportation
on any public street inside or outside of the subdivision. Gates shall not be
permitted across any public street;
2.   Pedestrian access into the subdivision will not be impeded;
3.   No constructed or city desired trail or public transportation feature will
be affected by the installation of gates;
4.   The implementation of gates for the development does not adversely affect
or inhibit the connectivity of the city's public transportation system;
5.   The gating of the development will not impose added pressure upon any
right of way identified within the Draper City master transportation plan
beyond that which would be reasonably anticipated if the development was not
gated.
6.   A homeowners' association adequately established to address the fiscal
needs of operation and maintenance of the development's gates and streets, is
or will be formed that will be responsible for any liability, maintenance,
repairs, and all other responsibility associated with the implementation of the
gates for the duration of time that the gates are present. Should the
homeowners' association be found, at any point in time, to be unable,
unwilling, or derelict in the operation and/or maintenance of the streets or
gates of the development, the gates shall be removed or left in an open
position, as determined by the planning commission through the revocation of
any and all conditional use permit(s) pertaining to the gates; and
7.   All gate development standards, as outlined in subsection D or E, and F of
this section, can and will be met.
D.   Subdivision Gate Development Standards: All subdivisions which desire to
include gated access points shall meet all of the following development
standards:
1.   All secondary subdivision entrances proposed to be gated shall be required
to conform to the same standards as the primary entrance(s).
2.   All gates which cross lanes of traffic entering the subdivision shall
swing toward the interior of the subdivision.
3.   All gates shall be equipped with a siren operated sensor, optical
emergency strobe system, or other system that is approved by and at the choice
of the fire department and the Draper City police department to allow access
and egress to the subdivision for emergency personnel without causing a delay
in response time. Any such system which requires "line of sight" operation
shall be installed in such a location and manner as approved by the fire
department and the Draper City police department. All such access and egress
points shall have a universal lock box installed as a backup mechanism in place
which can be operated by one person and is acceptable to and chosen by the fire
department and the Draper City police department for the event of failure of
the primary system.
4.   All gated access/egress points shall provide a minimum travel lane width
of fifteen feet (15') for each lane. Such lane width shall be provided for not
less than sixty feet (60') on either side of the gate.
5.   Gates shall not be located closer than fifty feet (50') from the edge of
any adjoining right of way.
6.   All gated access points shall provide a secondary "pull out" lane at each
entrance with a call box mechanism that allows visitors to contact residents of
the development for access without causing vehicle stacking at the entrance or
onto adjoining street(s). An example is shown in
figure 9-27-200-1 of this section. Units within the development shall be
equipped with a call box device which allows residents/tenants to open the
entrance gate(s) without leaving the unit.
7.   Gating of residential developments shall implement a wireless access
system for residents of the development to prevent vehicular stacking at
entrance points.
8.   Locking devices used with the gate(s) shall be reviewed and approved by
the fire department and the Draper City police department.
9.   All streets within the gated development shall meet the minimum width
requirements of the fire department and the Draper City engineering department
to allow for safe maneuverability of emergency apparatuses with on street
parking. Street widths may be reduced through the approval of the city council
following recommendation from at least the planning commission, fire department
and the Draper City engineering department upon satisfaction of the same that
on street parking will be reduced or eliminated within the development. No on
street parking shall be allowed within one hundred fifty feet (150') of gated
development access and/or egress points.
10.   The developer shall provide and ensure maintenance for lighting at all
gated entrances, in addition to that required for the development, in order to
ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety.
11.   No lot or unit driveway shall be allowed within one hundred feet (100')
of any gated point of access or egress for the development.
12.   In the event a gate is inoperable or in need of repair, the gate shall
remain in an open position until such time that adequate repairs can be made.
The Fire Department and/or Draper City Chief of Police shall have the right at
any time to require gate(s) remain in an open position if they have reason to
believe the gate(s) are not functioning properly or that the gates provide a
potential hindrance to response times beyond that accepted at the time of
approval for the gate(s).
FIGURE 9-27-200-1
GATED ENTRANCE EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4118.jpg]
 
13.   A single master water meter shall be placed on the trunk line(s)
providing culinary water service to the entire development with the homeowners'
association being the responsible entity billed for all water consumption. The
master meter shall be placed outside of the gates at or near the primary
entrance to the development, as determined by the Draper City Engineering and
Public Works Departments. The homeowners' association shall be liable for
making payments to the City for culinary water service for the development. If
the homeowners' association is unable or does not make the payments for the
culinary water service, the City shall shut off service to the development at
the master meter.
E.   Emergency Access Gate Standards: Gates at emergency access entrances shall
comply with the following standards:
1.   All roadways at gated emergency access entrances shall have a minimum
unobstructed width of twenty feet (20') that shall extend at least thirty feet
(30') on either side of the gate. All other portions of the roadways shall
comply with this Code.
2.   Gates shall be designed so that they do not cross into the public right-
of-way or adjacent traffic lanes outside the subdivision.
3.   Hinged gates shall swing toward the interior of the benefited subdivision.
If more than one subdivision is benefitted by a gate, then Draper City shall
have the authority to determine the direction of the gate's swing.
4.   Locking devices used with emergency access gates shall be reviewed and
approved by the Draper City Fire and Police Departments.
5.   Electric gates must operate in a fail-safe mode so that the gates unlock
and can be operated manually when electrical service is interrupted. Gates
shall be constructed to allow manual operation by one person.
6.   All gates shall be equipped with a siren operated sensor, optical
emergency strobe system, or other system that is approved by, and at the choice
of, the Draper City Fire and Police Departments to allow access and egress to
the subdivision for emergency personnel without causing a delay in response
time. Any such system which requires "line of sight" operation shall be
installed in such a location and manner as approved by the Draper City Fire and
Police Departments. All such access and egress points shall have a universal
lock box installed as a backup mechanism in place which can be operated by one
person and is acceptable to and chosen by the Draper City Fire and Police
Departments for the event of failure of the primary system.
7.   Pedestrian ingress/egress shall not be impeded and pedestrian access shall
be maintained through the gated area to meet the requirements of the Building
Code.
8.   Lighting, as determined by Draper City, shall be required at all gated
emergency access entrances for safety.
9.   The homeowners' association(s) and/or the developer in control of the
subdivision(s) benefitted by the emergency access gate (the "responsible
party") shall be required to install and maintain all emergency access gate
facilities in a working and operable condition. The responsible party shall
also be required to provide and ensure the maintenance of electricity and
lighting at all gated emergency access entrances. In the event an emergency
access gate becomes inoperable, the responsible party shall be required to
restore the gate to an operable condition acceptable to the Draper City Fire
and Police Departments within twenty (20) days from the date of discovery of
the gate's inoperability. A responsible party shall be subject to a fine as
outlined in the consolidated fee schedule for each day an emergency access gate
remains inoperable beyond the twenty-day grace period.
10.   In the event a gate is inoperable or in need of repair, the gate shall
remain in an open position until such time that adequate repairs can be made.
The Draper City Fire and Police Departments shall have the right at any time to
require a gate to remain in an open position if they have reason to believe the
gate is not functioning properly or that the gate provides a potential
hindrance to response times beyond that accepted at the time of approval of the
gate.
F.    Fire Apparatus Access Road Gate Standards: In addition to the applicable
standards of subsection D or E above, gates securing a fire apparatus access
road shall also comply with all of the following criteria:
1.   Where a single gate is provided, the gate width shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet. Where a fire apparatus road consists of a divided roadway,
the gate width shall be not less than twelve (12) feet.
2.   Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.
3.   Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by
one person.
4.   Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times
and replaced or repaired when defective.
5.   Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire
department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices must be
approved by the fire marshal.
6.   Methods of locking shall be submitted for approval by the fire marshal.
7.   Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance
with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) standard 325.
8.   Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and
installed to comply with the requirements of American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) specification F2200. (Ord. 722, 12-12-2006; amd. Ord. 1349, 9-
4-2018; Ord. 1479, 2-16-2021; Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021)
9-27-210: GENERAL PRESCHOOLS AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS IN RESIDENTIAL AND
AGRICULTURAL ZONES:
Any general preschool or private school that wishes to locate in a residential
or agricultural zone must meet all of the following requirements in order to
qualify for a conditional use permit:
A.   Zoning:
1.   If at any time the school's business license lapses for a period longer
than one month then the site shall not be used for any nonresidential use
without the appropriate zoning and land use map amendment processes being
followed.
B.   Lot Size Ratios:
1.   The minimum lot size to establish a general preschool or private school
shall be two (2) acres.
2.   Preschools in residential zones that existed prior to the enactment of
this subsection may use the building occupancy code to determine capacity.
C.   Parking and Queuing:
1.   Parking standards shall conform to chapter 25, "Parking", of this title.
2.   Adequate off street queuing areas which are completely contained on site
for student pick up and drop off are required. No off site queuing is
permitted. The Planning Commission shall determine the adequacy of queuing
areas based on the size, enrollment, and class hours of the proposed preschool
or school.
3.   As a submittal requirement for the conditional use permit, the applicant
shall submit a professionally prepared, scaled drawing which illustrates the
building location, access locations, driveway location, and pick up and drop
off areas.
D.   Setbacks:
1.   Each main building shall conform to the following setbacks:
a.   Front yard: Minimum of thirty feet (30').
b.   Side yard: Minimum of sixty feet (60').
c.   Rear yard: Minimum of sixty feet (60').
2.   Outdoor play areas shall be set back from the property lines by at least
fifteen feet (15') of substantial landscaping, solid fencing, and berming where
feasible.
E.   Fencing:
1.   Each school shall have a solid masonry enclosure around any trash
receptacle. The trash receptacle shall be totally screened from any neighboring
property owners or from the street, and shall contain a solid screened (no
chainlink with slats) lockable gate.
2.   Each school shall have a rear and side fence of at least six feet (6') in
height that is constructed of either solid masonry, vinyl, or wood in
accordance with subsection
9-23-110F of this title.
3.   Additionally, each play area shall be enclosed by a fence of at least
three feet (3') in height that contains self-closing and self-latching gates.
4.   No fence is required for the front yard.
F.   Street Classification:
1.   General preschools and private schools located in residential and
agricultural zones shall only be located on and have direct access from
arterial or major or minor collector streets. Such schools shall not be
permitted on local or private streets.
2.   Additionally, such schools may only be located on streets which conform
with objectives of the Draper City master transportation plan regarding level
of service C and D standards, as determined through engineering and planning
department reviews.
G.   Landscaping And Buffering:
1.   Landscaping shall conform to chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening", of
this title.
2.   For the purpose of calculating the required land use buffer, a private
school or general preschool shall be considered to have a land use intensity
factor of five (5).
3.   Landscaping must be residential in nature and should look similar to
properties adjacent to the site and located along the road to which the school
faces.
4.   Any existing trees with a two inch (2") or larger caliper on the site
shall be preserved in order to maintain the character of the neighborhood.
Destruction or removal of such trees shall require replacement on a caliper for
caliper basis.
5.   Where deemed appropriate to mitigate negative impacts, additional
buffering over the minimum standard may be required, as determined by the
planning commission.
H.   Lighting:
1.   Lighting standards shall conform to chapter 20, "Outdoor Lighting", of
this title.
2.   Lighting must be residential in nature with minimal impact on adjoining
properties. All lights mounted on poles or attached to a building shall be
directed down perpendicular to the ground. The light source shall be shielded
so that it will not be visible from any adjacent property.
3.   All outdoor lighting is limited to a maximum height of eight feet (8').
I.   Building Standards:
1.   The building must have a residential look with roof pitch and building
materials comparable to the residential character of the adjoining
neighborhood. As a submittal requirement of the conditional use permit, the
applicant shall submit pictures of each residential home within four hundred
feet (400') of the property in order to determine compatible materiality and
building style.
2.   The maximum height of the building shall be the average of the building
heights of any single-family home located on the same street face within one
thousand feet (1,000') and any adjoining properties to the site in order to
ensure compatibility of scale with surrounding residences.
3.   Buildings on the lot shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) lot coverage.
(Ord. 994, 1-3-2012; amd. Ord. 1479, 2-16-2021)
9-27-220: CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS AND MODEL HOMES:
A.   Construction Trailers: Developments may have an on site construction
trailer, exclusive of those that come and go on a daily basis, subject to the
following requirements:
1.   Use And Placement: Construction trailers may be used as a means to house
offices related to the construction and development activities on the site.
Construction trailers may also be used as space for the purpose of hiring
employees prior to the opening of the business.
a.   Duration:
(1)   Nonresidential Development:
(A)   A construction trailer may be placed on a site for nonresidential
development once a land disturbance permit has been issued and must be removed
from the development site prior to the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the last remaining unit/building.
(B)   A construction trailer for the purpose of infrastructure development may
be placed on a site for nonresidential development once a land disturbance
permit has been issued for that site. All trailers shall be removed from the
property prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
(2)   Residential Development: A construction trailer may be placed on a site
for residential development once a land disturbance permit has been issued and
must be removed from the site prior to the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the last remaining unit/building.
b.   Standards: Construction trailers must comply with all building, fire, and
other code requirements for installation, use, and removal. Any applicant
desiring to place a construction trailer shall apply for and be approved for
any and all permits required by the building and fire codes to install and
maintain the construction trailer prior to the trailer's installation on the
site.
2.   Residential Development: A construction trailer may only be located within
the residential phase or site in which the development activity is occurring.
No sales of lots, units, or homes shall be allowed from a construction trailer.
For the purposes of this section, construction trailers shall not include those
vehicles that come and go on a daily basis.
a.   Purposes: A construction trailer may be used as a means to house offices
related to:
(1)   Infrastructure development activities on the site;
(2)   Construction of a primary residential structure on a lot; or
(3)   Construction of a building to contain multiple residential units.
b.   Standards: A construction trailer may be placed on a site for the purpose
of constructing one or more primary residential structures subject to the
following:
(1)   Application: Prior to the placement of a construction trailer, a
construction trailer application and permit must be submitted to the city,
approved, and issued.
(2)   Placement: A construction trailer may not be placed within any public or
private right of way, any property identified to be set aside as open space or
common area, or on any property for which a valid certificate of occupancy has
been issued.
(3)   Association: An application for placement of a construction trailer shall
include a site plan or development plan showing the proposed location for the
trailer and the properties for which that construction trailer is to be
associated.
(4)   Removal: Construction trailers shall be removed prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy for the property on which they are located.
B.   Model Homes: A model home shall be allowed for use as a sales facility
only. For the purpose of this subsection, a unit within a multi-family
residential building used for the same purposes identified herein shall be
considered a model home. Sales of properties or units may not be conducted or
facilitated from any trailer, nonpermanent structure, or permanent structure
not permitted as a model home. The following standards shall apply to all model
homes:
1.   Location: Model homes are only allowed within city approved and recorded
residential developments and must be located on a platted lot or site within
the development.
2.   Duration: Model homes may be operated until a building permit is issued
for the last remaining lot within the development.
3.   Advertising: Model homes may not be used to advertise properties or units
located in another subdivision or property located outside of the development
site.
4.   Construction Standards: Model homes must comply with all standards and
conditions of approval for the development, including building materials,
setbacks, and landscaping. They must comply with all applicable residential
dwelling construction standards before and after the discontinued use as a
sales office.
5.   Licensure And Permitting: Model homes shall not be constructed without the
application for, approval of, and issuance of a building permit. Requirements
above and beyond those normally associated with a residential structure may be
required by the building division for a model home. Model homes may not operate
as such without the application for, approval of, and issuance of a Draper City
business license for such at that location.
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-27-230: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY:
A.   Screening: All outdoor storage shall be in conjunction with and
subordinate to a legally established business and shall be allowed only after
approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. The following
screening regulations shall apply to open storage areas:
1.   An opaque fence shall be required to screen the view of all open storage
areas.
a.   For screening views from public and private streets the fence shall be
constructed of masonry, metal, or the same materials as the adjacent building.
b.   For screening views from neighboring properties along the side and rear
property lines, inclusive of a gate, the fencing may be constructed of the same
materials listed in subsection A(1)(a) of this section or chain-link with
privacy slats.
2.   Outdoor storage areas shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20')
to a residential use or zone.
3.   Fences used to screen open storage shall be ten feet (10') high unless a
lower height is approved by the planning commission as part of the conditional
use permit. In approving reduced fence height the planning commission may not
approve a fence lower than six feet (6') in height and must find that the
reduced height will not create additional impacts to surrounding properties.
4.   Materials may not be stored or stacked higher than the fence.
5.   The planning commission may condition or require that specific materials,
colors, or design elements to be used in the construction and installation of
the screening fence or wall, other than those proposed, upon finding that he
specific material, color, or design element will better mitigate existing or
potential impacts to surrounding properties.
B.   Outdoor Display Areas: All outdoor display areas shall be in conjunction
with and subordinate to a legally established commercial business in accordance
with the following regulations:
1.   All proposed outdoor display areas must be approved as part of a new or
amended site plans pursuant to section
9-5-090 of this title. Outdoor display areas may not be counted as or be part
of the landscaped area required by chapter 23 of this title.
2.   The outdoor display area shall be directly related to a business occupying
a permanent structure on the site.
3.   Displays and merchandise shall not block sidewalks, walkways, building
entrances, drive aisles, or clear view areas.
4.   The location of outdoor displays shall directly correlate with the
physical location of the business on the site, such as directly in front of
their business area, and the physical functionality of the outdoor display area
may not create impacts to other businesses on the site. (Ord. 957, 12-14-2010;
amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
9-27-240: OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF APIARIES:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish certain requirements
of sound beekeeping practice that are intended to avoid problems that may
otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas.
B.   Apiary Standards: It is unlawful to maintain apiaries in Draper City
unless the following standards are met:
1.   Hive(s) shall be placed on property so that the general flight pattern of
bees is in a direction that will deter bee contact with humans and domesticated
animals on adjacent property or areas of public access. When hive(s) are
located within twenty feet (20') of a property line or public right of way, a
five foot (5') high flyway barrier is required. When hive(s) are located within
five feet (5') of the property line, the opening of the hive shall not face the
property line. Hive(s) shall not be permitted in front yards. On lots that are
ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less, hive(s) shall not be permitted in
side yards.
2.   Hive(s) shall be supplied with adequate accessible fresh water
continuously between March 1 and October 31 of each year. The water shall be in
a location minimizing the nuisance created by bees seeking water on neighboring
property.
3.   A person shall not locate or allow hive(s) on property owned or occupied
by another person without first obtaining written permission from the owner or
occupant.
4.   Lots may contain one hive per four thousand (4,000) square feet, with the
number of hives rounded down to the nearest whole number. Regardless of lot
size, so long as all lots within a radius of at least two hundred feet (200')
from any hive, measured from any point on the front of the hive, remain
undeveloped, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies.
C.   Apiary Permitted: An apiary is permitted in all single-family residential
zoning districts subject to compliance with the Salt Lake City-County health
department, general sanitation regulations, section 4.12, or its successor
relating to honeybee management.
D.   Registration Of Beekeeper: Each beekeeper shall be registered with the
Utah department of agriculture and food. Hive(s) shall be operated and
maintained as provided in the Utah bee inspection act set forth in title 4,
chapter 11 of the Utah state code, as amended. Hive(s) on property not owned by
the beekeeper shall be conspicuously marked with the state registration number.
E.   Inspection: A designated city official shall have the right to inspect any
apiary for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section between eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. once annually upon prior
notice to the owner of the apiary property, and more often upon complaint
without prior notice. (Ord. 1184, 1-12-2016)
9-27-250: DEVIATIONS FOR GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS:
A.   The purpose of this section is to enable governmental agencies to build
public buildings suitable to the purposes for which the buildings are built
within reasonable budgetary restrictions in order to provide the best value for
taxpayer dollars.
B.   In addition to any exceptions to land use regulations or development
standards granted by state law to a county, municipality, school district,
charter school, special district, special service district, and political
subdivision of the state, a building owned or operated by a county, a
municipality, or a school district may deviate from height restrictions by up
to five feet (5') if:
1.   The building for the requested height deviation is setback an additional
twenty percent (20%) from the required setback in the zone; and
2.   The Zoning Administrator issues an administrative interpretation
consistent with
9-5-170 that the additional height serves a functional purpose for which the
building is being built. (Ord. 1639, 3-18-2025)
9-27-260: SEASONAL FARM STAND:
A.   Seasonal farm stands may be conducted for up to one hundred eighty (180)
days per year.
B.   Seasonal farm stand sales are limited to produce and products produced or
grown on the premises.
C.   Two (2) hard surfaced parking stalls shall be provided on-site for the use
of customers in accordance with chapter 9-25. The parking stalls provided for
the use of the customers of the seasonal farm stand may be located on an
existing driveway and in tandem with parking stalls designed to serve the
single-family dwelling.
D.   Temporary accessory structures related to the seasonal farm stand may be
erected subject to the following regulations:
1.   Shall be located on the host property;
2.   Shall not be located in a right-of way or vehicular access easement;
3.   May be located in the front yard; however, the temporary accessory
structure must be removed from the front yard if the seasonal farm stand ceases
all operations for a period of nine (9) months or longer;
4.   Shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines;
5.   Shall be located at least six feet (6') away from any building;
6.   Shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size;
7.   Shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height to highest point of the roof;
and
8.   Shall not create a visual obstruction within the triangular areas
described in 9-27-080 of this chapter, pertaining to street intersections and
driveways.
E.   Temporary Signage: Signage outlined in this section are allowed for
seasonal farm stands and do not require a sign permit or fee:
1.   Wall Signs:
a.   A maximum of one (1) sign shall be allowed on the accessory structure.
b.   The sign shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
c.   No part of the sign shall extend above a roofline.
d.   The sign shall not project from the building wall a distance greater than
twelve inches (12").
e.   The sign shall not be illuminated.
2.   One (1) A-frame signs when:
a.   Not taller than three feet (3') high;
b.   Not wider three feet (3');
c.   Displayed only during hours of operation of the seasonal farm stand;
d.   Not be placed within any right-of-way;
e.   Not be located on or over any sidewalk or pedestrian walkway or to
obstruct the view of vehicular traffic approaching, at, or leaving any
intersection or driveway; and
f.   Not be illuminated. (Ord. 1661, 7-1-2025)
CHAPTER 28
MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE
SECTION:
9-28-010: Master Planned Community Zone
9-28-020: Edelweiss Master Planned Community Zone
9-28-010: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE:
Each master planned community zone, or MPC zone, is intended to allow a master
planned, architecturally designed development where customized zoning
requirements apply in order to permit flexibility and initiative in a large
scale site development. The following requirements shall apply to the
establishment of any MPC zone:
A.   Minimum Size: Each MPC zone shall be at least fifty (50) acres in size.
B.   Open Space Required: A minimum of thirty percent (30%) open space shall be
provided to include natural open space, trails or parks.
C.   Petition: A petition shall be submitted for a text and zoning map
amendment as provided in section
9-5-060 of this title, including the following materials:
1.   The proposed zone name and location;
2.   A proposed development agreement;
3.   The proposed zone text including:
a.   Permitted, conditional, and accessory uses; and
b.   Proposed development standards providing:
(1)   Land use standards establishing mix of land use types, location, and
density;
(2)   Lot standards establishing requirements for lot area and dimensions;
(3)   Building setback standards for front, side and rear yards; and
(4)   Building regulations addressing building height, building orientation,
and architectural design guidelines; and
4.   A conceptual master plan showing:
a.   The location of proposed land uses and proposed residential densities;
b.   The location, arrangement and configuration of open space, parks and
trails; and
c.   The location and design of street infrastructure.
D.   Development Standards: The development standards may include development
regulations regarding processing of applications, common and private open space
guidelines, natural resource protections, grading, drainage and street
standards.
E.   Modification By City Council: In considering a petition for an MPC zone,
the proposed zone text and zoning map amendment may be modified by the city
council to meet the intent and requirements of this section and may include
regulations and standards other than those proposed by the petitioner.
F.   Development Agreement: An MPC zone shall only be established with the
concurrent approval of a development agreement.
G.   Findings Required For Approval: The proposed MPC text and zoning map
amendment and schematic development plan shall be approved only if the city
council makes the following findings:
1.   The zone is necessary to provide land use or design standards tailored to
a specific geographic area and development program that cannot otherwise be
provided through conventional zoning.
2.   The zone provides equal or greater compatibility with surrounding land
uses than would occur with conventional zoning.
3.   The zone provides equal or greater protection to sensitive lands than
would occur with conventional zoning.
4.   The zone avoids incompatible development on lands subject to natural
hazards.
5.   The zone promotes efficient land use by allowing housing and commercial
development at densities that are appropriate for the area.
6.   The zone provides equal or greater opportunities for alternative modes of
transportation such as walking, bicycling, or transit, than would occur with
conventional zoning by:
a.   Encouraging or requiring significant mixed use development where
appropriate; and
b.   Providing a master plan with direct and convenient pedestrian or bicycle
connections between all land uses.
H.   Designation: Upon approval, each MPC zone shall be given a unique name
following the designation "MPC-" and shall be independent of any other MPC
zone.
I.   Permit Approval: Within an MPC zone, applications for subdivision
approval, site plan, conditional use permits, and any other needed permits
shall be submitted and approved as required to implement the conceptual master
plan. The conceptual master plan shall meet the conceptual subdivision review
requirement of title 17 of this code.
J.   Amendments To Plan: Amendments to an approved conceptual master plan shall
be obtained by following the procedures required for first approval as set
forth in this section. (Ord. 996, 1-17-2012)
9-28-020: EDELWEISS MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE:
The Edelweiss master planned community zone contains approximately sixty one
(61) acres located at approximately 14500 South 2200 East.
A.   Purpose: The MPC-Edelweiss zone is intended to provide a master planned
development where customized zoning requirements apply in order to allow for a
compatible transition between neighboring residential uses and the Corner
Canyon Regional Park. Significant features of the development include thirty
percent (30%) open space, low average density and trailhead accommodation.
Implementation of the MPC zone will provide the flexibility to create a mix of
residential uses that will appeal to many different homebuyers and price ranges
not typically found in other zoning classifications within the city.
B.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory dwelling units, per chapter 31 of this title.
Accessory structures, per chapter 10 of this title.
Church.
Dwelling, multi-family.
Dwelling, single-family.
Home occupations, per chapter 34 of this title.
Model homes.
C.   Conditional Uses:
Home occupations, per chapter 34 of this title.
D.   Procedures: Subdivision plat review is required for each portion of the
development. Approval of the MPC acknowledges acceptance of the adopted master
plan. See exhibit A of this section.
E.   Development Standards; Single-Family: The development standards of the
Edelweiss master planned community zone have been established to create lot
standards and guide the design of the lighting, landscaping, parking and road
infrastructure within the master plan. Single-family residential shall meet the
following standards:
1.   Lot Size, Frontage And Setbacks For Cottage Lots:
a.   Minimum lot size: Five thousand (5,000) square feet;
b.   Minimum lot frontage: Forty feet (40');
c.   Minimum lot width at front setback: Forty five feet (45');
d.   Front setbacks: Fifteen feet (15') minimum; twenty feet (20') to garage
minimum;
e.   Rear setbacks: Twenty feet (20'); rear decks may protrude five feet (5')
into setback;
f.   Side setbacks: Five feet (5') minimum;
g.   Side access garage: Twenty feet (20') minimum;
h.   Corner lot setbacks: Fifteen feet (15') minimum.
2.   Lot Size, Frontage And Setbacks For Estate Lots:
a.   Minimum lot size: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet;
b.   Minimum lot frontage: Fifty feet (50');
c.   Minimum lot width at front setback: Seventy feet (70');
d.   Front setback: Fifteen feet (15') minimum; twenty feet (20') to garage
minimum;
e.   Rear setbacks: Twenty feet (20'); rear decks may protrude five feet (5')
into setback;
f.   Side setbacks: Total fifteen feet (15'); five feet (5') minimum per side;
g.   Side access garage: Twenty feet (20') minimum;
h.   Corner lot setbacks: Fifteen feet (15') minimum.
3.   Project Lighting: All light sources visible along ridgelines shall be
unobtrusive, illuminating only the area adjacent to buildings. All light
sources shall be shielded and directional, pointing to the ground. Lighting
along public streets shall meet the requirements of chapter 20 of this title.
Light poles adjacent to streets without a park strip shall be located within
the public utility easement behind the curb.
4.   Landscaping And Trees: A detailed tree plan will be provided with each
final plat. Cottage lots shall have at least one street tree per lot in a
required park strip. Estate lots shall be required to provide street trees
within required park strips with spacing between trees at thirty (30) to forty
feet (40'). In areas where no park strip has been designed, the trees will be
incorporated into the overall landscape design utilizing a combination of
firewise plants and ornamental trees.
5.   Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit.
6.   Height Of Main Buildings: Thirty five feet (35') as measured by the
currently adopted residential building code.
7.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall meet the standards of
section
9-10-030 of this title.
8.   Repeat Plan Limitations: No two (2) homes shall have the same elevation on
adjoining lots.
9.   Roadways Serving Single-Family Development:
a.   Existing Conditions: The first phases of development will tie into the
existing infrastructure through Stoneleigh Heights Drive and Haddington Road.
These public street connections have less roadway width on the Suncrest side
and will gradually increase to meet the increased roadway width required by
current standards.
b.   Edelweiss Public Roads: All single-family homes throughout the development
will be served by public roads constructed with a forty six foot (46') total
dedicated width with a roadway width of thirty six feet (36') measured from
back of curb to back of curb. There will be a ten foot (10') public utility and
snow easement on one side of the road and a five foot (5') park strip and
sidewalk on the opposite side. See the master plan and the street cross section
comparison found in exhibit B of this section.
c.   Snowcap Court: Until such time that development occurs to the east,
Snowcap Court will be built with a temporary cul-de-sac.
d.   Emergency Access Road: An emergency access road will be constructed to
serve the development containing no less than twenty feet (20') of asphalt as
shown on the master plan.
10.   Easements: The following easements shall be provided within the
development:
a.   Public Utility Easements: All lots shall have front and rear easements of
ten feet (10'). Front easements are to be located behind the sidewalk or behind
the curb in areas where no park strip or sidewalk have been designed. One side
yard easement of at least five feet (5') will be provided.
b.   Snow Easements: In areas where no park strip or sidewalk has been
designed, a snow storage easement shall be provided.
c.   Slope Easements: Roadway cut and fill slopes located outside of the
dedicated public right of way shall be located within recorded easements
providing for slope protection and preservation.
d.   Water And Storm Drain Easements: Required water and storm drain easements
shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20').
F.   Development Standards; Townhomes: A detailed site plan will be required
for review and approval according to the standards set forth herein.
Development of the townhome component within the Edelweiss MPC shall comply
with the following development standards:
1.   Lot Size, Frontage And Setbacks For Townhomes: Setbacks and minimum lot
sizes shall be determined during site plan review.
2.   Unit Differentiation:
a.   Townhomes shall include a variety of unit sizes.
b.   Townhomes shall include a variety of heights. Long continuous rooflines
greater than fifty feet (50') shall not be permitted.
c.   Townhomes shall not exceed eight (8) units in alignment.
3.   Design Criteria:
a.   Design shall emulate the overall architectural theme of the area with a
"mountain classic, mountain contemporary or craftsman style".
b.   Exposed foundation walls shall not exceed four feet (4') above finished
grade at any point.
c.   All exposed sides of the structures shall have framed windows.
d.   Side and rear elevations that are visible from public and private streets
shall match the architectural detailing of the front facade.
e.   Utility and mechanical equipment extending from the structure shall be
clustered and screened by compatible architectural materials or appropriate
vegetation. Roof mounted equipment shall be situated on the back side of the
roof pitch so as not to be visible from any right of way.
4.   Colors And Materials:
a.   Color utilization shall be sensitive to existing development within the
vicinity and the natural landscape in which the project is located. Color
schemes shall follow the color palette found in the design guidelines.
b.   High quality materials for building facades will be selected as outlined
in the design guidelines.
5.   Edelweiss Design Review Committee (EDRC): The EDRC shall review and
approve the site plan prior to city submittal.
6.   Landscaping: A detailed landscaping plan shall be required at the time of
site plan review. Plant selection and placement shall be guided by firewise
standards and chapter 23 of this title.
7.   Amenities: A fully functional outside social area no less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet shall be provided in a central location accessible
to all residents of the community. This area shall contain a covered shade
structure, picnic tables and barbecue area.
8.   Height: To encourage height variation, structures shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum height of thirty five feet (35') by five feet (5') for no
more than fifty percent (50%) of the project buildings.
9.   Fencing: Private fencing shall be permitted when extending directly from
the rear of a unit and abutting the back yard of another unit or as a buffer to
adjacent land uses.
10.   Lighting: A light plan shall be submitted at the time of site plan review
and shall meet the requirements of chapter 20 of this title.
11.   Parking:
a.   A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required for each
dwelling unit.
b.   Guest parking shall be provided at a ratio of one stall for every four (4)
units.
12.   Homeowners' Association: An Edelweiss homeowners' association will be
formed to maintain private open space within the community.
13.   Roadways Serving Townhomes:
a.   Existing Conditions: Two (2) public roads currently serve the existing
Stoneleigh Heights Development that will tie into the townhome portion of the
MPC as shown on the master plan.
b.   Silver Flower Lane: Silver Flower Lane will be served by a public road
constructed with a forty one foot (41') dedicated width and a thirty six foot
(36') roadway width measured from back of curb to back of curb. There will be a
ten foot (10') public utility and snow easement on one side and a five foot
(5') sidewalk on the opposite side as shown in exhibit B of this section.
c.   White Petal Court: White Petal Court will be a private street serving up
to ten (10) units. It will be constructed with no less than twenty one feet
(21') of asphalt.
G.   Open Space: No less than thirty percent (30%) of the development will be
set aside as open space as shown in the adopted master plan. All areas labeled
as public open space shall be maintained by the city.
H.   Trails And Trailhead: The developer will work together with the city parks
and trails committee to provide design recommendations and further details to
the planning commission and city council for approval during the preliminary
and final plat process.
1.   Edelweiss Trailhead: A minimum of sixteen (16) parking stalls shall be
provided at the Edelweiss Trailhead. The developer shall install trail map
signage and a bike pump/tool station similar to other trailheads.
2.   Metropolitan Water District Multipurpose Trail: Developer shall allow a
multipurpose trail to connect from the Edelweiss Trailhead along the
metropolitan water district line to the developer's property line. Due to slope
and terrain restrictions, the trail will be kept natural in appearance and will
be suitable for hiking and mountain biking. It is expected that the trail shall
eventually tie to the trailhead on Suncrest Drive.
I.   Signage:
1.   Entrance Signs: Two (2) entrance signs shall be permitted in the locations
depicted in the master plan and further identified in exhibit C of this
section. The signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height measured to the
highest roof surface. Lighting will be allowed to illuminate the name of the
development either by direct exterior lighting or within the sign itself.
2.   Temporary Signs:
a.   Model Homes: Model homes shall be allowed one sign not to exceed thirty
two (32) square feet.
b.   Directional Signs: Developer may install up to two (2) directional signs
not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
J.   Exhibits:
   EXHIBIT A
   CONCEPTUAL MASTER PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4120.jpg]
 
   EXHIBIT B
   CROSS SECTION COMPARISON
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4298.png]
 
   EXHIBIT C
   ENTRY SIGNS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4126.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4128.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1128, 11-18-2004)
CHAPTER 29
RESERVED
CHAPTER 30
SECOND KITCHEN IN A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
SECTION:
9-30-010: Purpose
9-30-020: Development Standards; Permitted Use
9-30-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development regulations for
a second kitchen within a single-family residence. These regulations are
adopted for the following purposes:
A.   To allow city residents to have a second kitchen within a single-family
dwelling for the purpose of entertaining, recreation or convenience, accessory
to the first kitchen within the dwelling.
B.   To prohibit the use of a second kitchen within a single-family dwelling
that functions as a second dwelling unit or internal accessory dwelling unit
(I- ADU) in violation of chapter 31 of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd.
Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-30-020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; PERMITTED USE:
A.   A second kitchen in a single-family dwelling may be allowed in an A5, A2,
RA1, RA2, RH, R3, R4, R5, MPC, or RSD zone if all of the following requirements
are met:
1.   The dwelling has only one front entrance.
2.   The dwelling has only one address.
3.   Interior access is maintained to all parts of the dwelling to assure that
a second dwelling unit or I-ADU is not created. There shall be no keyed and
dead bolt locks or other manner of limiting or restricting access between both
kitchens and other common areas within the single-family dwelling.
4.   The dwelling has no more than one electrical meter.
5.   The second kitchen exists only as part of the single-family dwelling and
is not installed in an accessory or "out" building except as permitted with a
D-ADU pursuant to section
9-31-050.
6.   Construction of any such kitchen shall meet standards of the current
building codes adopted by the city.
B.   A second kitchen shall not be established in a single-family dwelling
which contains an I-ADU. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
CHAPTER 31
ACCESSORY DWELLINGS
SECTION:
9-31-010: Purpose
9-31-020: Scope
9-31-030: General Regulations
9-31-040: D-ADU Development Standards
9-31-045: I-ADU Development Standards
9-31-050: Second Kitchens
9-31-055: Deviations
9-31-060: Notice Of Accessory Dwelling Unit
9-31-070: Nonconforming Units
9-31-080: Violations
9-31-090: Exhibits
9-31-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development regulations for
accessory dwelling units (ADUs) within specified residential zones. (Ord. 1032,
10-23-2012; amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-31-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all ADUs within the city.
A.   I-ADUs shall be a permitted use in all primary residential zoning
districts except as prohibited within the areas identified on the map included
as Exhibit A in section
9-31-090 of this chapter. I-ADUs may only be established in the prohibited
areas identified in Exhibit A of section
9-31-090 upon approval of a deviation by the planning commission as outlined in
section
9-31-055.
B.   D-ADUs shall be a permitted use in all primary residential zoning
districts, master planned community zones (MPC), and residential special
districts (RSD) on individual lots or parcels twelve-thousand square feet
(12,000 ft²) or greater in size that contain no more than one single-family
dwelling, except as described in section
9-31-020(C) below.
C.   Properties identified in Exhibit B of Section 9-31-090 that were
originally constructed with carriage houses or apartments above their detached
garages, as described in the South Mountain Design Guidelines, and those
carriage houses or apartments exist as of August 6, 2024, shall be exempt from
the minimum lot size requirements of section 9-31-020(B) above. (Ord. 1032, 10-
23-2012; amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021; Ord. 1617, 8-6-2024)
9-31-030: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A.   An ADU shall not be rented or leased or offered for rent or lease unless
the owner of record possesses a valid ADU Permit.
B.   D-ADUs shall not be permitted for any property containing an I-ADU. As a
condition of approval for an application for a new D-ADU the owner of record
shall agree to waive any right to create an I-ADU on the same property unless
the D-ADU is first removed from the property. This condition shall be included
in the recorded notice of accessory dwelling unit required by section
9-31-060 of this chapter.
C.   Primary dwellings are not permitted to contain more than one I-ADU. I-ADUs
are not permitted within a D-ADU or other detached structure.
D.   I-ADUs shall not be permitted in single-family residential dwellings
located on lots or parcels that are six-thousand square feet (6,000 ft²) or
less in size.
E.   I-ADUs are not permitted within mobile homes.
F.   I-ADUs are not permitted within a primary dwelling unit serviced by a
failing septic system.
G.   Separate utility meters may not be installed for any I-ADU or D-ADU.
H.   An I-ADU shall not be rented or leased for a time period of less than
thirty (30) consecutive days. Only one rental agreement or lease shall be in
effect at any one time.
I.   No ADU or dwelling associated with an ADU may be separately rented,
leased, hired or loaned unless the owner of record occupies either the dwelling
or the ADU as their primary residence.
J.   An ADU Permit issued by the zoning administrator shall be required for the
development and use of any ADU and shall only be issued once all regulations
and standards of this section and sections 9-31-040 or 9-31-045 as applicable
to the specific type of ADU are met. The ADU Permit shall be subject to the
application and review procedures, including the annual renewal requirements
and procedures of section 9-5-210. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-
2021; Ord. 1626, 11-12-2024)
9-31-040: D-ADU DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to each D-ADU:
A.   Separate Structure: A D-ADU is a separate structure from the single-
family dwelling contained on the same lot or parcel as the single-family
dwelling.
B.   Conditions: A D-ADU shall comply with the applicable requirements of
section
9-31-030 and all of the following conditions:
1.   Only one D-ADU shall be allowed per lot or parcel.
2.   A D-ADU shall comply with the same setbacks for a main building in the
zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located.
3.   A D-ADU shall be located within the rear yard area of the lot or parcel
and is prohibited within the front yard area.
4.   At least one additional parking stall above the minimum required for the
single-family dwelling shall be provided on site and be reserved for exclusive
use by occupants of the D-ADU. The parking stall(s) provided for use of the
occupants of the D-ADU may not be located in tandem with parking stalls
designed to serve the single-family dwelling and shall be accessible from the
street by a driveway. Driveways must conform to all requirements of section
9-10-075 and other applicable requirements of this title. Parking stalls shall
be constructed of concrete or asphalt and shall comply with the applicable
requirements of sections
9-25-070 and
9-25-080.
5.   The total square footage of a D-ADU shall not exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the single-family dwelling's total square footage not including the garage.
6.   A D-ADU shall comply with all building construction and fire codes in
effect at the time the D-ADU is constructed, created or subsequently remodeled,
including obtaining the required building and other permits.
7.   The architectural design, color pallet, and materials of a D-ADU shall
match those of the single-family dwelling.
8.   The height of a D-ADU shall conform to the height limit specified for main
buildings in the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021; Ord. 1626, 11-12-2024)
9-31-045: I-ADU DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to each I-ADU:
A.   Existing Structure: An I-ADU shall be contained within the existing
footprint of the primary dwelling. Second kitchens within the primary
dwelling's footprint are not considered an I-ADU and are subject to
requirements found in chapter 30 of this title. An existing second kitchen
located within a primary dwelling can be converted as part of an application
for the creation of an I-ADU in compliance with all other standards for I-ADUs
listed in this chapter.
B.   Conditions: An I-ADU shall comply with the applicable requirements of
section
9-31-030 and with all of the following conditions:
1.   Only one I-ADU shall be allowed per lot or parcel.
2.   At least one additional parking stall above the minimum required for the
primary dwelling shall be provided on site and be reserved for exclusive use by
occupants of the I-ADU. The parking stall(s) provided for use of the occupants
of the I-ADU may not be located in tandem with parking stalls designed to serve
the primary dwelling and shall be accessible from the street by a driveway.
Driveways must conform to all requirements of section
9-10-075 and other applicable requirements of this title. Parking stalls shall
be constructed of concrete or asphalt and shall comply with the applicable
requirements of sections
9-25-070 and
9-25-080.
3.   If an I-ADU is created within a garage or carport attached to the primary
dwelling, the parking spaces contained within the garage or carport that are
removed shall be replaced in accordance with current parking and access
standards.
4.   The I-ADU shall comply with all applicable building, health and fire codes
in effect at the time the I-ADU is constructed, created or subsequently
remodeled. The owner of record shall be responsible to ensure that all required
building permits and other permits are obtained for the creation of an I-ADU.
5.   In accommodating an I-ADU within the primary dwelling, the exterior of the
primary dwelling may not be changed or altered in a manner that would alter the
appearance of the primary dwelling from that of a single-family dwelling. (Ord.
1499, 9-21-2021)
9-31-050: SECOND KITCHENS:
A second kitchen in a D-ADU may be allowed for the purpose of entertainment or
recreation as long as the second kitchen does not create a separate dwelling
unit within the D-ADU. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-31-055: DEVIATIONS:
A.   Deviation Authorized: The Planning Commission may approve a deviation from
strict compliance with the geographical restrictions of the I-ADU map in
Exhibit A of this chapter upon finding that:
1.   The lot or parcel on which the primary dwelling is located is at least six
thousand square feet (6,000 ft²);
2.   No D-ADU exists on the property;
3.   The proposed I-ADU meets all of the requirements of sections
9-31-030 and
9-31-045, including other applicable requirements of this chapter; and
4.   At least two (2) parking stalls meeting the requirements of
9-31-045(B)(2) are provided for use by occupants of the I-ADU. (Ord. 1499, 9-
21-2021; amd. Ord. 1626, 11-12-2024)
9-31-060: NOTICE OF ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT:
A.   As part of the ADU permit process, the owner of the property shall execute
a “notice of accessory dwelling unit” affidavit. The city shall record the
notice with the county recorder as a use condition on the property. The notice
shall be in a form approved by the Draper City attorney. Once recorded, a copy
of the notice shall be delivered to the owner of record.
B.   The notice of accessory dwelling unit shall include:
1.   A legal description and address of the property;
2.   Either of the following statements as applicable to the type of ADU permit
being issued:
a.   The primary dwelling contains an approved I-ADU and that the I-ADU may
only be used in accordance with the land use regulations of Draper City; or
b.   The property has an approved D-ADU and that the D-ADU may only be used in
accordance with the land use regulations of Draper City. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015;
amd. Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-31-070: NONCONFORMING UNITS:
A.   Accessory dwelling units legally established prior to October 1, 2021 may
continue to operate under the applicable provisions in effect at the time they
were approved and established in accordance with chapter 6 of this title. Legal
nonconforming ADUs shall also be required to obtain and maintain an ADU permit
under the procedures of section
9-5-210.
B.   Existing legal nonconforming ADUs without separate street addressing or
mailboxes, shall be permitted under this section to obtain and display a
separate street address and add the accompanying mailbox to the property
without affecting their nonconforming status. All addressing must receive
approval from both Draper City and the Salt Lake County Addressing department.
(Ord. 1499, 9- 21-2021)
9-31-080: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be enforced consistent with this title and
state code and may include fines and liens.
A.   Notice of Violation:
1.   Whenever an owner of record has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter the city shall provide a written notice of violation. The notice of
violation shall:
a.   Describe the violation;
b.   Provide the owner of record an opportunity to cure or correct the
violation that is:
(1)   Not less than fourteen (14) days after the notice of violation is issued,
for violations of
9-31-030(H);
(2)   Not less than thirty (30) days after the notice of violation is issued
for any other violation;
c.   Include a statement that if the owner of record fails to cure the
violation within the given time period that they may be subject to daily fines,
liens, the revocation of permits or approvals, criminal prosecution, and other
enforcement actions permitted by applicable law;
d.   Provide notification to the owner of record that they may file a written
objection to the violation within fourteen (14) days after the day on which the
written notice of violation is post-marked or posted on the property;
e.   Indicate the department name and address where the owner of record may
file the written objection;
f.   Be mailed to the owner of record, or to any other individual designated to
receive notice in the owner's license or permit records, and a copy shall be
posted on the property.
2.   If an owner of record files a written objection to the written notice of
violation in accordance with Utah Code 10-9a-530(5) as amended, the zoning
administrator shall provide notice, hold a hearing, and conduct a review to
determine whether the violation described in the written notice of violation
has occurred. If the zoning administrator determines that the violation in the
notice of violation has occurred, the city may impose any remedies permitted by
applicable law.
3.   If an owner of record does not file a written objection to the notice of
violation and does not cure the violation within the time period provided in
the notice, the city may impose any of the remedies listed in this section or
others as permitted by applicable law.
4.   If an owner of record cures a violation within the time period prescribed
in the notice of violation, or if the zoning administrator finds that the
violation listed in the notice of violation has not occurred, the city may not
impose sanctions.
B.   Liens:
1.   Notice of lien:
a.   A written notice of lien issued under this section shall:
(1)   Comply with the requirements of Utah Code 38-12-102 as amended;
(2)   State that the property is subject to a lien;
(3)   Specify the lien amount for each day of violation after the day on which
the opportunity to cure the violation expired; and
(4)   Be mailed to the owner of record, or to any other individual designated
to receive notice in the owner's license or permit records, and a copy of the
notice shall be posted on the property.
b.   Each notice of lien shall be recorded with the respective county recorder.
C.   Revocation:
1.   An ADU permit may be revoked if the zoning administrator determines:
a.   Actions taken under the permit do not conform to the approved plans,
specifications, or conditions of the permit;
b.   The permit was procured by false representation;
c.   The permit was issued by mistake; or
d.   That other applicable provisions of this title are being violated.
2.   The city shall serve written notice of revocation by mailing the notice by
certified mail to the owner of record as listed on the ADU permit, or by
posting the notice in a prominent location on the site.
3.   After the written notice of revocation is served no further construction
for an ADU may continue until a new permit is issued, or the permit is
reinstated by the zoning administrator.
a.   If the permit was issued by mistake, the city shall notify the owner of
record of the mistake and the actions or changes that must be made to bring the
ADU into compliance with applicable requirements and ordinances.
b.   For properties where a permit has been revoked for any reason other than a
mistake, a new or reinstated ADU permit may not be issued except in conformance
with applicable ordinances, resolutions, regulations, and requirements.
4.   If an ADU permit is revoked due to failure to comply with the approved
plans, specifications, or conditions of the permit or when other applicable
provisions of this title are being violated, a written notice of violation
shall be provided with the notice of revocation.
5.   Properties for which an ADU permit has been revoked may be subject to the
recordation of a notice of non-compliance against the property and shall be
prohibited from renting, leasing, hiring or loaning the accessory dwelling
unit.
D.   Other remedies: The city shall have such other remedies as are and may be
from time to time provided by Utah law or city ordinance for the violation of
any provision of this title.
E.   All remedies pertaining to violations of this chapter are cumulative.
(Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021)
9-31-090: EXHIBITS:
Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1499, passed September 21, 2021 is hereby
incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.
Exhibit B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5832.png]
(Ord. 1499, 9-21-2021; amd. Ord. 1617, 8-6-2024)
CHAPTER 32
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-32-010: Purpose
9-32-020: Scope
9-32-030: Development Standards
9-32-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum development standards for
multiple-family dwellings. These standards are intended to ensure that such
development is well buffered from and compatible with adjacent property, serves
the needs of occupants thereof, and retains long term viability and quality
through economies of scale. (Ord. 641, 8-16-2005; amd. Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
9-32-020: SCOPE:
A.   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to multiple-family dwellings.
This includes, but is not limited to, condominium projects, townhomes, and
garden apartments hereafter collectively referred to as multiple-family
projects.
B.   The requirements of this chapter are intended to apply to multiple-family
dwellings in addition to all other applicable regulations and the requirements
of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable
provisions of this title, this code and other laws. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of this title,
this code or other law, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. (Ord. 641,
8-16-2005; amd. Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
9-32-030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All multiple-family projects subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter, as set forth in section
9-32-020 of this chapter, shall comply with the following development
standards:
A.   Unit Differentiation: Multiple-family projects shall include design
features that differentiate adjoining units and create identity for each unit.
This goal shall be achieved through the following requirements:
1.   Multiple-family projects shall include a variety of unit sizes.
2.   Multiple-family projects shall include a variety of building heights.
a.   Continuous rooflines greater than fifty feet (50') in length shall not be
permitted.
b.   To encourage height variation, multi-family structures shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum height of thirty-five feet (35') by five additional feet
(5') for up to fifty percent (50%) of the project buildings, subject to
subsection A(2)(c) of this section.
c.   In no event shall multiple family structures adjacent to a less intense
land use exceed thirty five feet (35') within one hundred feet (100') of the
property boundary line.
3.   The front facade of multiple-family structures shall exhibit visual relief
through an array of architectural features and varied individual unit setbacks.
a.   Articulation such as roof dormers, hips, gables, balconies, porches, wall
projections, and fenestration shall be used to break up the visual massing of
building facades.
4.   Multiple-family projects shall include a variety of building colors and
materials.
a.   Color utilization should be sensitive to existing development within the
vicinity and the natural landscape in which the project is situated.
b.   The use of a minimum of three (3) colors per elevation is required.
c.   Multiple-family project proposals shall submit colored architectural
elevations or renderings displaying and identifying all exterior surfacing
materials and colors, including roofing material and color, in accordance with
subsection
9-5-090(D)(1)(d) of this title.
5.   Multiple-family projects on five (5) or more acres shall incorporate
variations of the following architectural elements:
a.   Accent building materials;
b.   Door frames;
c.   Garage doors;
d.   Number of stories;
e.   Rooflines;
f.   Window frames; and
g.   Window types.
6.   Townhouse style multiple-family projects shall not exceed six (6) attached
units per building.
7.   Exposed foundation walls shall not exceed four feet (4') above finished
grade at any point.
B.   Design: Multiple-family projects shall exhibit exceptional design
qualities. This goal shall be achieved through the following requirements:
1.   All exposed sides of multiple-family structures shall have framed windows.
2.   Side and rear elevations that are visible from public and private streets
shall match the architectural detailing of the front facade.
3.   Building materials for multiple-family structures shall consist of at
least fifty percent (50%) brick, stone, or synthetic stone on all sides of the
structure.
a.   The planning commission may grant a deviation from this clause to allow
accumulation or clustering of brick, stone, or synthetic stone on the most
publicly visible sides of the structure. This deviation is dependent on
compliance with the following standards:
(1)   The use of brick, stone, or synthetic stone is equal to a gross
calculation of square footage of fifty percent (50%) or more of all structure
sides.
(2)   Structure design meets subsection B(2) of this section.
b.   Windows, doors, and roof materials are excluded from the gross calculation
of exterior building materials.
c.   The planning commission may also grant a deviation from this clause if a
predominant building material exists in the project vicinity and the use of the
material will uphold the existing character and style of the given
neighborhood. The project developer may present the proposed building material
(and color) to the planning commission to substantiate the quality and
durability of the proposed dominant material.
4.   Shared entrances for multiple-family structures shall be centrally
located, accentuated with architectural detailing, and well lit.
5.   Utility and mechanical equipment extending from multiple-family structures
shall be clustered and screened by compatible architectural materials or
appropriate vegetation. When the project architecture contains pitched roofs,
the roof mounted utility equipment shall be situated on the back side of the
roof pitch.
6.   Carports and garages shall complement the project architecture in terms of
design, materials, and colors.
7.   Garage doors shall exhibit quality design and color variation throughout
the project.
8.   Where a desirable predominate architectural theme/style exists or where
design guidelines are established through a master plan, the proposed multiple-
family project shall be designed with a compatible theme/style to the
aforementioned precedent.
C.   Building Placement And Orientation: Multiple-family projects shall have a
strong relationship to the public realm that will enhance the safety and
efficiency of the project while improving the character of the neighborhood.
1.   All multiple-family structures shall front onto a right-of-way that is
accessible to emergency vehicles.
a.   The planning commission may grant an exception from this clause, for
multiple-family structures accessed by a private right-of-way if the following
findings can be met:
(1)   Multiple-family structures front onto an open space (courtyard/park) that
is accessible to all residents.
(2)   Emergency vehicle access is accommodated for all structures.
2.   Setbacks for multiple-family structures shall be measured from the closest
portion of the wall or foundation of the structure to the nearest property line
or edge of the public or private right-of-way excluding sidewalks.
a.   For multiple-family dwelling structures that are three (3) stories or less
in height setbacks from the right-of-way shall range between five feet (5') and
twenty feet (20').
b.   For multiple-family dwelling structures that are over three (3) stories in
height, or those that are located adjacent to an existing or proposed collector
street as shown on the Draper City master transportation plan, the setbacks
form the right-of-way shall range between fifteen feet (15') and thirty feet
(30').
c.   For projects with garages, the garage shall be set back at least twenty
feet (20') from the right-of-way or alley and shall include a driveway with a
depth of at least twenty feet (20'), excluding sidewalks.
d.   Setbacks between dwelling structures shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15').
e.   Except for property lines which divide attached units, setbacks from other
property lines shall be no less than ten feet (10'). Multiple- family
residential projects shall also comply with the perimeter landscaping
requirements of section
9-23-090 and land use buffer requirements of section
9-23-110.
f.   Development on corner lots shall comply with the provisions of subsection
9-27-080(C) of this title in which clear view at an intersection shall not be
obstructed.
3.   Multiple-family projects with frontage on a public street shall orient
units toward the public street.
a.   Multiple-family projects shall promote an active street frontage on all
public streets. The creation of a second frontage road or courtyard area along
the street frontage, to which units may be oriented toward, is an acceptable
option for projects with frontage along classified roads.
b.   Carports are prohibited adjacent to a public right-of-way.
4.   Fencing for multiple-family projects shall be limited to encourage shared
open space, pedestrian access, and project integration into the surrounding
neighborhood.
a.   Fencing shall only be permitted as a buffer between adjacent land uses, or
as private fencing for townhome style developments to delineate a private or
limited common area at the rear of a unit.
b.   Fencing along public streets shall be limited to a four foot (4') tall
decorative fence in compliance with the clear view restrictions for driveways
and intersections as found in Section
9-27-080 of this title.
(1)   The Planning Commission may grant a deviation from this requirement upon
finding all of the following:
(a)   The fence is necessary to address health or safety concerns of residents
due to the existing constraints of the site; and
(b)   The fencing is open in its design and provides pedestrian access breaks
at multiple locations in the fence at intervals that do not exceed one-hundred
feet (100') between them.
c.   Fencing used as a buffer between adjacent land uses shall comply with the
specifications of Section
9-23-110 of this title.
5.   Resident parking accommodations are encouraged to be located behind
multiple-family structures. This includes rear loaded garages with alleyways,
auto courtyards and parking lots.
a.   Alley accessways shall be a minimum of twenty six feet (26') wide and
shall comply with all International Fire Code and other standards of this title
for width and design as adopted by the State of Utah and/or Draper City.
6.   Required visitor parking shall be evenly distributed throughout multiple-
family projects and easily accessible.
7.   Driveway and garage parking shall not be included in the multiple- family
project’s visitor parking count requirement.
8.   On street parking, parallel or diagonal, is encouraged to be provided on
private streets as a substantial portion of the project's parking requirement.
This is meant to create flexibility in the available parking spaces for
residents and visitors.
9.   Landscaping strips between tire lines in the middle of driveways may be
used to break up expanses of impervious surface.
10.   Parking areas shall be broken into smaller parking clusters of twelve
(12) spaces or less, using landscaping and pedestrian pathways.
D.   Site Plan, Mobility, And Street Treatment: Pedestrian and automobile
circulation shall flow in a logical manner and integrate with neighborhood
street connectivity.
1.   A traffic impact study shall be prepared for multiple-family projects on
five (5) or more acres, or where required by the city engineer under the
provisions of title 11.
2.   The number of road connections and access points for a multiple-family
project shall comply with the following design standards and number of access
points:
a.   Townhome unit development:
(1)   One access point is required for up to thirty (30) units.
(2)   Two (2) access points are required for developments over thirty (30)
units.
b.   Multi-family unit developments, other than townhome unit dwellings:
(1)   One access point is required for projects with up to one-hundred (100)
dwelling units.
(2)   Two (2) access points are required for projects with more than one-
hundred (100) dwelling units.
c.   Multiple-family projects shall connect to existing public street networks
or stubs. Connection to a private street network or stub is encouraged and
shall include a perpetual cross access easement. Connection to a private street
network or stub shall count as an access point if it allows for unrestricted
access to the public and residents.
d.   Projects should strive to emulate the existing neighborhood street grid to
provide more opportunities for street connectivity to adjacent properties.
3.   Traffic calming measures such as lateral shifts, raised crosswalks, bulb
outs, or chicanes shall be incorporated into multiple-family projects.
4.   Multiple-family projects shall install sidewalks on both sides of all
private streets. Sidewalks shall be a width of no less than five feet (5').
a.   The planning commission may permit a deviation from the requirement for
sidewalks on both sides of a private street by eliminating the sidewalk or a
portion of the sidewalk on one side of the street upon finding all of the
following:
(1)   The second sidewalk or portion of the sidewalk does not provide
pedestrian connectivity to any units or amenities;
(2)   Ample pedestrian circulation has been provided;
(3)   The purpose and intent of the development standards set forth in this
chapter are met; and
(4)   The second sidewalk or portion thereof is unnecessary and/or undesirable.
5.   Private streets within multiple-family projects are encouraged to emulate
public street standard elements such as:
a.   On street parallel parking;
b.   High back curb and gutter;
c.   Park strips with street trees and cutback parking; and
d.   Bike paths.
6.   Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access points, entryways,
public gathering nodes, and parking areas. Pedestrian access points shall be
installed between the project and the external neighborhood.
7.   All multiple-family projects shall submit a lighting plan in compliance
with chapter 20, “Outdoor Lighting” of this title.
a.   Exterior lighting along private streets shall be limited to a maximum
height of fourteen feet (14').
b.   Lighting along public streets shall also comply with public street
lighting requirements of title 11.
8.   All multiple-family projects shall submit a landscaping plan in accordance
with chapter 23, "Landscaping And Screening", of this title.
E.   Common Open Space: No less than thirty percent (30%) of the gross project
area, shall be designated for open space uses. Applicants for multiple-family
projects shall submit an intent statement outlining a theme for the type of
quality open space that the project will provide. The open space theme shall be
consistent with the following classifications:
1.   Natural Open Space (Passive Space): In accordance with chapter 24,
"Natural Resources Inventory", of this title, applicants for multiple-family
projects should survey sensitive and valued natural lands that may be desired
for preservation. If this survey reveals a significant portion of natural open
space that is suitable for preservation, this open space option is preferred.
2.   Improved Clusters: Improved clusters of open space with landscaping/
amenities. This type of open space is large enough in area to be functional for
a variety of uses by residents. The accumulation of green spaces can function
like recreation areas by encompassing required project amenities. This type of
green space is preferred to a myriad of remnant green patches throughout the
project. This option is more appropriate for apartment style developments.
3.   Visual Relief: Visual relief from the street through open space. This
theme includes setbacks (sometimes called front yards), open side yards, and
park strips along the street. This type of open space is meant to give some
spatial relief between the buildings and the street through landscaped front
yards and park strips that are standard for most residential neighborhoods.
This open space theme is more appropriate for townhouse type developments where
units have frontage onto the street.
4.   Standards: The following standards shall apply to all themes:
a.   Open space areas shall be available to everyone residing in the boundaries
of a development.
b.   Open space may include pathways and outdoor amenities.
c.   Open space excludes private balconies, decks, patio areas, recreation
buildings, indoor amenities, vehicle parking, streets and streetscape
sidewalks.
d.   No more than thirty percent (30%) of a development's slope areas in excess
of thirty percent (30%) can be included in the area calculation for open space;
provided, that appropriate amenities making it accessible and usable are
included in the project.
e.   Open space should be centrally located and based on existing natural
features.
f.   Open space should be clustered to create the most beneficial and efficient
use of space.
F.   Amenities: Recreational amenities shall be provided for multiple-family
projects.
1.   Multiple-family projects of up to fifty (50) dwelling units shall provide
at least one amenity from the following list appropriate for the project size
and location. Multiple-family projects over fifty (50) dwelling units shall
provide one additional amenity from the list for each additional fifty (50)
dwelling units in the project, or portion thereof.
a.   Multiple-family projects shall include at least one amenity per fifty (50)
units from the following list:
(1)   Tot lot/play structure.
(2)   Community garden.
(3)   Courtyard with benches.
(4)   Picnic tables and barbecue area with shade structures.
(5)   Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor), Splash pad, or Hot tub.
(6)   Sports courts (i.e., tennis, basketball, volleyball).
(7)   Natural open space area with benches/viewing areas and/or trails.
(8)   Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of this
guideline.
2.   Projects of fifty-one (51) to one-hundred (100) dwelling units shall
include one of the following amenities in addition to those required in
subsection F(1)(a) of this section:
a.   A minimum of one indoor, social area for gathering, no less than one-
thousand (1,000) square feet in size, or a minimum of one outdoor social
function area for gathering, no less than one-thousand (1,000) square feet in
size. Social function areas shall be centrally located with respect to the
overall development.
3.   Projects of more than one-hundred (100) dwelling units shall include both
amenities described in subsection F(2)(a) of this section in addition to those
required in subsection F(1)(a) of this section. (Ord. 641, 8-16-2005; amd. Ord.
1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord. 1497, 7-20-
21)
CHAPTER 33
USES IN HISTORIC BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-33-010: Purpose
9-33-020: Scope
9-33-030: Conditional Use Permit Required
9-33-040: Development Standards
9-33-050: Historic Preservation Commission Review
9-33-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is:
A.   To encourage preservation of historic buildings by allowing income
producing activities to be conducted within historic structures; and
B.   To establish use and development regulations for uses allowed within
historic buildings. (Ord. 1191, 4-19-2016)
9-33-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any building listed on the
Draper historic landmark register. Such requirements shall not be construed to
prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, and
other laws. (Ord. 1191, 4-19-2016)
9-33-030: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   Conditional Use Permit: The following uses may be established in any
residential zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant
to the requirements of this chapter and section
9-5-080 of this title:
Bed and breakfast inn.
Cultural service.
Medical service.
Office, general.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Reception center.
Restaurant, general.
Retail, general (antique store only).
B.   Additional Conditional Use Permit Criteria: No conditional use permit
shall be authorized unless the criteria set forth in subsection
9-5-080E3 of this title is met and the evidence presented establishes that the
proposed facility:
1.   Can be adapted to the site while still meeting the requirements of
applicable city requirements; and
2.   Is compatible with the existing facility's architecture, landscaping, site
design, and parking layout. (Ord. 1191, 4-19-2016)
9-33-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any bed and
breakfast inn established as a conditional use:
A.   Historic Landmark Register: The building or site on which the use is
conducted shall be included on the Draper historic landmark register. The
building or site shall remain on the national, state, or Draper historic
landmark register for the duration of the conditional use permit.
B.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided as needed to make the building
and site compatible with the neighborhood and to provide a visual buffer for on
site parking in relation to adjacent properties and the street. Landscaping may
include, but shall not be limited to:
1.   Planting trees in the park strip; and
2.   Landscaping needed to assure an appropriate setting for a historical site.
C.   Operating Hours: Operating hours may be restricted to mitigate any
foreseeable negative impact and to make the use more compatible with the
neighborhood in which it is located. Particular attention shall be paid to the
operating hours of retail and service uses located near residential uses.
D.   Parking: Parking may be less than required by chapter 25 of this title
based upon the specific aspects of the site and use proposed.
E.   Signs: Signs shall conform to the requirements of chapter 26 of this
title, except as otherwise provided in this subsection:
1.   Sign types shall be limited to monument, wall, and identification signs.
2.   Signs shall be designed to complement the site and structures in terms of
size and placement.
3.   Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet or, if freestanding, five
feet (5') in height.
4.   If illuminated, only indirect lighting shall be allowed.
5.   The design of all signs shall be approved as part of a conditional use
permit, after a recommendation is received from the historic preservation
commission.
F.   Nonconforming Circumstances: Existing nonconforming conditions may be
allowed to continue based upon specific aspects of the site and the use
proposed. (Ord. 1191, 4-19-2016)
9-33-050: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION REVIEW:
Prior to considering a conditional use permit application under this chapter,
the application shall be reviewed by the historic preservation commission.
A.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the zoning administrator shall
submit a copy of the application to the historic preservation commission.
B.   Within twenty (20) days after receipt, the historic preservation
commission shall review the application with respect to the development
standards set forth in this chapter and standards for issuance of a conditional
use permit.
C.   Within ten (10) days after reviewing an application, the commission shall
prepare and transmit a written recommendation to the zoning administrator.
(Ord. 1191, 4-19-2016)
CHAPTER 34
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
9-34-010: Purpose
9-34-020: Scope
9-34-030: Permitted Use
9-34-040: Development Standards; Permitted Use
9-34-050: Conditional Use Home Occupations
9-34-060: Alteration To Standards
9-34-070: Enforcement
9-34-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development regulations for
home occupations. These regulations are intended to ensure that limited
business activities allowed in a residential zone do not disturb the
residential character of a neighborhood. (Ord. 909, 7-21-2009)
9-34-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all home occupations within the
city. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other
applicable provisions of this title, this code, and other laws. (Ord. 909, 7-
21-2009)
9-34-030: PERMITTED USE:
The home occupation use set forth below shall be allowed as a permitted use in
any agricultural or residential zone, within the main dwelling unit, subject to
the development standards of section
9-34-040 of this chapter. The definition of this use is set forth in chapter 3
of this title.
Office, general. (Ord. 909, 7-21-2009)
9-34-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; PERMITTED USE:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any home
occupation allowed as a permitted use:
A.   Ownership: The home occupation shall be owned and operated by a person who
resides in the dwelling where the home occupation is located. Such person shall
be the primary provider of the labor, work, or service provided in the home
occupation.
B.   Business License: A business license for the home occupation shall be
obtained from and continually maintained with the city pursuant to title 6,
chapter 11 of this code.
C.   Employees: Members of the family of the owner who reside in the dwelling
may be employed in the home occupation. Nonfamily or nonresident employees
shall be limited to one person.
D.   Inspection: All facilities shall comply with fire, building, plumbing,
electrical and all other city, county, state and federal codes. Inspections
during reasonable hours by city officials may occur as necessary to assure
compliance with regulations.
E.   Inventory: No stock in trade, inventory, or other merchandise to exceed
two hundred fifty (250) square feet shall be kept on the premises. No outside
storage is allowed. (Ord. 909, 7-21-2009)
F.   Modification Of Structures Or Yards: There shall be no visible evidence
from the exterior of a dwelling that it is being used for any other purpose
than that of a dwelling. No activities shall be carried on outside the dwelling
in the yard for the benefit of or incidental to the home occupation. No front
yard area shall be altered to provide parking required for a home occupation.
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
G.   Nuisance: Tools, items, equipment, or activities conducted within the
dwelling which is offensive or noxious by reason of the emission of odor,
smoke, gas, vibration, magnetic interference, or noise shall be prohibited.
H.   Secondary Use: The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
secondary to the primary use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The home
occupation shall not disrupt the normal residential character of the
neighborhood in which the residence is located. Not more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the dwelling unit shall be used for the home occupation.
I.   Signs: All signage in a residential area must comply with chapter 26,
"Signs", of this title.
J.   Traffic, Parking, And Access: No home occupation use shall generate
pedestrian, parking, or vehicular traffic in excess of that customarily
associated with the zone in which the use is located. All parking shall be
provided and maintained on site with adequate provision for drop off traffic.
K.   Vehicles: Other than the business owner's personal transportation, there
shall be no vehicles or equipment on the property associated with the home
occupation which would not normally be found at a residence. No signage for the
home occupation shall be allowed on vehicles.
L.   Yards: Yards surrounding the dwelling and accessory buildings shall not be
used for any activities or storage of any materials associated with the home
occupation.
M.   Customers: No customers allowed. Children accessing a limited daycare or
limited preschool facility shall not be considered customers.
N.   Utility Demand: The home occupation shall not cause a demand for public
utilities in excess of that necessarily and customarily provided for
residential uses.
O.   Main Structure: The home occupations shall be conducted, located, and
contained within the primary structure on the property. (Ord. 909, 7-21-2009)
P.   Single-Family And Multiple-Family Dwellings: Home occupations listed as
permitted or conditional within this title may be permitted in a single-family
or a multiple-family dwelling, subject to the standards found within this
section and section
9-34-060 of this chapter. Businesses within multiple-family dwellings shall
provide an approval letter from the respective homeowners' association, or
management company in the case of apartments, if the business proposes any
employees, customers or business vehicles. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
Q.   Licensure: Any home occupation involving childcare shall comply with all
applicable state and local laws and regulations regarding residential
childcare, including, but not limited to, provisions of the Utah child care
licensing act, as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 26-39-101 et seq.,
as amended, and the residential certificate childcare standards as set forth in
the Utah administrative code section R430-50-1 et seq., as amended. In
addition, cottage food production operations are regulated and inspected by the
Utah department of agriculture. Any food related home occupation under their
jurisdiction must comply with these regulations. (Ord. 909, 7-21-2009)
9-34-050: CONDITIONAL USE HOME OCCUPATIONS:
The following home occupations may also be established in any agricultural,
residential, commercial zone subject to the use table regulations of applicable
zones, subject to the development standards listed in section
9-34-040 of this chapter, and subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit pursuant to the requirements of section
9-5-080 of this title. Uses listed in this section may also necessitate an
additional conditional use permit subject to section
9-34-060 of this chapter:
Assembly and repair, limited.
Cottage business.
Daycare, limited.
Grooming service. Conditions:
A.   Animal being groomed must be current on the following vaccinations:
rabies, parvovirus, distemper, and kennel cough.
B.   Facility shall be subject to periodic inspection by city staff.
C.   Animal being groomed shall be kept indoors the whole time in a controlled
environment.
D.   Up to two (2) animals shall be allowed on the premises at a time for
grooming purposes.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Preschool, limited. (Ord. 1004, 4-3-2012; amd. Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020)
9-34-060: ALTERATION TO STANDARDS:
A home occupation listed in section
9-34-030 or
9-34-050 of this chapter that does not conform to any of the development
standards in section
9-34-040 of this chapter may nonetheless be established through the issuance of
a conditional use permit specifically for the desired alteration to those
development standards. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
9-34-070: ENFORCEMENT:
Refer to chapter 7 of this title to read about the remedies, penalties,
procedures, and other matters that apply to any violation of the provisions in
this chapter. (Ord. 909, 7-21-2009)
CHAPTER 35
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
9-35-010: Purpose
9-35-020: Scope
9-35-030: New Manufactured And Mobile Home Parks
9-35-040: Location
9-35-050: Business License Required
9-35-060: Development Standards
9-35-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development standards for
manufactured and mobile home parks existing on the effective date of this title
to assure their compatibility with adjoining uses and to protect the welfare of
the public. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-35-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the use and occupancy of
manufactured and mobile homes located in manufactured and mobile home parks
within the city. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this title, this code, and other laws. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
9-35-030: NEW MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME PARKS:
No new manufactured and mobile parks shall be created, nor shall any existing
park be expanded in acreage or in the number of manufactured or mobile homes
allowed. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-35-040: LOCATION:
Manufactured and mobile homes not on a permanent foundation shall be located
only within a manufactured and mobile home park, except as authorized by a
temporary use permit pursuant to title 6, chapter 16 of this code. Manufactured
homes anchored to a permanent foundation may be located in any zone that
permits single-family dwellings, provided the manufactured home is attached to
a permanent foundation in accordance with applicable building codes and
conforms to applicable provisions of this title and title 10 of this code.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-35-050: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a manufactured and mobile home park without a valid
business license issued by the city. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-35-060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any
manufactured and mobile park and any manufactured or mobile home located
therein:
A.   Applicable Laws: Parks shall conform to all applicable laws, including,
but not limited to, zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, health, and fire
codes.
B.   Debris: Parks shall be maintained free of debris that may provide rodent
harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, or other pests.
C.   Drainage: The site shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate
surface drainage and isolated from any existing or potential health hazard or
nuisance.
D.   Dust: Objectionable dust from exposed ground surfaces shall be prevented
by use of appropriate ground cover and control measures. This shall include,
but shall not be limited to, paving with cement or asphalt, covering with
mulch, or cultivating with vegetative ground cover.
E.   Fences And Walls: An adequate fence or wall shall be built around the
perimeter of any significantly altered park. The fence or wall shall prevent
ingress or egress, except at established walkways or streets.
F.   Fence And Wall Repair: Fences and walls shall be maintained in good
repair, including periodic repainting, as needed.
G.   Flammable Materials: Flammable materials, including, but not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, oil, paper, plastic, cardboard, and wood, shall not be
stored beneath or against a manufactured or mobile home.
H.   Identification: Each mobile home lot shall have a number or other
identification, permanently affixed and in such a location that the lot can be
easily identified by an inspector or drivers of emergency response vehicles.
I.   Infestation: Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained
reasonably free of pests, insects, poisonous spiders and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects,
spiders, and rodents shall conform with city and other applicable requirements.
If the potential for infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath
any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable
materials.
J.   Maintenance: All buildings, parts of buildings, grounds, and equipment
shall be maintained clean and in good repair.
K.   Paving: Any areas provided for garages, carports, or vehicle pads shall be
paved with concrete or asphalt and connected to the street.
L.   Skirting: Each manufactured or mobile home shall be adequately skirted
within thirty (30) days after set up.
M.   Side Yard: Each manufactured and mobile home shall be a minimum of fifteen
feet (15') from any adjacent home or lot boundary within the park.
N.   Solid Waste: Solid waste shall be stored in a sanitary way using
conveniently located watertight containers. Solid waste and junk shall be
disposed at least once each week in accordance with applicable health
regulations. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
O.   Stairs: Each manufactured and mobile home shall have stairs and landing
for each outside door. The stairs and landing shall comply with minimum
requirements of the current building codes adopted by the city. (Ord. 624, 2-8-
2005)
P.   Storage: Each manufactured and mobile home lot shall contain a permanent,
covered, and securable storage shed that provides a minimum of one hundred
twenty (120) cubic feet of usable storage space. No storage shall be permitted
outside such sheds.
1.   A bulk storage area, separate from manufactured or mobile homes, and of at
least eighty (80) square feet for each home space in the park, shall be
provided for a significantly altered park. The designated area shall be hard
surfaced and fenced to screen the compound from surrounding home spaces.
2.   Recreational vehicles, including, but not limited to, travel trailers,
camp trailers and truck campers shall be stored only in a bulk storage area.
Q.   Street Surface: All streets shall be hard surfaced.
R.   Street Maintenance: Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks,
holes, bumps, and similar defects. This shall not be interpreted, however, to
prohibit speed bumps constructed in accordance with law.
S.   Vehicles: Abandoned and junk vehicles and vehicle parts and other junk
shall be removed promptly.
T.   Weeds: Weeds shall be kept cut below six inches (6") high all year long,
both within the park and on surrounding public property to the edge of any
adjoining street. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 36
PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATIONS
SECTION:
9-36-010: Purpose
9-36-020: Scope
9-36-030: Permitted Use
9-36-040: Development Standards; Permitted Use
9-36-050: Conditional Use Permit Required
9-36-060: Development Standards; Conditional Use
9-36-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development regulations for
public utility substations to ensure they are compatible with adjoining uses.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-36-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any public utility substation
within the city. Such requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this title, this code, and other laws. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
9-36-030: PERMITTED USE:
A public utility substation that conforms to the development standards of
section
9-36-040 of this chapter shall be a permitted use in any zone. (Ord. 394, 8-7-
2001)
9-36-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; PERMITTED USE:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any public
utility substation established as a permitted use:
A.   Color: The substation shall be painted or constructed of materials with
earth tone colors chosen by the utility provider from a list of colors approved
by the community development department.
B.   Fencing: The perimeter of the substation site shall be fenced if necessary
for public safety or to minimize visual impact.
C.   Landscaping: The perimeter of the substation site shall be landscaped in
accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the community development
department.
D.   Location: Substations shall be located only as follows:
1.   On private property and more than thirty feet (30') from any habitable
structure.
2.   Within the park strip of any fully constructed public street right of way.
3.   On public streets where:
a.   Full improvements have not yet been installed as shown on the city's
master traffic and transportation plan; and
b.   The applicant, via city form, agrees to relocate the substation at his
expense to the park strip when the street is fully constructed.
4.   No substation shall be located in the path of any planned street or trail
as illustrated on the city's master traffic and transportation plan or parks
and trails master plan.
E.   Maximum Size: Maximum aboveground size shall be as follows:
1.   If not located within the park strip of a fully improved street: nine feet
(9') in any direction horizontally and six and one-half feet (61/2') vertically
above the existing grade.
2.   If located within the park strip of a fully improved street: five feet
(5') horizontally parallel to the street by two feet (2') perpendicular to the
street and fifty six inches (56") vertically above existing grade.
F.   Visual Obstructions: The substation shall conform to visual obstruction
regulations set forth in section
9-27-080 of this title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-36-050: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A public utility substation that does not conform to the development standards
of section
9-36-040 of this chapter may be established in any residential, commercial,
public facilities, or manufacturing zone subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to the requirements of section
9-5-080 of this title and the development standards of section
9-36-060 of this chapter. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-36-060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; CONDITIONAL USE:
The development standards of section
9-36-040 of this chapter shall apply to any public utility substation
established as a conditional use, except as modified by the following
subsections:
A.   Location: Public utility substations exceeding the size limits of
subsection
9-36-040E of this chapter shall not be located in any park strip or front yard.
B.   Maximum Size: A public utility substation located in a residential zone
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') horizontally and ten feet (10') vertically
above existing grade.
C.   Maximum Height: No public utility substation shall exceed ten feet (10')
in height. Height exceeding the limitations of subsection
9-36-040E of this chapter may be permitted only with a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 37
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
SECTION:
9-37-010: Purpose
9-37-020: Scope
9-37-030: New Recreational Vehicle Parks
9-37-040: Conditional Use Permit Required
9-37-050: Development Standards
9-37-060: Responsibilities Of Owners
9-37-070: Responsibilities Of Park Guests
9-37-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development standards for
recreational vehicle parks to assure their compatibility with adjoining uses
and to protect the welfare of the public. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-37-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the use and occupancy of
recreational vehicles in recreational vehicle parks within the city. Such
requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable
provisions of this title, this code, and other laws. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-37-030: NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
No new recreational vehicle parks shall be created, nor shall any existing park
be expanded in acreage or in the number of recreational vehicles allowed. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
9-37-040: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No recreational vehicle park shall be established unless:
A.   Such use is allowed as a conditional use in the zone where it is located;
and
B.   A conditional use permit has been issued for the use pursuant to the
requirements of section
9-5-080 of this title and the development standards of this chapter. (Ord. 394,
8-7-2001)
9-37-050: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any
recreational vehicle park:
A.   Applicable Laws: Parks shall conform to all applicable laws, including,
but not limited to, zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, health, and fire
codes.
B.   Clearance: Each recreational vehicle shall be located at least fifteen
feet (15') from adjacent recreational vehicles.
C.   Debris: Parks shall be maintained free of debris that may provide rodent
harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, or other pests.
D.   Drainage: The site shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate
surface drainage and isolated from any existing or potential health hazard or
nuisance.
E.   Dust: Objectionable dust from exposed ground surfaces shall be prevented
by use of appropriate ground cover and control measures. This shall include,
but shall not be limited to, paving with cement or asphalt, covering with
mulch, or cultivating with vegetative ground cover.
F.   Fence And Wall Repair: Fences and walls shall be maintained in good
repair, including periodic repainting, as needed.
G.   Fittings: All utilities provided for each recreational vehicle lot shall
have approved standard fittings to which a recreational vehicle can be easily
connected.
H.   Flammable Materials: Flammable materials, including, but not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, oil, paper, plastic, cardboard, and wood, shall not be
stored beneath or against a manufactured or mobile home.
I.   Infestation: Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained
reasonably free of pests, insects, poisonous spiders and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects,
spiders, and rodents shall conform with city and other applicable requirements.
If the potential for infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath
any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable
materials.
J.   Tenure: No recreational vehicle shall occupy a recreational vehicle park
for more than four (4) days in any sixty (60) day period.
K.   Maintenance: All buildings, parts of buildings, grounds, and equipment
shall be maintained clean and in good repair.
L.   Paving: Any areas provided for parking shall be paved with concrete or
asphalt and connected to the street.
M.   Street Surface: All streets shall be hard surfaced.
N.   Street Maintenance: Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks,
holes, bumps, and similar defects. This shall not be interpreted, however, to
prohibit speed bumps constructed in accordance with law.
O.   Weeds: Weeds shall be kept cut below six inches (6") high all year long,
both within the park and on surrounding public property to the edge of any
adjoining street. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-37-060: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS:
A.   Applicable Laws: The owner of each recreational vehicle park shall comply
and ensure compliance of other persons with the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable laws concerning the recreational vehicle park or part thereof.
B.   Inspection: The park owner shall make at least one daily inspection of the
entire park to ensure compliance with law. Park guest restrooms and washing
facilities shall be inspected more than once each day, if necessary, to ensure
compliance with this requirement.
C.   Maintenance: The park owner shall maintain all buildings, rooms,
equipment, and premises, including public areas abutting streets and sidewalks
in a clean and sanitary condition. Restroom equipment shall be maintained in
adequate amounts, including, but not limited to, toilet paper, hand towels, and
hand soap.
D.   Repair: The park owner shall maintain in good repair all equipment and
facilities provided by the park owner.
E.   Placement: The park owner shall supervise the safe and proper placement of
each recreational vehicle on its lot.
F.   Connections: The park owner shall ensure that all connections and
disconnections from any recreational vehicle to sewer, water, gas, electric, or
other utility service governed by this chapter are made and maintained
correctly and in compliance with applicable laws.
G.   Register: The park owner shall maintain a current register of park
occupants. The register shall be readily available to any authorized person
inspecting the park. A detailed map identifying each lot shall be available.
H.   Notify: The park owner shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this chapter, including occupant duties and responsibilities.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-37-070: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARK GUESTS:
A.   Applicable Laws: Each park guest shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws.
B.   Placement: Each park guest shall ensure that his or her recreational
vehicle is correctly and safely placed on the lot.
C.   Connections: Each park guest shall ensure that all connections and
disconnections from his or her recreational vehicle to any utility are made and
maintained in compliance with requirements of this chapter and other applicable
laws.
D.   Pets: No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, or other animal shall
permit it to run at large or defecate on park property. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 38
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS AND
PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
SECTION:
9-38-010: Purpose
9-38-020: Scope
9-38-030: Permitted Uses
9-38-040: Development Standards
9-38-050: Reasonable Accommodation
9-38-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A.   Comply with Utah Code Annotated sections 10-9a-516 and 520; and
B.   Avoid discrimination in housing against elderly persons or persons with
disabilities pursuant to the Utah fair housing act and the federal fair housing
act as interpreted by courts whose decisions are binding in Utah. (Ord. 838, 8-
5-2008)
9-38-020: SCOPE:
If any facility, residence, congregate living or other housing arrangement
meets the definition of a residential facility for elderly persons or a
residential facility for persons with a disability as set forth in this title,
the requirements of this chapter shall govern the same notwithstanding any
conflicting provision of this title or this code. Except as provided herein,
the requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this title, this code or other laws. (Ord. 838,
8-5-2008)
9-38-030: PERMITTED USES:
A.   Permitted Uses: Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this title, a
residential facility for elderly persons and a residential facility for persons
with a disability shall be permitted uses in any zone where a dwelling is
allowed either as a permitted or conditional use, subject to the development
standards in section
9-38-040 of this chapter.
B.   Review Process: In order to evaluate the impact of the proposed facility
and its similarity to the impact of a single- family dwelling occupied by a
family, the following information must be submitted with the application:
1.   A sufficiently detailed site plan, building plans and other information
necessary to determine compliance with building safety and health regulations
applicable to similar residential dwelling permitted in the zone.
2.   Drawings depicting the elevation of all sides of the building.
3.   Specific type of facility (as defined by state regulations) and by which
agency it is regulated.
4.   Number of residents, nonresident staff and expected number of visitors per
day, along with hours and degree of supervision to be provided.
5.   Location and number of similar facilities in the vicinity of the proposed
facility.
C.   Termination: A use permitted by this chapter is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
1.   The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential facility for
elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability; or
2.   Any license or certification issued by the Utah department of health or
the department of human services for such facility terminates or is revoked; or
3.   The facility fails to comply with requirements set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 838, 8-5-2008)
9-38-040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply as follows:
A.   Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons:
1.   The facility shall comply with building, safety, and health regulations
applicable to similar structures.
2.   The facility must be able to be used as a residential facility for elderly
persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would change the
structure's residential character.
3.   Adequate off street parking shall be provided. Parking in addition to the
stalls typical for a single-family home must be screened from public view.
4.   No person who is being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse may be placed
in a residential facility for elderly persons.
B.   Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability:
1.   The facility shall comply with all building, safety and health regulations
applicable to similar structures.
2.   The facility must be able to be used as a residential facility for persons
with a disability without fundamental alterations that would change the
structure's residential character or negatively impact the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
3.   The facility shall be limited to eight (8) occupants, exclusive of staff.
4.   If the facility is housing persons whose disability is substance abuse
related and is located within five hundred feet (500') of a school, a security
plan satisfactory to local law enforcement officials must be submitted and
include twenty four (24) hour supervision of residents and other twenty four
(24) hour security measures.
C.   No Dangerous Persons Permitted: No residential facility shall be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would:
1.   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals;
or
2.   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
D.   License And Certification: Prior to occupancy of any residential facility,
the person or entity operating the facility shall:
1.   Provide to the city a copy of any license or certification required by the
Utah state department of health or the Utah state department of human services;
and
2.   Certify in a sworn statement that no person will reside or remain in the
facility whose tenancy would:
a.   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals;
or
b.   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Ord.
838, 8-5-2008)
9-38-050: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION:
A.   Reasonable Accommodation Required: None of the requirements of this
chapter shall be interpreted to limit any reasonable accommodation necessary to
allow the establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for persons with
a disability.
B.   Application: Any person or entity wanting a reasonable accommodation shall
make application to the zoning administrator and shall articulate in writing
the nature of the requested accommodation and the basis for the request.
C.   Decision: The zoning administrator shall render a decision on each
application for a reasonable accommodation within thirty (30) days. The
decision shall be based on evidence of record demonstrating:
1.   The requested accommodation will not undermine the legitimate purposes of
existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation
would provide to a person with a disability;
2.   That, but for the accommodation, one or more persons with a disability
likely will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice;
and
3.   That equal results will be achieved as between the person with a
disability requesting the accommodation and a nondisabled person.
D.   Appeal: If a reasonable accommodation request is denied, the decision may
be appealed to the hearing officer in the manner provided for appeals of
administrative decisions set forth in this title. (Ord. 838, 8-5-2008)
CHAPTER 39
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
9-39-010: Purpose
9-39-020: Scope
9-39-030: Definitions
9-39-040: Location Of Businesses; Restrictions
9-39-050: Effect On Nonconforming Businesses
9-39-060: Signs
9-39-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose and objective of this chapter is to:
A.   Establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration
of sexually oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the
city; and
B.   Regulate the signage of such businesses, control the adverse affects of
such signage, and prevent inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the
community. (Ord. 966, 7-5-2011)
9-39-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any sexually oriented business
within the city. This chapter shall be construed as a regulation of time,
place, and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the
United States and Utah constitutions. The requirements of this chapter shall
not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this
title, this code, and other laws. (Ord. 966, 7-5-2011)
9-39-030: DEFINITIONS:
Terms involving sexually oriented businesses which are not defined in this
title shall have the meanings set forth in title 6, chapter 5 of this code.
(Ord. 966, 7-5-2011)
9-39-040: LOCATION OF BUSINESSES; RESTRICTIONS:
A.   Distance Requirements: No sexually oriented business shall be located:
1.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, public park, library,
licensed child daycare center, linear park/recreational trail or religious
institution; or
2.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residential use or any
agricultural or residential zone boundary; or
3.   Within six hundred feet (600') of any other sexually oriented business.
B.   Measurement Standards:
1.   Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this
chapter shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or zoning districts, from the property boundaries of the school,
public park, religious or cultural activity, residential use, or other sexually
oriented business, or from the right of way of a gateway to the structure of
the sexually oriented business.
2.   Distance requirements from zoning districts for this chapter shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning
districts, from the closest zoning boundary of a residential or agricultural
district to the sexually oriented business structure. (Ord. 966, 7-5-2011)
9-39-050: EFFECT ON NONCONFORMING BUSINESSES:
All existing legal, nonconforming sexually oriented businesses, as of the
effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter within nine (9) months from the date of enactment.
(Ord. 966, 7-5-2011)
9-39-060: SIGNS:
A.   More Restrictive Provisions: Notwithstanding anything contrary contained
in chapter 26 of this title, the more restrictive requirements shall prevail.
B.   Development Standards: Signs for sexually oriented business shall be
limited as follows:
1.   No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed for each sexually oriented
business.
2.   No sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet.
3.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the exterior
walls or roof of any building or structure.
4.   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or
inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Signs shall
contain alphanumeric copy only.
5.   Only wall signs and awning signs shall be permitted.
6.   Painted wall advertising shall not be permitted.
7.   Other than the signs specifically allowed by this section, no sexually
oriented business shall attach, construct, or allow to be attached or
constructed, any temporary sign, banner, light, or other device designed to
draw attention to a business location. (Ord. 966, 7-5-2011)
CHAPTER 40
TEMPORARY USES
(Rep. by Ord. 908, 10-20-2009; Ord. 923, 1-19-2010)
CHAPTER 41
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-41-010: Purpose
9-41-020: Scope
9-41-030: Existing Facility Plan Required
9-41-040: Permitted Use
9-41-050: Development Standards; Permitted Use
9-41-060: Conditional Use
9-41-070: Development Standards; Conditional Use
9-41-080: Historic Preservation Commission Review
9-41-090: Nonmaintained And Abandoned Facilities
9-41-100: Prohibited Use
9-41-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development regulations for
wireless telecommunication facilities to assure their compatibility with
adjoining uses to the extent permitted by the telecommunications act of 1996,
as may be amended. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to low power radio services
facilities such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal communications system)
communications and paging systems.
A.   Facility Types: The following types of wireless telecommunication
facilities shall be governed by this chapter:
1.   Hidden antennas.
2.   Roof mounted antennas.
3.   Stealth design antennas.
4.   Flush mounted and nonflush mounted wall antennas.
5.   Whip antennas.
6.   Monopoles.
7.   Lattice towers.
B.   Other Laws: The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to
prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, and
other laws, including pertinent regulations of the federal communications
commission and the federal aviation administration. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-030: EXISTING FACILITY PLAN REQUIRED:
When a carrier applies for a permit under this chapter, the carrier shall
submit a plan showing by location and type the carrier's existing and planned
facilities within the city and within one mile of the city's boundary. (Ord.
394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-040: PERMITTED USE:
A wireless telecommunication facility that conforms to the development
standards of section
9-41-050 of this chapter shall be a permitted use in any zone. A separate
application shall be required for each proposed facility. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-050: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; PERMITTED USE:
The development standards set forth in this section shall apply to any wireless
telecommunication facility established as a permitted use. The standards in
each subsection are not mutually exclusive; thus the requirements of more than
one subsection may apply in any given case.
A.   In General: The following development standards shall be applicable to all
facilities regardless of the facility type or zone within which the facility is
proposed to be located:
1.   The proposed facility shall be located on an approved structure and/or
site in conformance with this code. If a proposed facility site does not
conform to this code, the carrier shall submit and have approved by staff a
plan to bring the structure and/or site into conformance with the code prior to
completion and operation of the proposed facility. This plan shall be submitted
with a permitted use application.
2.   Any associated mechanical or electrical equipment shall be completely
screened from view, from public rights of way, on site parking areas and
adjacent properties, with a solid screen.
3.   The proposed facility, including associated mechanical and electrical
equipment, shall not be located within a public right of way.
4.   The proposed facility shall conform to the requirements of this title,
this code, and other laws, including pertinent regulations of the federal
communications commission and the federal aviation administration.
5.   Copies of required permits from pertinent federal agencies establishing
compliance with applicable federal regulations shall be filed with the city
prior to the issuance of any permit for a proposed facility.
6.   The proposed facility shall conform to applicable development standards
set forth in this section.
7.   Lightning rods shall not be include in the height calculation for any
facilities.
B.   Stealth Design Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to stealth
design antennas. The intent of this subsection is to allow creativity in
designing a proposed facility so that it will have essentially no visual
impact:
1.   Stealth designs may include, but are not limited to, the use of one or
more of the following:
a.   Screening, structure and/or antenna design which blend with the
architecture of the existing structure upon which the antenna will be mounted.
b.   Screening, structure, antenna and/or location design which blend with and/
or take advantage of existing vegetation and/or features of a site.
c.   Color schemes that make an antenna less noticeable.
2.   The city shall have sole authority to determine whether or not a proposed
facility design will have essentially no visual impact.
a.   The zoning administrator shall determine whether a proposed stealth design
meets the intent of this subsection B, or defer the matter to the planning
commission.
b.   If a determination is made that a proposed facility design will have a
visual impact, a conditional use permit shall be required as set forth in
section
9-41-060 of this chapter.
C.   Roof Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to roof
mounted antennas:
1.   Roof mounted antennas shall be permitted on flat roofs and shall be
screened, constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which they are
attached.
2.   Roof mounted antennas shall be permitted on pitched roof structures only
if determined to be a stealth design as set forth in this section.
3.   Roof mounted antennas shall be allowed on top of existing penthouses or
mechanical equipment rooms, provided:
a.   The antennas and antenna support structures are enclosed by a structure
that creates a visual screen which is architecturally compatible to the
building; and
b.   The screening structure, antennas and antenna mounting structures do not
extend more than eight feet (8') above the existing roofline of the penthouse
or mechanical equipment room.
4.   Roof mounted antennas not mounted on a penthouse or mechanical equipment
room shall be allowed as follows:
a.   On buildings without parapet walls antennas shall be mounted a minimum of
five feet (5') from the exterior wall of a building.
(1)   Antennas mounted between five (5) and ten feet (10') from the exterior
wall shall have a maximum height directly proportional to the distance the
antenna is set back from the exterior wall up to a maximum height of ten feet
(10') above the roofline of the building to which the antenna is attached.
(2)   Regardless of setback from exterior walls, antennas shall not exceed a
maximum height of ten feet (10') above the roofline of the building.
b.   On buildings with parapet walls antennas shall be mounted at least five
feet (5') behind any parapet wall.
(1)   For antennas mounted between five (5) and ten feet (10') behind a parapet
wall the maximum height of the antenna shall be directly proportional to the
distance the antenna is set back from the wall up to a maximum of ten feet
(10') as measured from the top of the parapet wall.
(2)   Regardless of setback from parapet walls, no antenna shall extend more
than fifteen feet (15') above the roofline of the building itself unless
approved pursuant to a conditional use permit.
D.   Wall Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to flush and
nonflush mounted wall antennas:
1.   Wall mounted antennas shall not:
a.   Extend above the wall line of the building.
b.   Extend more than twelve inches (12") horizontally from the wall surface.
2.   Antennas, equipment and the supporting structure shall be painted to match
the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are
most commonly seen.
3.   Antennas and the supporting structures on buildings should be
architecturally compatible with the building.
4.   Whip antennas shall not be allowed on a wall mounted antenna structure.
5.   Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or
mechanical equipment rooms, with no portion of the antenna extending above the
roof or parapet line of such structures, shall be considered wall mounted
antennas.
6.   The maximum number of carriers per building shall be:
a.   In commercial and industrial zones, one carrier for the front side of each
building; no limit on other building sides.
b.   In residential and agricultural zones, one carrier per building side, up
to a maximum of four (4) sides. All antennas shall be approved stealth design
antennas as set forth in this section.
7.   The total antenna area per carrier shall be:
a.   In commercial and industrial zones, each carrier's total combined area
allowed for wall mounted antennas and supporting structures, shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet for each exterior wall of the building or a total of one
hundred sixty (160) square feet per building. The total area is the sum of the
area of each individual antenna face and the visible portion of the supporting
structure as viewed when looking directly at the face of the building.
b.   In residential and agricultural zones, subsection D7a of this section
shall apply except on residential structures. Such structures shall be
evaluated on a case by case basis as part of the stealth design requirements
set forth in this section.
8.   Not more than four (4) walls shall be occupied by antennas, except on
residential buildings which shall be evaluated on a case by case basis as part
of the stealth design requirements set forth in this section.
E.   Monopoles With Antennas And Antenna Support Structures: The following
provisions shall apply to monopoles with antennas and antenna support
structures:
1.   Monopoles shall be located as follows:
a.   Monopoles shall not be located in residential or agricultural zones.
b.   Monopoles may be located in commercial, public facility, or industrial
zones so long as they are not within a required landscaping, buffering, or
parking area.
c.   Monopoles are preferred in the rear yard area of a lot or parcel.
d.   Monopoles shall be set back as follows:
(1)   A minimum of two feet (2') for every foot of pole height from the closest
line of any property in an adjacent residential zone in which a residential use
is located or may be located. The planning commission may reduce the required
setback from a residential zone if practical difficulties are demonstrated by
the carrier (i.e., city park location, public buildings, etc.).
(2)   In addition to the minimum setbacks required by the zone and other
locational restrictions of this subsection, monopoles shall be set back from
all public rights of way the greater of one hundred feet (100') or one and one-
fourth feet (1.25') for every one foot (1') of monopole height, as defined in
this subsection.
(3)   A monopole shall not be located within five hundred (500) linear feet
from another monopole.
2.   The height of monopoles shall be as follows:
a.   The maximum height of a monopole with antennas and antenna support
structures shall be sixty feet (60') unless additional height is necessary to
accommodate a permitted use.
b.   Height shall be measured from the average finished grade at the base of
the monopole to the top of the highest portion of the facility.
3.   The maximum visible width of antennas and antenna mounting structures on a
monopole shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height or fifteen feet (15') in
width as viewed looking directly at the monopole at the same elevation as the
antennas and antenna mounting structure.
4.   Monopoles shall be fenced for security purposes as required in this
section.
5.   There shall be no climbing pegs located on the lower twenty feet (20') of
any monopole.
6.   Antennas may be collocated on a single monopole subject to the development
standards of this section.
F.   Accessory Buildings And Equipment To Antennas And Antenna Structures:
Accessory buildings and equipment shall conform to required setback, height,
and landscaping requirements of the zone in which they are located. Accessory
equipment not located within an accessory building shall be fenced as set forth
in subsection G of this section.
G.   Fencing: Monopoles, accessory equipment and other apparatus associated
with antennas, and antenna support structures shall be enclosed with a six foot
(6') high vinyl coated chainlink fence.
H.   Undergrounding Of Lines: All communication and power lines to or between
any accessory building, accessory equipment, and antenna structures shall be
located underground.
I.   Facilities Located In Commercial Zones: The facilities set forth below
shall be permitted uses in commercial and industrial zones so long as they meet
the requirements of this subsection and are not located on otherwise vacant
property:
1.   Hidden antennas.
2.   Stealth design antennas.
3.   Flush mounted wall antennas.
4.   Roof mounted antennas that are:
a.   Completely enclosed from view within an architecturally compatible screen
approved by staff.
b.   Set back at least ten feet (10') from exterior walls of the building on
nonparapet wall buildings, or ten feet (10') from the parapet wall on parapet
wall buildings.
5.   Monopoles:
a.   If an application is for a second carrier to collocate on an existing
monopole previously approved by a conditional use permit; and
b.   If the height of the existing monopole will not be increased by more than
twenty feet (20').
J.   Facilities Located In Residential And Agricultural Zones: The facilities
set forth below shall be permitted uses in residential and agricultural zones:
1.   Hidden antennas mounted in any structure.
2.   Stealth design antennas mounted on:
a.   School buildings or structures (private, public or quasi- public).
b.   Churches.
c.   Agricultural buildings or structures.
d.   Residential structures.
(Ord. 394, 8-7-2001; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
9-41-060: CONDITIONAL USE:
A wireless telecommunication facility that does not conform to the development
standards of section
9-41-040 of this chapter may be established in any agricultural, residential,
commercial, public facilities, or industrial zone subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to the requirements of section
9-5-080 of this title and the development standards of section
9-41-070 of this chapter. Each facility shall require a separate conditional
use permit. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
9-41-070: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; CONDITIONAL USE:
The development standards of section
9-41-060 of this chapter shall apply to any wireless telecommunication facility
established as a conditional use, except as otherwise modified by this section:
A.   Antennas And Mounting Structures On Or Over Public Rights Of Way: Antennas
and mounting structures shall not encroach on or over the public sidewalk or on
or over a public right of way, unless:
1.   The facility is approved by conditional use permit on existing structures
located in the right of way.
2.   Associated mechanical and electrical equipment is not located in the
public right of way.
3.   The facility is virtually hidden from view.
4.   The existing structure is proven structurally sound to support the
proposed facility.
5.   The carrier signs an agreement with the city which:
a.   Holds the city harmless from any liability claims as a result of the
facility;
b.   Requires the carrier to provide, prior to permit issuance, proof to the
city that the carrier has acquired sufficient liability insurance as may be
required by the city; and
c.   Names the city as cobeneficiary of the insurance policy.
B.   Facilities In Historic Districts: Any facility proposed within a historic
district or on a landmark site as defined by the city, county, state or the
federal governments shall be approved by a conditional use permit.
C.   Fencing And Screening Requirements: Specific fencing and screening plans
for each facility shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with any
conditional use permit application. Higher grade fencing, more aesthetic fence
designs, and landscaping may be required for the purposes of visual screening,
architectural compatibility, site compatibility, and other impact mitigation.
D.   Lattice Towers: A lattice tower facility shall be permitted only upon a
finding that none of the other facility types set forth in subsection
9-41-020B of this chapter is suitable in light of particular circumstances
associated with a location where a facility is required for the proper
functioning of a low power radio services network.
E.   Monopoles:
1.   Monopoles may be allowed in side yard areas of any lot if approved by
conditional use permit.
2.   The height of an existing monopole located in a commercial zone may be
increased if approved by a condition use permit. No monopole with antennas and
antenna support structures shall exceed a height of one hundred feet (100').
3.   A monopole may be located within five hundred (500) linear feet from
another monopole if approved by a conditional use permit.
4.   The maximum height of a monopole with antennas and antenna support
structures may be increased if approved by conditional use permit for
collocation of a second carrier on an existing monopole. In the event
collocation for the second carrier is terminated, the original carrier shall
have thirty (30) days, from the date the second carrier files with the FCC the
required "notice to abandon" its facility, to reduce the height of the monopole
to its originally approved height. The city shall receive a copy of the "notice
to abandon" filed with the FCC.
F.   Nonflush Mounted Wall Antennas: Nonflush mounted wall antennas may extend
more than six feet (6') horizontally from the wall surface if approved by a
condition use permit.
G.   Stealth Design Antennas And Monopoles: Stealth design monopoles may be
located in residential or agricultural zones if approved by a conditional use
permit. Final determination of the acceptability of any such stealth design
antenna or monopole shall be made as part of the conditional use permit
process.
H.   Additional Conditional Use Factors: In addition to conditional use
standards outlined in subsection
9-5-080E of this title, the following factors shall be considered in evaluating
an application for a conditional use permit:
1.   Compatibility of the proposed structure with the height and mass of
existing buildings and utility structures.
2.   For new sites, whether location of the antenna on other existing
structures in the same vicinity such as other towers, buildings, water towers,
utility poles, athletic field lights, parking lot lights, etc., is possible
without significantly impacting antenna transmission or reception.
3.   Antenna location in relation to existing vegetation, topography and
buildings to obtain the best visual screening.
4.   Whether spacing between monopoles creates quantifiable detrimental impacts
to adjoining properties. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-080: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION REVIEW:
Prior to considering a conditional use permit application for any facility
within a historic district or on a landmark site, the application shall be
reviewed by the historic preservation commission.
A.   Submittal: Upon receipt, the zoning administrator shall submit a copy of
the application to the historic preservation commission.
B.   Time Limit For Review: Within thirty (30) days after receipt, the historic
preservation commission shall review the application with respect to the
development standards set forth in this chapter and standards for issuance of a
conditional use permit.
C.   Recommendation: Within fourteen (14) days after reviewing an application,
the commission shall prepare and transmit a written recommendation to the
planning commission. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-090: NONMAINTAINED AND ABANDONED FACILITIES:
A.   Letter Agreement: Prior to approval of an application for any facility,
the applicant shall supply the city with a letter agreeing to the requirements
and processes of this section. The letter agreement shall state that if
technology renders the facility obsolete, the facility is not maintained, the
facility is abandoned, or the facility is vacated, the carrier will provide the
city with a copy of a "notice to abandon" to be filed with the FCC and will
remove the facility as set forth in this section.
B.   Notices:
1.   If the zoning administrator determines that a facility is not maintained,
is abandoned or is vacated, the zoning administrator shall send the carrier a
notice of nonmaintenance or abandonment by certified mail, indicating such and
suggesting compliance alternatives.
2.   If a facility subject to the foregoing notice requirement has not been
repaired, put into use or removed within thirty (30) calendar days of the
carrier's receipt of the notice, the zoning administrator may send the carrier
a certified notice to remove, which shall give the carrier thirty (30) calendar
days from the receipt of the notice to remove the facility as set forth in this
section.
C.   Removal Requirements: Within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt
of a notice to remove, a carrier shall:
1.   Remove from the site all:
a.   Antennas, support structures, and other associated apparatus; and
b.   The top three feet (3') of the antenna footing and other building
footings.
2.   Restore the site to its original condition, including, but not limited to,
grading and revegetation as approved by the city.
D.   Violation: In the event a facility is not removed as required, the city
may undertake legal action to enforce removal as set forth in chapter 7 of this
title. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
9-41-100: PROHIBITED USE:
No wireless telecommunication antennas other than those allowed subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall be permitted within the city except as
otherwise required by applicable state or federal law. (Ord. 394, 8-7-2001)
CHAPTER 42
CANNABIS PRODUCTION ESTABLISHMENTS AND
MEDICAL CANNABIS PHARMACIES
SECTION:
9-42-010: Purpose
9-42-020: Scope
9-42-030: Definitions
9-42-040: Standards
9-42-050: Regulation Precedence
9-42-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the establishment of cannabis
production establishments and medical cannabis pharmacies as defined in
9-3-040 of this title, subject to licensing procedures required by the State of
Utah. (Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-42-020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any cannabis production
establishments and medical cannabis pharmacies within the city. This chapter
shall be construed as a regulation of time, place, and manner of the operation
of these businesses, consistent with Utah Code. The requirements of this
chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions
of this title, this code, or other laws. (Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
9-42-030: DEFINITIONS:
A.   "Primarily Residential" for the purposes of this chapter and any
applicable state law means the following zoning districts:
1.   MPC – Master Planned Community
2.   RA1 – Residential agricultural
3.   RA2 – Residential agricultural
4.   RH – Single-family residential (hillside)
5.   R3 – Single-family residential
6.   R4 – Single-family residential
7.   R5 – Single-family residential
8.   RM – Residential - MDU
9.   RM1 – Multiple-family residential
10.   RM2 – Multiple-family residential
11.   RR-22 – Rural Residential
12.   RR-43 – Rural Residential
13.   RSD-1 – Foxgate Farms (Residential Special District)
14.   RSD-2 – Corner Canyon Vista (Residential Special District)
15.   RSD-3 – South Fork Estates (Residential Special District)
16.   RSD-4 – Valle di Villa (Residential Special District)
17.   RSD-5 – Bellevue (Residential Special District)
18.   IC – Institutional Care
B.   The definitions in Utah Code Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis
Act, as amended, and Utah Code Title 4 Chapter 41a, Cannabis Production
Establishments, as amended, are hereby adopted by this section. (Ord. 1418, 1-
21-2020)
9-42-040: STANDARDS:
A.   Health and Safety:
1.   The following standards apply to all cannabis production establishments:
a.   There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into
the environment from any facility where growing, processing, or testing of
cannabis occurs, and
b.   Cannabis production establishments shall meet the land use requirements
for the zone in which it is located;
2.   The following standards apply to all medical cannabis pharmacies:
a.   No cannabis products shall be visible from outside a medical cannabis
pharmacy, and
b.   Medical cannabis pharmacies shall meet the land use requirements for the
zone in which it is located.
B.   Hours of Operation: Permitted hours of operation for medical cannabis
pharmacies shall be 7:00 am to 10:00 pm.
C.   License Requirement: No cannabis production establishment or medical
cannabis pharmacy shall be established, operated, or maintained within the City
without a valid license issued by the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food
or the Utah Department of Health, respectively, and without a valid business
license issued by the City.
D.   Location:
1.   Cannabis production establishments shall be located as required by Title
4-41a of the Utah Code.
2.   Medical cannabis pharmacies shall be located as required by Title 26-61a
of the Utah Code.
E.   Number of Facilities:
1.   No more than one (1) cannabis production establishment shall be permitted
in the City for every 40,000 residents of the City, rounded down.
2.   No more than one (1) medical cannabis pharmacy shall be permitted in the
City for every 40,000 residents of the City, rounded down.
F.   Signs: Signs shall be subject to the dimensional and design regulations
per sections 4-41a-403 and 26-61a.505, Utah Code, as amended. (Ord. 1418, 1-21-
2020; amd. Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021)
9-42-050: REGULATION PRECEDENCE:
If any regulation, in Title 9 – Land Use and Development Regulations, regarding
cannabis production establishments or medical cannabis pharmacies is in
conflict with Utah Code, State code takes precedence. (Ord. 1418, 1-21-2020)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING OFFICIAL
SECTION:
10-1-010: Building Official
10-1-020: Qualifications
10-1-030: Powers And Duties
10-1-040: Building Inspectors
10-1-050: Liability
10-1-060: Conflict Of Interest
10-1-070: Appeal Of Decisions
10-1-010: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The position of building official is hereby created, which position may also be
referred to as chief building official. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-1-020: QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person appointed as the building official of Draper City must meet the
qualifications set forth at Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-9, as amended,
and any other requirements imposed by the city. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-1-030: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The building official shall perform all the duties set forth in the
construction codes and any other duties as the city council may from time to
time provide, including, but not limited to, the following:
A.   Administration: The building official shall administer the provisions of
the construction codes and this title.
B.   Enforcement: The building official shall enforce the provisions of the
construction codes and this title. For such purposes, the building official
shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
C.   Interpretation: The building official shall interpret the provisions of
the construction codes and may recommend adoption and undertake enforcement of
rules and regulations supplemental to such provisions as may be necessary.
D.   Permits: The building official shall receive and review all applications
for permits required by the provisions of the construction codes and this
title, shall determine whether such applications conform with the construction
codes, and shall issue permits accordingly.
E.   Inspections: The building official shall inspect all buildings and
structures as required by the provisions of the construction codes and this
title to ensure that the construction, alteration, or repair conforms to the
approved plans, specifications and provision of the construction codes.
F.   Certificates: The building official shall issue all certificates of
occupancy or final inspection required by the provisions of the construction
codes and this title.
G.   Assistants: The building official may recommend to the city manager the
hiring of, or contracting for, technical officers, inspectors, and other
employees.
H.   Right Of Entry: The building official may enter a building or structure at
any reasonable time to make an inspection, to enforce any of the provisions of
the construction codes, or when the building official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon a premises a condition which
is contrary to or in violation of such codes which makes the building or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous. If such building or premises is
occupied, the building official must present his or her credentials to the
occupant and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the
building official must make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
In any case where entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse
through remedies provided by law to secure entry.
I.   Stop Orders: When work is being done contrary to the provisions of the
construction codes, or any other rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
the building official may order the work stopped by serving written notice on
any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done. Upon receipt
of notice, such persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the
building official to proceed.
J.   Occupancy Violations: When a building, structure or building service
equipment therein is being used contrary to the provisions of the construction
codes, the building official may order such use discontinued by serving written
notice on any person causing such use to be continued. Upon receipt of notice,
such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the
building official.
K.   Disconnect Utilities: The building official shall have the authority to
disconnect a utility service or energy supply to a building, structure or
building service equipment where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to
life or property. The building official shall, whenever possible, notify the
serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or building
service equipment of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action,
and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the building,
structure or building service equipment, in writing, of such disconnection
immediately thereafter.
L.   Condemn Building Service Equipment: When the building official ascertains
that building service equipment has become hazardous to life, health or
property, or has become unsanitary, the building official shall order in
writing that such equipment either be removed or restored to a safe or sanitary
condition, as appropriate. The written notice itself shall fix a time limit for
compliance with such order. Defective building service equipment shall not be
maintained after receiving such notice.
When equipment or installation is to be disconnected hereunder, written notice
of such disconnection and causes therefor shall be given within twenty four
(24) hours after disconnection to the serving utility, the owner and occupant
of such building, structure or premises.
M.   Connection After Order To Disconnect: No person shall make connections
from an energy, fuel or power supply, nor supply energy or fuel to building
service equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by
the building official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued
by the building official, until the building official authorizes the
reconnection and use of such equipment.
N.   Institute Action: When any construction work, building or service
equipment is maintained in violation of the construction codes or in violation
of a notice issued pursuant to the provision of this section, the building
official shall, upon approval from the community development director and the
city manager, institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
O.   Investigate Violations: The building official shall conduct investigations
and prepare reports as required by Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-8, as
amended, upon a finding that a licensed contractor, electrician, or plumber has
materially violated the provisions of a code in a manner to jeopardize the
public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-1-040: BUILDING INSPECTORS:
Any number of "building inspectors" may be hired by the city to assist the
building official in the performance of his or her duties. All building
inspectors shall take the constitutional oath of office and be properly
deputized before entering on their respective duties. Building inspector(s)
shall be under the direct supervision of the building official, shall have the
authority to perform those duties delegated to the building inspector(s) by the
building official, and shall have such other powers and duties as designated by
the city council. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-1-050: LIABILITY:
A.   The building official and any building inspector, acting in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not be rendered
personally liable for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties.
B.   Except as otherwise provided by law, a suit brought against the building
official or building inspector because of an act or omission performed by the
building official or building inspector in the enforcement of the provisions of
construction codes, or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through
the enforcement of such codes, shall be defended by Draper City until final
termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be
assumed by Draper City. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-1-060: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The building official and any building inspector shall obtain prior written
approval from the community development director before engaging or aiding in
the construction of any improvement or structure within the city. In the event
a conflict of interest is determined to exist between the building official's
or building inspector's personal interests and his or her duties as a city
official, an outside independent inspector shall be employed to conduct the
necessary inspections. It shall be unlawful for the building official or any
building inspector to provide or participate in any private inspections
regarding any property located within the city. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-1-070: APPEAL OF DECISIONS:
A.   Application And Interpretation Decisions By Building Official: Orders,
decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the
application and interpretation of the construction codes may be appealed to the
building board of appeals by filing within fifteen (15) days from the date of
said decision an original and three (3) copies of a written statement of the
grounds for the appeal and a request for hearing, if desired, with the city
recorder during regular business hours.
B.   Other Decisions: All other orders, decisions or determinations made by the
building official, building inspector, or other city official relative to the
construction codes or this title, may be appealed to the city council by filing
within fifteen (15) days from the date of such decision an original and three
(3) copies of a written statement of the grounds for the appeal and a request
for hearing on said decision, if desired with the city recorder during regular
business hours. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION CODES
SECTION:
10-2-010: Definition
10-2-020: Construction Codes Adopted
10-2-030: Fire Code
10-2-040: Storage Of Hazardous Materials
10-2-050: UFA Fire Prevention Permit Fee Schedule
10-2-060: Copies Of Codes
10-2-070: Violation
10-2-080: Conformance With Other Ordinances
10-2-090: Exhibits
10-2-010: DEFINITION:
The codes adopted in this chapter shall be referred to collectively as the
construction codes for the city. (Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-020: CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 1682,
adopted 11-18-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
The most recent version adopted by the state of Utah of the following
construction codes and appendices and the state's amendments thereto are
incorporated by reference and hereby adopted: international building code,
international residential code, international plumbing code, international
mechanical code, national electrical code, international energy conservation
code, international fuel gas code, the HUD code, and the model manufactured
home installation standard. Unless otherwise provided, the adoption of each
code shall include the adoption of appendices required to be adopted by the
state and those specifically adopted in this chapter. (Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-030: FIRE CODE:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been REPEALED by new legislation (Ord. 1682,
adopted 11-18-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
A.   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire and explosion, the most recent edition adopted
by the state of the international fire code is hereby adopted, including the
referenced standards and appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and J but not
appendix A thereof, with such amendments as are set forth in this chapter.
B.   Draper City hereby adopts by reference and incorporates herein the
statewide amendments and additions to the international fire code, adopted by
the state legislature, a copy of which is in section
10-2-090, exhibit A of this chapter and by this reference made a part hereof.
(Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-040: STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The storage of class I and class II hazardous materials in aboveground or
belowground tanks inside and outside of buildings is prohibited unless allowed
by the zoning provisions applicable to the location in which the proposed tanks
are to be located. In addition, the storage of class I and class II hazardous
materials pursuant to this section is subject to the provisions of National
Fire Protection Association 30, 58, and 59A. (Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-050: UFA FIRE PREVENTION PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE:
In accordance with international fire code section 113, Draper City hereby
adopts by reference the unified fire authority's fire prevention permit fee
schedule in section
10-2-090, exhibit B of this chapter. The schedule includes fees for hazardous
materials permitting and inspection, fire inspection, standby at special
events, reinspection delay in preparation at work site, and blasting
permitting. The schedule shall be placed on file in the office of the city
recorder. All fees in section
10-2-090, exhibit B of this chapter, shall be collected by and paid to the
unified fire authority at the time the permit, inspection, reinspection or fire
watch staffing is requested and shall be a condition for issuance of the permit
and scheduling of the inspection, reinspection, or standby staffing. (Ord.
1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-060: COPIES OF CODES:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 10-3-711, one copy of each of the codes adopted
in this chapter shall be filed in the city recorder's office and one copy shall
be filed in the office of the chief building official for use and examination
by the public during regular business hours. (Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-070: VIOLATION:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the
same to be done in violation of any provision of the construction codes or this
chapter.
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to comply
with a lawful order of the building official, building inspector or fire
marshal.
C.   Any person violating the provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-080: CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
Any construction, alteration or improvement of any building or structure shall
comply with the construction codes as well as all other relevant city
ordinances and regulations, including subdivision, zoning and fire provisions.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to be interpreted and administered
in conformance with such other ordinances and whenever a conflict exists
between any of these provisions, the more restrictive standard or provision
shall prevail. (Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
10-2-090: EXHIBITS:
EXHIBIT A (DCMC 10-2-030)
15A1-403. Adoption of State Fire Code.
(1)   (a)   The State Fire Code is:
(i)   a code promulgated by a nationally recognized code authority that is
adopted by the Legislature under this section with any modifications; and
(ii)   a code to which cities, counties, fire protection districts, and the
state shall adhere in safeguarding life and property from the hazards of fire
and explosion.
(b)   On and after July 1, 2010, the State Fire Code is the State Fire Code in
effect on July 1, 2010, until in accordance with this section:
(i)   a new State Fire Code is adopted; or
(ii)   one or more provisions of the State Fire Code are amended or repealed in
accordance with this section.
(c)   A provision of the State Fire Code may be applicable:
(i)   to the entire state; or
(ii)   within a city, county, or fire protection district.
(2)   (a)   The Legislature shall adopt a State Fire Code by enacting
legislation that adopts a nationally recognized fire code with any
modifications.
(b)   Legislation enacted under this Subsection (2) shall state that it takes
effect on the July 1 after the day on which the legislation is enacted, unless
otherwise stated in the legislation.
(c)   Subject to Subsection (5), a State Fire Code adopted by the Legislature
is the State Fire Code until in accordance with this section the Legislature
adopts a new State Fire Code by:
(i)   adopting a new State Fire Code in its entirety; or
(ii)   amending or repealing one or more provisions of the State Fire Code.
(3)   (a)   The board shall, by no later than November 30 of each year,
recommend to the Business and Labor Interim Committee whether the Legislature
should:
(i)   amend or repeal one or more provisions of the State Fire Code; or
(ii)   in a year of a regularly scheduled update of a nationally recognized
fire code, adopt with any modifications the nationally recognized fire code.
(b)   The board may recommend legislative action related to the State Fire
Code:
(i)   on its own initiative; or
(ii)   upon the receipt of a request by a city, county, or fire protection
district that the board recommend legislative action related to the State Fire
Code.
(c)   Within 45 days after receipt of a request under Subsection (3)(b), the
board shall direct the division to convene an informal hearing concerning the
request.
(d)   The board shall conduct a hearing under this section in accordance with
the rules of the board.
(e)   The board shall decide whether to include in the report required under
Subsection (3)(a) whether to recommend the legislative action raised by a
request.
(f)   Within 15 days following the completion of a hearing of the board under
this Subsection (3), the board shall direct the division to notify the entity
that made the request of the board's decision regarding the request. The
division shall provide the notice:
(i)   in writing; and
(ii)   in a form prescribed by the board.
(4)   If the Business and Labor Interim Committee decides to recommend
legislative action to the Legislature, the Business and Labor Interim Committee
shall prepare legislation for consideration by the Legislature in the next
general session that, if passed by the Legislature, would:
(a)   adopt a new State Fire Code in its entirety; or
(b)   amend or repeal one or more provisions of the State Fire Code.
(5)   (a)   Notwithstanding Subsection (3), the board may, in accordance with
Title 63G. Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, amend a State Fire
Code if the board determines that waiting for legislative action in the next
general legislative session would:
(i)   cause an imminent peril to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
(ii)   place a person in violation of federal or other state law.
(b)   If the board amends a State Fire Code in accordance with this Subsection
(5), the board shall:
(i)   publish the State Fire Code with the amendment: and
(ii)   notify the Business and Labor Interim Committee of the adoption,
including a copy of an analysis by the board identifying specific reasons and
justifications for its findings.
(c)   If not formally adopted by the Legislature at its next annual general
session, an amendment to a State Fire Code adopted under this Subsection (5) is
repealed on the July 1 immediately following the next annual general session
that follows the adoption of the amendment.
(6)   (a)   A legislative body of a political subdivision may enact an
ordinance that is more restrictive in its fire code requirements than the State
Fire Code:
(i)   in order to meet a public safety need of the political subdivision; and
(ii)   subject to the requirements of this Subsection (6).
(b)   A legislative body of a political subdivision that enacts an ordinance
under this section on or after July 1, 2010 shall:
(i)   notify the board in writing at least 30 days before the day on which the
legislative body enacts the ordinance and include in the notice a statement as
to the proposed subject matter of the ordinance; and
(ii)   after the legislative body enacts the ordinance, report to the board
before the board makes the report required under Subsection (6)(c), including
providing the board:
(A)   a copy of the ordinance enacted under this Subsection (6); and
(B)   a description of the public safety need that is the basis of enacting the
ordinance.
(c)   The board shall submit to the Business and Labor Interim Committee each
year with the recommendations submitted in accordance with Subsection (3):
(i)   a list of the ordinances enacted under this Subsection (6) during the
fiscal year immediately proceeding the report; and
(ii)   recommendations, if any, for legislative action related to an ordinance
enacted under this Subsection (6).
(d)   (i)   The state fire marshal shall keep an indexed copy of an ordinance
enacted under this Subsection (6).
(ii)   The state fire marshal shall make a copy of an ordinance enacted under
this Subsection (6) available on request.
(e)   The board may make rules in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah
Administrative Rulemaking Act, to establish procedures for a legislative body
of a political subdivision to follow to provide the notice and report required
under this Subsection (6).
Enacted by Chapter 14, 2011 General Session
EXHIBIT B (DCMC 10-2-050)
UFA Fire Prevention Permit Fee Schedule
UFA Fire Prevention Permit Fee Schedule
Material Solid Lbs. Liquid Gal. Gas Cub. Ft. Fees UFA
UFA Fire Prevention Permit Fee Schedule
Material          Solid Lbs. Liquid Gal.    Gas Cub. Ft.      Fees UFA
                                            200 cub. ft.
Hazardous                                   Corrosive or
Materials         500 lbs    55 gal.        Oxidizer          *$195.00 Annually
(Annually)                                  504 cub. Ft.
                                            Oxygen
                                            >200 cub. ft.
Hazardous                                   Corrosive or
Materials         >500 lbs   >55 gal.       Oxidizer          *$240.00 Annually
(Annually)                                  >504 cub. Ft.
                                            Oxygen
"H" Occupancy
Back Up                                                    **$145.00
Generator.                                                    Annually
(Annually)
"H" Occupancy
Hazardous
Materials Permit            500 gal. tank  500 cub. ft.      *$195.00 Annually
Dispense and Use.
(Annually)
"H" Occupancy
Hazardous                                   >500 cub. ft. or
Materials Permit            >500 gal. tank any highly toxic  *$485.00 Annually
Dispense and Use.                           gas
(Annually)
Other Occupancy
Hazardous                                                     **$195.00
Materials Permit            500 gal. tank  500 cub. Ft.      Annually
Dispense and Use.
(Annually)
Aerosol products                            >500 lbs. Level 2 **$195.00
(Annually)                                or 3 Aggregate    Annually
                                            Qty.
Flammable                    Indoors
Cryogenic Fluid             1                               **$195.00
(Annually)                   Outdoors                         Annually
                             60 gal.
Above Ground
Tanks                                     500 Cub. Ft. R-   *$195.00,
Installation                                3 Occup. Exempt.  **$75.00 per hour
(Flammable)
Below Ground
Tanks                                     500 Cub. Ft. R-   *$195.00 **$75.00
Installation                                3 Occup. Exempt.  per hour
(Flammable)
Above Ground
Tanks                       500 gal                         *$395.00
Installation                                                  **$75.00 per hour
(Flammable)
Below Ground
Tanks                       500 gal                         *$395.00
Installation                                                  **$75.00 per hour
(Flammable)
Pyroxylin
plastics.
cellulose nitrate 25 pounds                                 *$195.00
(pyroxylin)                                                   (Annually)
plastics
(Annually)
Body Shop/Garage                                              *$195.00
under 5,000 sq.                                            (Annually)
ft. (Annually)
Fireworks -
Outdoor Public                                                *$485.00
Display (Per                                               **$700 per (Per
Event) Cities,                                                Event)
County
Open Flame
Proximal Audience                                             *$195.00 (Per
Indoor Approved                                            Event)
Fireworks (Per                                                **$75.00 per hour
Event)
Application of    More than 9 sq. ft. for flammable liquid
Flammable         spray application of 55 gallons for dip     **$195.00
Finishes, Spray   tank operations.
or Dip
Blasting Permit                                               $75.00 per site,
                                                              $350.00 annually
Fire Stand-by                                                 **$75.00 per hour
Special Events                                                per fire
                                                              inspector
Re-inspection                                                 **$75.00 first
fee, delay in                                                 hour, doubles
preparation at                                                every hour
work site                                                     thereafter.
                                                              
 
* Fees are assessed separately.
**Fees are assessed accumulatively (added to baseline permit fee).
Authorization by code:
IFC 105.1.1 Permits required, fees can be assessed
IFC 105.1.2 Types of permits
IFC 105.2.2 Inspection authorized
IFC 113.1 Permit Fees
(Ord. 1082, 12-17-2013)
CHAPTER 3
PERMITS
SECTION:
10-3-010: Permit Required
10-3-020: Application For Building Permit
10-3-030: Issuance Of Permit
10-3-040: Approved Plans
10-3-050: Partial Permit
10-3-060: Retention Of Plans
10-3-070: Validity Of Permit
10-3-080: Expiration Of Permit
10-3-090: Extension Of Permit
10-3-100: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
10-3-110: Fees And Security Required
10-3-120: Investigation Fees
10-3-130: Fee Refunds
10-3-140: Public Improvements
10-3-010: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in the Construction Codes, no
building, structure, or building service equipment shall be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted
or demolished unless a separate and appropriate permit for each building,
structure, or building service equipment is first obtained from the City as set
forth in chapter 3 of the Uniform Administrative Code and the provisions
provided herein. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-020: APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT:
A.   Filing: Application for a building permit shall be made by filing with the
Community Development Department a complete and accurate "Building Permit
Application" and supporting documents required by the Construction Codes and
other applicable laws.
B.   Residential Subdivisions: Building permit applications for residential
construction on lots within a subdivision may be submitted and reviewed after
the subdivision has been legally recorded with the County Recorder and the City
has received the updated parcel information from the County Recorder and has
inputted the parcel information into the City's GIS database. No building
permit related to any residential construction will be issued until all public
improvements related to the final subdivision have been completed, been
accepted by the Engineering Division, the warranty period has begun, and
written approval of all public agencies involved has been received.
C.   Construction On Existing Parcels: Building permit applications for
residential and non-residential construction on existing parcels not within a
subdivision shall be submitted and reviewed by the Community Development
Department to determine the requirements for building permit issuance. The
Community Development Department shall route applicable plans to the
Engineering Division to determine frontage improvement and right- of-way
dedication provisions. The Engineering Division shall determine the presence of
adequate frontage improvements and right-of-way dedication in accordance with
sections
9-27-100 and
9-27-110 of this Code. The Engineering Division shall inform the Community
Development Department of the requirement and method by which frontage
improvements shall be provided by the applicant. The Community Development
Department shall inform the applicant of the Engineering Division's
determination.
1.   Upon finding by the Engineering Division that certain frontage
improvements are not required, the Community Development Department may issue
the building permit provided all other conditions of the building permit
issuance have been satisfied.
2.   Upon finding by the Engineering Division that certain frontage
improvements are required, the building permit applicant shall prepare and
submit improvement plan documents in accordance with sections
17-3-030 and
17-4-030 of this Code. The City Engineer will review the applicant's submittal
documents in accordance with section
17-4-040 of this Code for compliance with title 17, chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this
Code.
3.   Upon finding that the improvement plan documents for frontage improvement
installation are complete, the building permit applicant shall post a form of
security and enter into an improvement agreement in accordance with the
provisions of section
17-4-070 of this Code. Upon completion of the improvement agreement, the City
Engineer shall issue an encroachment permit in accordance with title 11,
chapter 6 of this Code.
4.   Upon issuance of the encroachment permit, the Engineering Division shall
notify the Community Development Department that the required documentation for
the establishment of frontage improvements has been completed and the building
permit may be issued provided all other conditions have been satisfied.
5.   No temporary or final occupancy permit shall be issued by the building
official related to any residential construction unless all required frontage
improvements related to the development of the parcel has been completed,
accepted by the City Engineer, the warranty period has begun, and written
approval has been received from all public agencies involved.
6.   No final occupancy permit shall be issued by the building official related
to any non-residential construction unless all required frontage improvements
related to the development of the parcel have been completed, accepted by the
City Engineer, the warranty period has begun, and written approval has been
received from all public agencies involved.
D.   Commercial Subdivisions: Building permit applications for non- residential
construction on lots within a subdivision may be submitted and reviewed after
the subdivision has been legally recorded with the County Recorder. Building
permits for construction in commercial subdivisions may be issued prior to the
completion of all public improvements subject to the following requirements
being met:
1.   Continuous access to the lot through the subdivision is provided by a
street with an all weather surface acceptable to the Fire Marshal;
2.   A trash receptacle with a secured lid or secured cover has been located on
the site and not in the street, and shall be of a size and nature suitable for
containing all construction-related debris until the debris is removed from the
site;
3.   A sanitary toilet has been located on the site and not in the street for
the use of construction workers; and
4.   Fire hydrants are fully operational with required fire flow capability in
the area of the subdivision where permits are requested as required by the Fire
Marshal.
E.   Occupancy Permit Required: There shall be no occupancy of any non-
residential building in any zone until an occupancy permit has been issued. An
occupancy permit shall not be issued until the following conditions are met and
all work is acceptable to the City and appropriate agencies:
1.   All necessary utilities are installed including culinary water lines,
sanitary sewer, flood control facilities, electric power, and natural gas
lines;
2.   All required public improvements are installed;
3.   All Building Code requirements are satisfied; and
4.   All City conditions of site plan approval have been completed.
F.   Notification To Buyer, Builder Regarding Occupancy Permits: It shall be
unlawful for any subdivider to sell any portion of an approved nonresidential
subdivision until the prospective buyer or builder has been advised that
occupancy permits shall not be issued until all required improvements are
completed. (Ord. 1302, 1-23-2018; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
10-3-030: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The building permit application and supporting documents shall be reviewed by
the building official or his or her designee, the Community Development
Director or his or her designee, and any other appropriate officials or
departments to ensure compliance with pertinent laws and ordinances. If the
building official and the Community Development Director find that the work
described in the building permit application and supporting documents conform
to the requirements of the Construction Codes and other pertinent laws and
ordinances, and that the fees and bonds required herein have been paid to the
City, a permit shall be issued to the applicant, signed by both the building
official and the Community Development Director, or his or her designee. (Ord.
168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-040: APPROVED PLANS:
Upon issuing a permit, the building official or the Community Development
Director shall endorse in writing or stamp any plans and specifications filed
therewith as "APPROVED". Such approved plans and specifications shall not be
changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official
and the Community Development Director. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-050: PARTIAL PERMIT:
Upon a showing of good cause, the building official or the community
development director, may issue a permit for the construction of part of a
building, structure or building service equipment before the entire plans and
specifications for the whole building, structure or building service equipment
have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed
statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the
construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances. The holder of such
a partial permit shall proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire
building, structure or building service will be granted, and shall assume all
risks of so proceeding. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-060: RETENTION OF PLANS:
One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant
and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which
the work authorized thereby is in progress. One set of approved plans and
specifications shall be retained by the city for a period of not less than
ninety (90) days from the date of completion of the work covered therein, and
thereafter as may be required by the Draper City government records access and
management ordinance. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-070: VALIDITY OF PERMIT:
The issuance of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for violation of
any of the provisions of the construction codes or of any other pertinent law,
including, but not limited to, the city zoning, subdivision and fire ordinances
and regulations. Permits presuming to give such authority shall not be valid.
The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifications, and other data shall
not prevent the building official, fire chief or other city official from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such documents. (Ord. 168, 3-
7-1995)
10-3-080: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
A.   Every permit issued by the city shall expire and become null and void if
the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any
time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
B.   After expiration of a permit, a new permit must be obtained prior to
recommencing work. If no changes have been made or will be made in the original
plans and specifications for such work, and the suspension or abandonment has
not exceeded one year, the fee for a new permit shall be one-half (1/2) the
amount required for a new permit for such work. If changes have been made or
will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, or the
suspension or abandonment has exceeded one year, the fee for a new permit shall
be the full amount required for a new permit for such work. (Ord. 168, 3-7-
1995)
10-3-090: EXTENSION OF PERMIT:
A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply in writing for an extension
of time within which work may commence under that permit showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from
being taken within the time required by section
10-3-080 of this chapter. Upon sufficient showing, the city may extend the time
for action by the permittee; provided, that such extension shall not exceed a
period of one hundred eighty (180) days and shall only be permitted once. (Ord.
168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-100: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit when the permit is issued
in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of
the provisions of the construction codes or other pertinent law. (Ord. 168, 3-
7-1995)
10-3-110: FEES AND SECURITY REQUIRED:
A.   Except as otherwise provided, all building permit fees shall be assessed
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city.
B.   Applicants for new residential, commercial, and industrial building
permits and for pools or accessory structure building permits shall be required
to furnish security in the form of a cash or corporate surety bond or letter of
credit in the amount set forth in the consolidated fee schedule, adopted by the
city to ensure repair and restoration of public improvements damaged during the
construction process. So long as the security covers all active projects, a
developer may post a revolving security on an annual basis.
C.   In the event the applicant fails to timely and fully complete the
permitted work in accordance with construction code requirements and the
provisions of this title, the city may thereafter use the funds comprising the
bond or letter of credit to cause the work to be completed. Any unexpended
portion of the security retained by the city, less fifteen percent (15%) of the
total cost to complete the work to cover overhead and administrative costs of
the city, shall be refunded to the applicant upon timely and satisfactory
completion of the work required and compliance with all other construction code
requirements and applicable laws. If the funds received from the bond are not
sufficient to pay the total cost of completion and the fifteen percent (15%)
overhead fee, the applicant shall be obligated to pay to the city all
deficiency amounts. The city shall pursue all civil and criminal legal remedies
to ensure payment and/or reimbursement for deficiency amounts. Permit fees and
any other fees or security required herein shall be paid to the city before a
permit may be issued. (Ord. 863, 10-28-2008)
10-3-120: INVESTIGATION FEES:
Whenever work for which a permit is required by the construction codes or the
provisions of this title has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a
special investigation may be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether
or not a permit is then or subsequently issued equal to the amount of the
permit fee required. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-130: FEE REFUNDS:
The city may authorize the refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected when written request for such refund is filed by
the original permittee within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of
fee payment. The city will not authorize refunding of more than eighty percent
(80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. In
addition, the city will not authorize refunding of more than eighty percent
(80%) of the plan review fee paid when application for a permit is withdrawn or
canceled before any examination time has been expended. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-3-140: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A.   Duty To Install: Any person obtaining a permit to build or alter any
structure upon a lot or parcel which is not improved by required public
improvements, such as asphalt, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, park strips,
streetlights, culinary and secondary water, sanitary sewer, storm drain and
flood control facilities, shall be required to install all such improvements
along the street frontage of said lot in accordance with all construction
standards, regulations and applicable ordinances of the city. No building
permit shall be issued until the requirements of section
10-3-020 of this chapter are completed.
B.   Duty To Repair: Any person obtaining a permit to build or alter any
structure upon a lot which is improved by required public improvements shall
repair any damage to such improvements occurring as a result of construction
activity relating to the permit issuance in accordance with all construction
standards, regulations and applicable ordinances of the city. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until all such improvements are repaired.
C.   Duty To Maintain Site: Any person obtaining a permit hereunder to build or
alter any structure upon a lot or parcel which is adjacent to a public street
shall take all necessary measures to confine construction debris to the lot or
parcel and prevent the tracking of dirt, mud, sand, gravel or other materials
onto public improvements. A violation of this subsection which obstructs,
covers or obscures the public improvements, causes damage or is likely to cause
damage to the public improvements or creates a public safety hazard shall be
sufficient cause to issue a stop work order. (Ord. 1042, 1-22-2013)
CHAPTER 4
INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
10-4-010: Inspections Required
10-4-020: Inspection Card
10-4-030: Inspection Requests
10-4-040: Duty To Keep Work Accessible And Exposed
10-4-050: Approval Required
10-4-060: Reinspection
10-4-070: Reinspection Fees
10-4-080: Special Inspections
10-4-090: Special Inspector
10-4-100: Structural Observance
10-4-110: Final Inspection
10-4-120: Validity Of Inspection
10-4-010: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
Construction or work requiring a permit shall be subject to inspections by the
building official as specified in the construction codes. The building official
may also make or require other inspections of construction work to ascertain
compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws or
regulations. Construction or work requiring a permit issued by the fire
department shall also be subject to inspection and approval of the fire chief
in accordance with the fire code. In such instances, references herein to
building official shall also refer to fire chief when applicable. (Ord. 168, 3-
7-1995)
10-4-020: INSPECTION CARD:
Construction or work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit
holder or agent shall have posted or otherwise made available an "inspection
card" upon which the building official shall make the required entries
regarding inspection of the construction or work. The permit holder shall cause
the inspection card to be maintained available until final approval has been
granted. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-030: INSPECTION REQUESTS:
The person doing the work authorized by a permit shall notify the building
official in writing or by telephone that such work is ready for inspection at
least one business day before inspection is desired. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-040: DUTY TO KEEP WORK ACCESSIBLE AND EXPOSED:
The permit holder shall cause the construction or work to remain accessible and
exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the building official.
Neither the building official, nor Draper City, shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow
inspection. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-050: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspection
within a reasonable time and shall either indicate that the construction, or
portion thereof, is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or
agent that the construction, or portion thereof, fails to comply with the
construction codes or pertinent laws. Any portions which do not comply shall be
corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized
by the building official. No construction or work shall be done beyond the
point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
approval of the building official. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-060: REINSPECTION:
If reinspection is required, the applicant must present a request for
reinspection to the building official and pay any reinspection fees assessed by
the city. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-070: REINSPECTION FEES:
Reinspection fees may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such
portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when
corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may also be assessed
for: failure to properly post or otherwise have the inspection report card
readily available; failure to have the approved plans readily available;
failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested; or
deviation from plans requiring the approval of the building official. When a
reinspection fee is assessed, the fee must be paid to the city before
additional inspection of the work will be performed. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-080: SPECIAL INSPECTIONS:
The owner, or engineer or architect of record acting as owner's agent, shall
employ one or more "special inspectors" to provide inspections on work or
construction requiring "special inspections" as specified in the construction
codes. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-090: SPECIAL INSPECTOR:
The special inspector shall be a qualified person demonstrating competence, to
the satisfaction of the building official, for inspection of the particular
type of construction or operation requiring the special inspection. Preapproval
of special inspectors is required. The special inspector shall have the duties
and responsibilities as set forth in the construction codes. (Ord. 168, 3-7-
1995)
10-4-100: STRUCTURAL OBSERVANCE:
Structural observation shall be performed as required by the construction
codes. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-110: FINAL INSPECTION:
The building official or building inspector(s), upon notification, shall make a
final inspection and approval of all buildings and structures when completed
and ready for occupancy and use. When completed and ready for occupancy and
use, the building official shall mark the inspection report as a certificate of
occupancy in accordance with chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-4-120: VALIDITY OF INSPECTION:
An inspection approval shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation
of any of the provisions of the construction codes or other pertinent law.
Inspections presuming to give such authority shall not be valid. (Ord. 168, 3-
7-1995)
CHAPTER 5
CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
10-5-010: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
10-5-020: Improvements And Repairs
10-5-030: Issuance Of Certificate
10-5-040: Notice Of Disapproval
10-5-050: Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy
10-5-060: Posting Of Certificate
10-5-070: Revocation Of Certificate
10-5-080: Violation Of Certificate Requirement
10-5-090: Validity Of Certificate
10-5-010: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
No building or structure shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part for any
purpose, nor shall a change in the existing occupancy classification of a
building or structure or portion thereof be made until the city has issued a
certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-5-020: IMPROVEMENTS AND REPAIRS:
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or structure until
all public improvements, such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water meter boxes,
street paving, sewage, storm, flood and fire control facilities and any other
required improvements, are completed and operable. If any public or other
required improvements are damaged during construction, no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until such improvements are repaired. (Ord. 168, 3-7-
1995)
10-5-030: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE:
After the building official or building inspector performs the final inspection
of a building or structure and finds that all improvements have been completed
or repaired as required herein, and finds no violations of the construction
codes or any other applicable laws, the building official shall, with the
approval from the community development director, issue a certificate of
occupancy containing the date of inspection, the date of issuance, and any
information required by section 309 of the uniform administrative code. (Ord.
168, 3-7-1995)
10-5-040: NOTICE OF DISAPPROVAL:
After the building official or building inspector performs the final inspection
of a building or structure and finds that such building or structure does not
conform to the construction codes or other pertinent law, the building official
shall issue a written notice of disapproval to the applicant stating the
reasons for such disapproval. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-5-050: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A.   Generally: Upon sufficient showing of good cause and subject to the
limitations set forth in subsection B of this section, the building official is
empowered, with the advice and consent of the community development director,
to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the use of a portion or
portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire
building or structure.
B.   Limitations: No temporary certificate shall be issued for any incomplete
construction code requirements which would result in substantial hazard or be
injurious to the health, safety or welfare of any person or which would result
in the violation of any ordinance of the city or law of the state of Utah.
C.   Procedure: In order to obtain a temporary certificate, the applicant must
execute a written agreement to fully complete, repair and/or replace
improvements or work within the time prescribed, not to exceed one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of the certificate and pay any
required fees and bonds.
D.   Extension: An applicant holding an unexpired temporary certificate may
apply in writing for an extension of time within which work may be completed
showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented
action from being taken within the time required. Upon sufficient showing, and
payment by the applicant of a fifty dollar ($50.00) extension fee, the city may
extend the time for completion. Such extension shall only be permitted once and
shall not exceed a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
E.   Breach: In the event the applicant fails to timely and fully complete,
repair and/or replace said improvements in a satisfactory manner, the city may
thereafter use the funds comprising any bond or other sufficient security
approved by the city retained to cause the improvement to be completed,
repaired and/or replaced. If the funds received from the bond are not
sufficient to pay the total cost of completion, repair and/or replacement of
the improvements and the fifteen percent (15%) overhead fee, or if a bond was
not retained, the applicant shall be obligated to pay to the city all
deficiency amounts. The city shall pursue all civil and criminal legal remedies
to ensure payment and/or reimbursement for deficiency amounts. In addition, the
city may file a notice of noncompliance with the county recorder's office for
applicant's failure to comply with the temporary certificate of occupancy.
F.   Compliance: Upon timely and satisfactory completion, repair and/or
replacement of said improvements, and compliance with all other construction
code provisions and applicable laws, the building official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy and release any unexpended portion of any bond
retained by the city to the applicant, less fifteen percent (15%) of the total
cost to complete, repair and/or replace the improvements to cover overhead and
administrative costs of the city. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-5-060: POSTING OF CERTIFICATE:
The building official shall issue the certificate of occupancy, notice of
disapproval, or temporary certificate of occupancy to the owner or applicant
through appropriate means, including hand deliver, mailing or posting. (Ord.
168, 3-7-1995)
10-5-070: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke any certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy whenever the certificate is issued in error,
on the basis of incorrect information supplied, where conditions or
requirements contained within the certificate have not been met, or when it is
determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of
any provision of the construction codes or any other applicable law. (Ord. 168,
3-7-1995)
10-5-080: VIOLATION OF CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENT:
A.   Use Or Occupation: Any person, firm or corporation using or occupying any
building or structure prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation occurs or continues.
B.   Permitting Use Or Occupation: Any person, firm or corporation permitting
any person to use or occupy a building or structure prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, or temporary certificate of occupancy, shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-5-090: VALIDITY OF CERTIFICATE:
Any certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy issued
hereunder shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of any of the
provisions of the construction codes or other pertinent law. Certificates
presuming to give such authority shall not be valid. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
10-6-010: Building Board Of Appeals Established
10-6-020: Members
10-6-030: Organization And Procedure
10-6-040: Filing Appeal
10-6-050: Notice And Hearing
10-6-060: Decision
10-6-070: Limitation
10-6-080: Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal
10-6-090: Judicial Review Of Board's Decision
10-6-010: BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a building board of appeals in Draper City to hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions and determinations made by the building
official relative to the application and interpretation of the construction
codes. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-020: MEMBERS:
A.   Number And Qualification: The building board of appeals shall consist of
five (5) members who may not be employees of Draper City. Members of the
building board of appeals shall be licensed in the state of Utah as a building
official, fire official, architect, contractor, engineer, or otherwise
qualified by technical experience to act on matters regarding the application
and interpretation of the construction codes.
B.   Appointment And Term: Members of the board of appeals shall be appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, to staggered
terms of four (4) years; provided, that members may be appointed to terms
shorter than four (4) years when necessary to provide for staggered terms.
C.   Compensation: Members of the board of appeals shall receive a per diem
allowance for each day or portion of a day spent performing board duties, and
all necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred in the discharge of
such duties, as the city council may by resolution approve.
D.   Removal: Members of the board of appeals may be removed with or without
cause upon recommendation of the mayor by a majority vote of the city council;
provided, that such member is given:
1.   Written notice of the removal; and
2.   An opportunity to be heard by the city council. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-030: ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
A.   Chairperson: The board of appeals shall elect a chairperson, who shall
administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses, and oversee the
proceedings of the board. In the event the chairperson is absent from any
proceeding, a chairperson pro tempore may be appointed by a majority vote of
the members present.
B.   Building Official: The building official of Draper City shall be ex
officio member of the building board of appeals. As such, the building official
shall attend all proceedings of the board of appeals and shall act as secretary
to the board, but shall not vote upon any matter before the board.
C.   Rules Of Procedure: The board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its business.
D.   Meetings: The board of appeals shall hold meetings at such times as the
board determines is necessary and as called by the chairperson or the city
manager. Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings of the board of
appeals shall be open to the public.
E.   Records: The board of appeals shall keep minutes of proceedings, including
the vote of each member on each question, or the member's absence or failure to
vote, and records of its examinations or other official actions. Such records
shall be filed with the city recorder and shall be open to the public pursuant
to the Draper City government records access and management ordinance.
F.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the board of appeals shall constitute
a quorum and may act in behalf of the board. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-040: FILING APPEAL:
Unless otherwise provided in the applicable construction code, any order,
decision or determination of the building official or building inspector may be
appealed to the building board of appeals by filing within fifteen (15) days
from the date of said decision an original and three (3) copies of a written
statement of the grounds for the appeal and a request for a hearing on said
decision, if desired, with the city recorder during regular business hours.
(Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-050: NOTICE AND HEARING:
The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of the appeal,
give any required public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in
interest. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
the relevant construction codes. Any party may appear in person or by attorney
at the hearing. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-060: DECISION:
After the hearing, the board of appeals shall make a decision on the matter.
Except as provided in section
10-6-070 of this chapter, the board may, by majority vote, affirm, reverse, or
modify the appealed order, decision or determination of the building official
or building inspector; provided, that any decision granting an appeal shall
require votes from at least three (3) members of the board in support of such
decision. The building board of appeals shall render its decisions and findings
in writing to the appellant with duplicate copies to the city manager and the
building official. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-070: LIMITATION:
The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the
administrative provisions of the construction codes, nor shall the board of
appeals be empowered to waive any requirements of the construction codes. (Ord.
168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-080: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING APPEAL:
An appeal stays all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the building official certifies to the board of appeals after the
request for hearing has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated, the
stay would in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which
may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction
on application, notice and good cause showing. (Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
10-6-090: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOARD'S DECISION:
The city, or any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals, may
have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction, provided, the petition for such relief is presented to
the court within thirty (30) days after the date such decision is rendered.
(Ord. 168, 3-7-1995)
TITLE 11
STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
11-1-010: Public Works Department
11-1-010: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
The public works department, as is authorized in section
3-1-070 of this code, shall administer all such streets and public improvements
as are authorized by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council
by ordinance or resolution certified by the city recorder. The public works
director may be assigned to a preexisting city official by another title and
can be anyone whom the mayor, with the advice and consent of the council,
designates as a public works director. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
STREET STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-010: Establishment Of Standards And Specifications
11-2-020: Development Standards, Technical Specifications And Standard Drawings
11-2-030: Amendments, Changes And Alterations
11-2-040: Drainage Design Criteria
11-2-050: Streets Intersecting Arterials And Minor Arterials
11-2-060: Traffic Impact Study Guidelines
11-2-010: ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The city manager, with the advice and consent of the city council through
ordinance or resolution, shall establish certain standards and specifications
that shall be applicable to streets and public improvements and all such areas
that are authorized under this title. All such standards and specifications
shall be published and/or set out in writing and on file with the city
recorder's office and the public works department for public inspection and
review. (Ord. 962, 2-1-2011)
11-2-020: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARD
DRAWINGS:
The city council, on February 18, 1988, did adopt by resolution 2-18-88,
certain development standards, technical specifications and standard drawings
which shall be applicable to all streets and roadways within the boundaries of
Draper City. These standards, specifications and drawings are prepared in
booklet form so as to be available to the public and those interested parties.
All such streets, roadways, or public transportation corridors which come
within the purview of these standards, specifications and drawings shall comply
with those drawings, specifications and standards. (1994 Code)
11-2-030: AMENDMENTS, CHANGES AND ALTERATIONS:
From time to time the city council by ordinance or resolution shall amend,
change or alter the development standards, technical specifications and
standard drawings for streets and roads within Draper City, and such amendments
shall be automatically included in this chapter as binding upon all roads,
streets and passageways within the boundaries of Draper City without formal
adoption or amendment of this chapter. (1994 Code)
11-2-040: DRAINAGE DESIGN CRITERIA:
The document entitled "Draper City drainage design criteria", dated October 11,
2012, is hereby adopted as part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 1033, 12-4-2012)
11-2-050: STREETS INTERSECTING ARTERIALS AND MINOR ARTERIALS:
Any new public or private street intersecting an arterial or minor arterial
shall require the installation of right and left turn lanes on the arterial or
minor arterial. Dedication of any additional right of way width required to
create and install the turn lanes and amenities shall be made at no cost to the
city. Construction of the turn lanes and all amenities on the arterial or minor
arterial, including striping and pavement markings, signs, required curb,
gutter, sidewalk, park strips, and ADA ramps, shall be made at no cost to the
city. Such improvements shall be deemed project improvements because they are
solely required to serve the abutting project. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
11-2-060: TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY GUIDELINES:
The document entitled "Draper City traffic impact study guidelines" dated June
1, 2012, is hereby adopted as part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
CHAPTER 3
LAND USE DEVELOPMENT REGULATION
SECTION:
11-3-010: Application Of Land Use And Development Regulations
11-3-010: APPLICATION OF LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
The land use and development regulations of Draper City, Utah, which comprise
title 9 of this code, which apply to roads, streets and passageways, and in
particular those dealing with streets, alleys and bridges, shall be applicable
and binding on all streets, roadways, and public transportation corridors which
shall be constructed, established, and designed within the boundaries of Draper
City. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
CHAPTER 5
VACATING RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
11-5-010: Vacating Rights Of Way
11-5-010: VACATING RIGHTS OF WAY:
The city council may declare by ordinance that a street or alley is vacated or
narrowed or the name of a street or alley is changed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-609.5 et seq., as
amended, regarding the vacation, narrowing or changing the name of a street.
(Ord. 293, 10-6-1998)
CHAPTER 6
ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
SECTION:
11-6-010: Definitions
11-6-020: Permit Required
11-6-030: Permit Application Requirements
11-6-040: Emergency Work
11-6-050: Permit Fees
11-6-060: Permit; Contents, Duration And Extensions
11-6-070: Permit; No Transfer Or Assignment
11-6-080: Compliance With Specifications, Standards, Traffic Control
Regulations; Site Permittee Identification
11-6-090: Other Highway Permits
11-6-100: Relocation Of Structures In Public Ways
11-6-110: Impact Of Excavation On Existing Improvements
11-6-120: Restoration Of Public Property
11-6-130: Insurance Requirements
11-6-140: Improvement Completion Assurances
11-6-150: Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations On City Liability
11-6-160: Work Without Permit; Penalty
11-6-170: Failure To Comply; Default In Performance
11-6-180: Failure To Conform To Design Standards; Penalty
11-6-190: Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation, Or Stop Order
11-6-200: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
11-6-210: Conflict With Governing Provisions
11-6-220: Violation; Penalty
11-6-010: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
CITY: Draper City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The Draper City engineer, or his/her authorized representative.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property, or which
causes interruption of utility services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND DESIGN STANDARDS: The latest
version of the engineering regulations, or standard specifications for
construction published by the city engineer and/or adopted by the city.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet city engineering
regulations, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard condition within
the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement of surfaces,
deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities. Measurement of
failure shall be further defined in the engineering regulations.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing utility systems or utility services to customers, all or part of the
necessary system which uses the public right of way.
MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: The "Manual On Traffic Control
Devices For Streets And Highways" as published by the U.S. Department of
Transportation and/or the Federal Highway Administration.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such system, or who
otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a system.
PERMITTEE: Any person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
provider, corporation, company, organization, or entity of any kind.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee, or
public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
state public service commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone, or other utility product or services for use by
the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainageways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the city.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying
system used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights
of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway, or ditch installed in a right
of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term
does not include private drain lines.
SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and
all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances owned, leased,
or used by a provider located in the construction, ownership, operation, use or
maintenance of a telecommunications or utility system.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and
includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction, and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation
of the permit. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to perform utility or excavation work of any kind in a
public way or city property within the city, shall make application for a
permit. The decision by the city to issue a permit shall include, among other
factors determined by the city, the following:
A.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or structures
proposed to be installed in the public way;
B.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in addition to
cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other users of the
public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and water;
C.   The damage or disruption, if any of public or private facilities,
improvements, or landscaping previously existing in the public way;
D.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction
from numerous excavations of the public way; or
E.   The city’s interest in encumbering the city property with activities and
purposes of the encroachment. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
11-6-030: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Filing: Application for a permit shall be filed with the city engineer on
a form or forms to be furnished by the city. Property owners and/or tenants for
whom work is being done shall be responsible for obtaining the permits,
provided, however, contractors may obtain the permit in the contractor's name
with written permission by the owner providing the contractor is authorized to
complete the work.
B.   Eligible Applicants: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work within the public ways of the city, save and except the
following:
1.   Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
2.   Providers;
3.   Property owners installing, replacing, or maintaining less than five
hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb,
and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the city engineer,
upon a portion of the public way adjacent to their residence; or
4.   Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public way,
such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or maintenance of
electric signs, glass, awnings, and painting or cleaning of buildings or
signboards or other structures.
C.   Consideration Of Past Performance: The city engineer may deny the issuance
of permits to contractors, utility companies, or other permit applicants who
have shown by past performance that in the opinion of the city engineer they
will not consistently conform to the engineering regulations, specifications,
design standards, or the requirements of this chapter.
D.   Plans, Specifications May Be Required: When necessary, in the judgment of
the city engineer, to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to
existing or proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether
the work proposed complies with the engineering regulations, construction
specifications and design standards, the city engineer may require the filing
of engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in
sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance,
or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and
sketches are filed and approved.
E.   Complete Application Required: Applicant shall provide all documentation
listed on the permit application at the time of submission to the city
engineer. Submission shall be online or via email. Incomplete applications will
not be accepted.
F.   Expiration of Application: Applications will expire after thirty (30) days
without a permit being issued. Reactivation of an application for up to an
additional thirty (30) days will require an additional application fee payment.
G.   Work Without Permit Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to
commence work upon any public way until the city engineer has approved the
application and until a permit has been issued for such work, except as
specifically approved to the contrary in this chapter.
H.   Appeal: The disapproval or denial of an application by the city engineer
may be appealed by the applicant to the city council by filing of a written
notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the city engineer. The
city council shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor is timely
filed as soon as practicable, and render its decision within two (2) weeks
following notice of such appeal.
I.   Authority Limited: In approving or disapproving work within any public
way, or permits therefor, in the inspection of such work, in reviewing plans,
sketches or specifications, and generally in the exercise of the authority
conferred upon him/her by this chapter, the city engineer shall act in such
manner as to preserve and protect the public way and the use thereof, but shall
have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of permittees and
applicants or other persons which have no relationship to the use, preservation
or protection of the public way.
J.   Exceptions: A permit is not required from the city engineer for hand
digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler systems and
landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public way. However, conformance
to all city specifications is required. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-
19-2022)
11-6-040: EMERGENCY WORK:
A.   Permitted: Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the
public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a
permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
B.   During Business Hours: In the event that emergency work is commenced on or
within any public way of the city during regular business hours, the city
engineer shall be notified within one- half (1/2) hour from the time the work
is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such work shall take all
necessary safety precautions for the protection of the public and the direction
and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is accomplished according to
city engineering regulations, the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
and other applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in
the industry.
C.   Other Than Business Hours: Any person commencing emergency work in the
public way during other than business hours without a permit shall immediately
thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during the first hour of the first
regular business day on which city offices are open for business after such
work is commenced. A permit for such emergency work may be issued which shall
be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the
city engineer. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-050: PERMIT FEES:
A.   Required: The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon issuance
of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under the
permit as outlined in the consolidated fee schedule. Such costs could include
costs for reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of the
project, deterioration of the public way or diminution of the useful life of
the public way, and other costs to the city associated with the work to be done
under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory manner.
B.   Waiver: The city engineer may waive permit fees or penalties or portions
thereof provided for in this chapter, when he/she determines that such permit
fee or penalty:
1.   Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons whose
income is below the median income level for the city; or
2.   Pertains to an encroachment on the public way involving a beautification
project which furthers specific goals and objectives set forth in the city's
strategic plan, master plans, or other official documents, including decorative
street lighting, building facade lighting, flower and planter boxes, and
landscaping.
C.   Additional Charges: The city may add additional charges to cover the
reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review, inspection,
after-hours inspections including nights, weekends, and/or on city observed
holidays, and work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be
charged by the city to each permittee, in addition to the permit fee. (Ord.
259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
11-6-060: PERMIT; CONTENTS, DURATION AND EXTENSIONS:
A.   Issued Permit: The city will issue an encroachment permit on approval of
an application.
B.   Content: Each permit shall state the starting date and estimated
completion date. Work shall be completed within five (5) days from the starting
date or as determined by the city engineer. Such determination shall be based
upon factors reasonably related to the work to be performed under the permit.
Such factors may include, in addition to other factors related to the work to
be performed, the following:
1.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
2.   Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on the public way affected by the work;
3.   Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted by the
work;
4.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed, as well
as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the
public way by the public; and
5.   Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the city.
C.   Duration: The city engineer shall be notified by the permittee of
commencement of the work within twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing
work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
D.   Special Instructions: The permit may include special instructions that
shall become part of the conditions of the permit.
E.   Inspections: Work within the public way or city property is required to be
inspected by the city engineer or his designee, including but not limited to,
prior to contractor beginning work, material placement, completion, final
inspection, and any inspection identified in the special instructions if
required by the city engineer.
F.   Extension: If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the
expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the city engineer for an
additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the city engineer
for good cause shown.
G.   Length Of Extension: The length of the extension requested by the
permittee shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. No extension
shall be made that allows work to be completed in the winter period without
payment of winter fees. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
11-6-070: PERMIT; NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
chapter and under said permit. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-080: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS, TRAFFIC CONTROL
REGULATIONS; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
A.   Conformance: Work performed in the public way shall conform to the
requirements of the design standards, construction specifications and traffic
control regulations of the city, a copy of which shall be available from the
city engineer, kept on file in the office of the city engineer, and open to
public inspection during office hours. (Ord. 962, 2-1-2011)
B.   Signage: Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the
work, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall be attached to a
barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the permittee's name, or
company name, telephone number, and after hours telephone number.
C.   Barricades: All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a
minimum amount of interference or interruption of street or pedestrian traffic.
Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on the public way shall be
minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades and/or other structures
will be available and used where necessary to prevent accidents involving
property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the permittee's
equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has been backfilled and
proper temporary gravel surface is in place, except where backfilling and
resurfacing is to be done by the city; in which case the barricades, together
with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain in place until the
backfill work is actually commenced by the city. From sunset to sunrise, all
barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate signal lights,
torches, etc.
D.   Traffic: All public ways shall remain open to vehicle and pedestrian
traffic during work unless conditions necessitate closure, as determined by the
city engineer. Closure of the public way requires a written approval of the
public works director, in consultation with the city engineer. Conditions of
the public way closure will be special instructions in the permit, including
written approval from the public works director. Any street closure will
require a city approved detour plan and that the applicant provide written
notification to emergency services, school district, post office, mass transit,
and other agencies as applicable. Street closure conditions will be listed as
special instructions on the permit. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-
2022)
11-6-090: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
A.   Holders of permits for work on highways owned or under the jurisdiction of
other government entities, but located within the city limits, shall not be
required to obtain permits from the city under the provisions of this chapter,
unless the work extends beyond the back side of the curb, or beyond any other
designated jurisdictional boundary. Any city permit shall not be construed to
permit or allow work on a county road or on a state highway within the city
without an applicable county or state permit.
B.   The city engineer, in his or her discretion, shall have the right and
authority to regulate work under permits issued by other governmental entities
with respect to hours and days of work, and measures required to be taken by
the permittee of said governmental entity for the protection of traffic and
safety of persons and property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to impose any duty, implied or express, on the city
or its employees, officers, agents or assigns, relative to the protection of
traffic and safety of persons or property, arising out of the issuance of any
permit issued by government entities other than the city, or arising out of any
work performed on any public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-100: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
A.   Authority: The city engineer may direct any person owning or maintaining
facilities or structures in the public way to alter, modify or relocate such
facilities or structures as the city engineer may require. Sewers, pipes,
drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and
overhead and underground gas, electric, utility, telephone, utility systems,
communication facilities, water and water pipes shall specifically be subject
to such directives. The person owning or maintaining the facilities or
structures shall, at their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written
notice by the city, promptly protect, or promptly alter or relocate such
facilities or structures, or part thereof, as directed by the city. In the
event that such person refuses or neglects to conform to the directive of the
city, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate
such part of the facilities or structures without liability to such person.
Such person shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the city in connection
with such work performed by the city, including also design, engineering,
construction, materials, insurance, court costs and attorney fees.
B.   Considerations: Any directive by the city engineer shall be based upon one
or more of the following:
1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being maintained
contrary to law, or determined by the city engineer to be structurally unsound
or defective;
2.   The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance, as defined under state
statute or city ordinance. (This section shall not, however, be deemed to
diminish the vehicle impound authority of the police department.);
3.   The authority under which the facility or structure was installed has
expired or has been revoked;
4.   The facility or structure is not in conformity with public improvements
consistent with the general plan of the city for the area;
5.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such facilities or
structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
6.   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
C.   Police Power: Any directive of the city engineer under this section shall
be under and consistent with the city's police power. Unless an emergency
condition exists, the city engineer shall make a good faith effort to consult
with the person regarding any condition that may result in a removal or
relocation of facilities in the public way to consider possible avoidance or
minimization of removal or relocation requirements and provide the directive as
far enough in advance of the required removal or relocation to allow the person
a reasonable opportunity to plan and minimize cost associated with the required
removal or relocation.
D.   Prior Private Easement: This obligation does not apply to facilities or
structures originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the public way, if that
prior private easement grants a superior vested right.
E.   Failure To Comply: Any person owning or maintaining facilities or
structures in the public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such
facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the city engineer shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor. All costs of alteration, modification or
relocation shall be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or
structures involved.
F.   Emergencies: The city may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other
emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable discretion, cut or move
any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or under the public way, in
which event the city shall not be liable therefor to a person. The city shall
notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon
as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this subsection. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-110: IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
A.   A permit does not authorize, provide permission, or imply authorization to
trespass onto private property or private way outside of the public way.
B.   Temporary Improvements: If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by
excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or
provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient
for users, and consistent with city standards for such.
C.   Temporary Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas, until the
permanent repairs are complete, the disturbed area shall be restored and
maintained with a temporary surface consisting of compacted road base or
temporary asphalt.
D.   Disturbances:
1.   At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or
personal property of a private property owner or the city, such permittee shall
ensure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of
the work.
2.   The costs associated with the disturbance and the return, replacement and/
or restoration shall be borne by the permittee. Further, a permittee shall
reimburse a property owner or the city, for any actual damage caused by the
permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in connection with
the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this subsection shall
require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private property owner when that
subscriber or private property owner requests that the permittee remove,
replace or relocate improvements associated with the service provided by the
permittee to the property owner and when the permittee exercises due care in
the performance of that service, or when the subscriber or private property
owner provided false information to the permittee on which the permittee relied
to its detriment.
3.   Included Acts: Examples of types of acts specifically included in this
section are the following:
a.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or fence, to
install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable or other
appurtenances of the permittee;
b.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the
permittee;
c.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture
of a private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning,
heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of construction,
maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
d.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances due to
the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise, if applicable.
E.   Drainage Channels: Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches,
shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow will not be
interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow of the
drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be submitted for approval
by the city engineer prior to the blockage of the channel. Approved rerouting
method shall be implemented and maintained during usage to facility
unrestricted flow.
F.   Subcontractors Applicable: The requirements imposed upon the permittee
extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the permittee might
employee to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
G.   Permanent Structure In Public Way: The requirements of this section shall
not apply to the removal by a permittee, of a permanent structure placed by a
property owner in a public way, unless such property owner has received prior
written permission from the city granting the property owner the right to
install a permanent structure on a public way, and such written permission has
been recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd.
Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
11-6-120: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A.   Required: The permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the surface of
any public way or city property to its original condition and replace any
removed or damaged pavement according to the standards outlined on the permit.
All restoration shall conform to the engineering regulations, design standards
and specifications promulgated by the city and shall be accomplished within the
time limits set forth in the permit, unless additional time is granted in
writing by the city engineer.
B.   Restoration By City: At its option, the permittee doing the actual
excavation work may request that the city restore the surface to its original
condition. The fee for such resurfacing shall be determined by the city
engineer in accordance with its reasonable costs for such work and shall be
charged to the person, firm, or corporation making the excavation. Payment for
said work shall be received by the city prior to the issuance of the
encroachment permit in order to accommodate the scheduling by the city of the
restoration and shall be sufficient to cover all associated costs incurred by
the city. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
11-6-130: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Specified: Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to the
city evidence that such applicant has a comprehensive general liability (CDL)
and property damage policy that includes contractual liability coverage
endorsed with the following limits and provisions or with such alternative
limits and provisions as may be approved by the city:
1.   Commercial General Liability Insurance on an “occurrence” basis, including
products and completed operations, property damage, bodily injury and personal
and advertising injury with limits no less than two million ($2,000,000) per
occurrence. The general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit,
or the general aggregate limit shall be two (2) times the required occurrence
limit. The coverage shall be in the nature of broad from commercial general
liability coverage. The city attorney may increase or decrease minimum
insurance limits, depending on the potential liability of any project.
2.   Draper City, its officers, officials, employees, and volunteers are to be
covered as additional insureds on the CGL policy with respect to liability
arising out of work or operations performed by or on behalf of the Contractor
including materials, parts, or equipment furnished in connection with such work
or operations. General liability coverage shall be provided in the form of an
endorsement.
3.   The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance
or self-insurance maintained by the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance
and shall not contribute to or with it.
4.   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall not
effect coverage provided to the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns.
5.   Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply separately
to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with
respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
6.   The permittee grants to the city a waiver of any right to subrogation,
which any insurer of said permittee may acquire against the city by virtue of
the payment of any loss under such insurance. Permittee agrees to obtain any
endorsement that may be necessary to affect this waiver of subrogation, but
this provision applies regardless of whether or not the city has received a
waiver of subrogation endorsement from the insurer.
7.   The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no
recourse against the city for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy.
8.   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage shall
not be suspended, voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in limits, except
after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested sent to the city.
9.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend the
city and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property occurring by
reason of permit work done by the permittee, or his/her subcontractor or agent,
whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right of way
has been opened to public travel.
10.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the
city, and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work pursuant
to the permit including, but not limited to, falling objects or failure to
maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time work begins
until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public use.
11.   Each required insurance policy shall provide that coverage shall not be
cancelled, except with prior written notice given to the city.
B.   Carrier Requirements: Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an A.M.
Best rating of no less than A:VII, unless otherwise acceptable to the city.
C.   Certificates: Permittee shall furnish the city with original certificates
of insurance including all required amendatory endorsements (or copies of the
applicable policy language effecting coverage required by this clause) and a
copy of the Declarations and Endorsement page of the CGL policy listing all
policy endorsements to the city before work begins. However, failure to obtain
the required documents prior to the work beginning shall not waive the
Permittee’s obligation to provide them. The city reserves the right to require
complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies, including
endorsements required by these specifications, at any time.
D.   Unsatisfactory Policies: If any of the required policies are, or at any
time become, unsatisfactory to the city as to form or substance, or if a
company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to
the city, the permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to
the city for approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as
required by the city. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such
insurance as provided herein, the city may declare the permit to be in default
and pursue any and all remedies the city may have at law or in equity,
including those actions outlined in this chapter.
E.   Subcontractors Included: The permittee shall include all subcontractors as
insured under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and
endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be
subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
F.   Deductibles, Retentions: Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall
be declared to and approved by the city. At the option of the city, either the
insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions
as respects the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or
assigns, or the permittee shall procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the
city, guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim
administration, and defense expenses.
G.   Homeowner Policies: A property owner performing work adjacent to his or
her residence may submit proof of a homeowner's insurance policy in lieu of the
insurance requirements of this section.
H.   Exceptions: A provider may be relieved of the obligation of submitting
certificates of insurance under the following circumstances:
1.   If such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
a.   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this chapter, or has complied
with state requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may submit
annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual submissions for
each permit; and
b.   Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage that would
otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this chapter; or
c.   The work to be performed under the permit issued to the applicant is to be
performed by the city, in which case insurance requirement or other risk
transfer issues shall be negotiated between the city and the applicant by
separate agreement. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-2022)
11-6-140: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY:
A.   Improvement Completion Assurance Required: Except as noted in this
chapter, before being issued a permit, each applicant shall provide the city
with an improvement completion assurance as defined by section
17-4-075 in an amount determined by the city engineer to guarantee faithful
performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this
chapter.
B.   Exception For Franchise: Public utilities franchised by the city shall not
be required to provide an improvement completion assurance if such requirement
is expressly waived in the franchise documents. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord.
1501, 10-5-2021)
11-6-150: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
A.   The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the permit. The
issuance and acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall constitute such
an agreement by the permittee to this section.
B.   This chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the city, its
officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to
any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work within the
public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter; nor shall the
city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of
any work. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-160: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT; PENALTY:
A.   Stop Order: A stop order may be issued by the city engineer directed to
any person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way
without a permit. The abutting property owner shall be responsible for causing
work to be done.
B.   Additional Fee: Any person found to be doing work in the public way
without having obtained a permit, as provided in this chapter, shall be
required to pay a permit fee equal to two (2) times the normal permit fee. For
replacement work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee
for new construction shall apply. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-170: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
A.   Conditions: Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued
by the city engineer, after notice to the permittee for any of the following
reasons:
1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any provision of
this chapter;
2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law
relating to the work; or
3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does constitute,
may constitute or cause a condition endangering life or property.
B.   Immediate Effect: A suspension or revocation by the city engineer, and a
stop order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the city
engineer and notice to the person performing the work in the public way. Notice
to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the city engineer
has posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written notice has
been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by the
permittee on the permit.
C.   Notice: Whenever the city engineer finds that a default has occurred in
the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof
may be given to the principal. Such notice shall state the work to be done, and
the period of time deemed by the city engineer to be reasonably necessary for
the completion of the work.
D.   Failure To Comply; Work By City: In the event that the principal, within a
reasonable time following the giving of such notice (taking into consideration
the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the requirements of
public safety and for the protection of persons and property), fails either to
commence and cause the required work to be performed with due diligence, or to
indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice,
the city may perform the work, at the discretion of the city engineer, with
city forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be commenced by the city
attorney against the contractor and bonding company and such other persons as
may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the city, including attorney
fees, on account thereof. In the event that cash has been deposited, the cost
of performing the work may be charged against the amount deposited, and suit
brought for the balance due, if any. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998; amd. Ord. 1538, 4-19-
2022)
11-6-180: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the city
engineer may:
A.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
B.   Issue a stop order;
C.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
D.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
E.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance costs.
(Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-190: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the city engineer may be appealed
by the permittee by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council
within ten (10) days of the action of the city engineer. The city council shall
hear such appeal, if written request therefor is timely filed, as soon as
practicable, and render its decision within a reasonable time following filing
of notice of appeal. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-200: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-210: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
11-6-220: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists shall
be a separate offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from
otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 259, 1-6-1998)
CHAPTER 7
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
11-7-010: Purpose
11-7-020: Definition
11-7-030: Submission Requirements
11-7-040: Data Formats
11-7-050: Construction Projects; Bond Release
11-7-060: Exemptions
11-7-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish processes, procedures, and
standards for providing data to Draper City to further the development of the
city's geographic information system (GIS). The data will facilitate the
planning and management of the city. (Ord. 792, 10-2-2007)
11-7-020: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "GIS" means an integrated collection of computer
software, hardware, and data used to view and manage information about
geographic places, analyze spatial relationships, and model spatial processes.
A GIS provides a framework for gathering and organizing spatial data and
related information so it can be displayed and analyzed. (Ord. 792, 10-2-2007)
11-7-030: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Project Data Required: At the time a developer's project is placed under
warranty, the developer shall provide to the Draper City department of public
works the project's data in ESRI shapefiles or feature classes that reflect the
as built facilities. Though an applicant for a bond release is not the original
applicant of the project, the applicant for the bond release shall nevertheless
bear responsibility for submitting the GIS data to the city.
B.   Information Required: The GIS data submittal shall include the following
system information as applicable to the project:
1.   Roadway system: Regulatory signs, street signs, centerlines, curb and
gutter, sidewalks, speed humps, crosswalks, ADA ramps, and monuments;
2.   Culinary water system: Fire hydrants, air vacs, blowoffs, water valves,
water meters, water laterals, and water pipes;
3.   Secondary water system: Air vacs, blowoffs, service boxes, valves, water
laterals, and water pipes;
4.   Sewer system: Manholes, laterals, and pipes;
5.   Land drain system: Manholes, laterals, and pipes;
6.   Storm drain system: Catch basins, manholes, and pipes;
7.   Parcel information: Boundaries, lots, and public utility easements;
8.   Dedicated land: Easements, parks, and trails;
9.   Landscape information: Type of foliage; and
10.   Utility information: Streetlights, power sources, wiring plan, future use
telecommunications conduit, and service boxes.
C.   Additional Information: The public works director may request additional
information and data, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
D.   Submittal: The GIS data shall be submitted with the final approved as
built drawings. (Ord. 792, 10-2-2007)
11-7-040: DATA FORMATS:
All GIS data shall be submitted in ESRI shapefiles or feature classes. The data
shall be in the following format: NAD83, Utah state plane, central zone,
international foot (1 foot = 0.3048 m) horizontal, NAVD88. (Ord. 792, 10-2-
2007)
11-7-050: CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS; BOND RELEASE:
A.   Underground Utilities: Developers of construction projects extending into
a public right of way, where underground utilities can be identified, shall
submit GIS data on the utilities in the format described in section
11-7-040 of this chapter. The utilities include, but are not limited to, gas
lines, phone lines, water lines, secondary water lines, sewer lines, cable TV
lines, fiber optic cables, power lines, storm drains, irrigation items, and
ditches.
B.   Time Limit For Submittal: The GIS data shall be submitted within fourteen
(14) days of completion of the project.
C.   Bond Release: The city shall release bonds associated with a construction
project only upon the GIS data being satisfactorily submitted. (Ord. 792, 10-2-
2007)
11-7-060: EXEMPTIONS:
A.   Single lot residential projects or applications that are not installing
new or modifying existing utilities are exempt from the GIS submittal
requirements of this chapter.
B.   Construction projects limited to single service laterals are exempt from
the requirements of this chapter.
C.   Developers of public improvement projects with a cost as estimated by the
public works department of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less may, prior
to construction, petition the public works department for an exemption from the
requirements of this chapter. The decision of the city engineer shall be final.
(Ord. 792, 10-2-2007)
TITLE 12
FLOOD DAMAGE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-010: Purpose
12-1-020: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
12-1-030: Definitions
12-1-040: General Provisions
12-1-050: Administration
12-1-060: Variance And Appeal Procedure
12-1-070: General Standards
12-1-080: Specific Standards
12-1-090: Floodways
12-1-100: Penalty
12-1-010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of Draper City, Utah, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
A.   Protect human life and health;
B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
G.   Ensure potential buyers are notified that property is in a special flood
hazard area. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009)
12-1-020: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property in times of flood, or that cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate floodwaters;
D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009; amd. Ord. 1428, 4- -2020)
12-1-030: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition
and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AH, AO, or VO zone on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be
designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone
A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The water surface elevation of the one-percent- annual-
chance flood event. It is the height in relation to mean sea level expected to
be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. It is also the elevation shown on
the FIRM and found in the accompanying FIS for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-
V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood
that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given
year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade or below ground
level on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, posts and piers,
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and b) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-
30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting
the definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section
60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the placing of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date
of this chapter.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
placing of concrete pads.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report provided by FEMA that contains
flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood
boundary-floodway map (if applicable), the flood insurance rate map, and
supporting technical data.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source; or
C.   Mudslides including mudflows and debris flows which are proximately caused
by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid, flowing mud or debris on the
surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of
water and deposited along the path of the current.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance, and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places maintained
by the department of the interior or preliminarily determined by the secretary
of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
national register;
B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the
interior; or
D.   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement.
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is
not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For the purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on the city's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the placing of concrete pads and which is completed on or after the
effective date of this chapter.
READY FOR HIGHWAY USE: A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A.   Built on a single chassis;
B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the placing of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading or filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
B.   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. See section 60.6 of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations or the provisions of this chapter is presumed to be in violation
until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, where specified, of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009; amd. Ord. 1428, 4- -2020)
12-1-040: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of Draper City.
B.   Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special
flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
scientific and engineering reports entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Salt
Lake County, Utah and incorporated areas” dated September 25, 2009 and November
19, 2021, and “The Flood Insurance Study for Utah County, Utah and incorporated
areas", dated June 19, 2020, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
and flood boundary-floodway maps (FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
C.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
D.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all
provisions shall be:
1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3.   Deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of Draper City or any officer or employee thereof, or the federal emergency
management agency for any flood damages that result in reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009;
amd. Ord. 1428, 4- -2020; Ord. 1504, 10-19-2021)
12-1-050: ADMINISTRATION:
A.   Designation Of Floodplain Administrator And Development Permits:
1.   The senior engineer manager or other engineer as designated by the city
engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
2.   Development permit applications shall have the same meaning as land
disturbance permit applications as defined in section
18-1-030. Throughout the remainder of this chapter, the term "land disturbance
permit" may be used in place of the term "development permit."
B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator: Duties and
responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
1.   Maintaining and holding open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter;
2.   Reviewing permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding;
3.   Reviewing, approving or denying all applications for land disturbance
permits required by adoption of this chapter and title 18;
4.   Reviewing permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies, including section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC § 1334, from which prior approval is required;
5.   Making the necessary interpretation as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards where, for example, there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions;
6.   Notifying, in riverine situations, adjacent communities, Salt Lake County
flood control, Utah division of water rights stream alterations and the Utah
national flood insurance program coordinator of the Utah department of public
safety division of homeland security prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;
7.   Assuring that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained;
8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
subsection
12-1-040B, "Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this
chapter, obtaining, reviewing and reasonably utilizing any base flood elevation
data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in
order to administer the provisions of sections
12-1-070, "General Standards";
12-1-080, "Specific Standards"; and
12-1-090, "Floodways", of this chapter;
9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, requiring that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development including fill
shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the city's FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any
point within the city; and
10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Part 65.12 of the national
flood insurance program regulations, approving certain development in zones A1-
30, AE, AH, on the city's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot (1'); provided, that the city first
applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map
revision).
C.   Permit Issuance Procedures: A land disturbance permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within any area of special flood
hazard established in subsection
12-1-040B of this chapter. Application for a land disturbance permit shall be
made according to title 9 or title 17 and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the proposed landscape alterations, existing or proposed
structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
1   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
2   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential
structure shall be floodproofed;
3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the floodproofing
criteria in subsection
12-1-080B of this chapter;
4.   A description of the extent to which any watercourses or natural drainage
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
5.   A full and complete set of final plans, specifications, certifications and
computations in electronic format compatible with the city's systems and hard
copy of two (2) sets of eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") plans,
specifications, certifications, and computations.
D.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in title 10, no building,
structure, or building service equipment shall be erected, constructed,
enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished
unless a separate and appropriate building permit for each building, structure,
or building service equipment is first obtained as outlined in
10-3-010 and applicable standards of this title.
E.   Approval And Endorsement: Upon issuance of the land disturbance permit,
the floodplain administrator shall endorse in writing, or stamp "Approved" on
all required sets of plans and specifications. The floodplain administrator
shall retain the plans and specifications during the period of construction and
as thereafter required in subsection B1 of this section. The floodplain
administrator shall return one set of the approved plans and specifications to
the applicant. The applicant shall retain the approved set of plans and
specifications at the site covered by the land disturbance permit at all times
during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. The remaining plan set
and specifications shall be used for city inspection and related field reviews.
E.   Approval Or Denial Of A Land Disturbance Permit By Floodplain
Administrator: The floodplain administrator shall, based upon all of the
provisions of this chapter and title 18, approve or deny the land disturbance
permit in accordance with the following relevant factors:
1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that
area. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009; amd. Ord. 1428, 4- -2020)
12-1-060: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   Appeal Board: An appeal board consisting of the public works director and
a designated employee of the city engineer's office is hereby established. The
appeal board shall hear and render judgement on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B.   The appeal board shall hear and render judgement on an appeal only when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction.
D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to FEMA upon request.
E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements
to be erected on a lot of one half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level, providing the relevant factors in
12-1-010C have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one
half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
title.
H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
J.   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
K.   Any application for which a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
L.   Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
1.   The criteria outlined in
12-1-060I are met; and
2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009; amd. Ord. 1428, 4- -2020)
12-1-070: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage;
D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from
the systems into flood waters; and
F.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009; amd.
Ord. 1428, 4- -2020)
12-1-080: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in subsection
12-1-040B, "Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard",
12-1-050B8, or
12-1-080F of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of
any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in
12-1-050C is satisfied.
B.   Non-Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
C.   Enclosures: For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect and must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one
(1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above
grade.
3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings
or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
D.   Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance
with subsection
12-1-070A of this chapter.
1.   All manufactured homes and those to be substantially improved shall
conform to the following requirements:
a.   Manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be
elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b.   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
c.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions that are not subject to the provisions
in subsection D1a of this section shall be elevated so that either:
(1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation; or
(2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements that are no less than thirty six inches (36") in height
above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
E.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall either:
1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3.   Meet the permit requirements and elevation and anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
F.   Standards For Subdivisions:
1.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections
12-1-010 and
12-1-020 of this chapter.
2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement
of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet land disturbance permit
requirements of this chapter and title 18.
3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and
other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is
less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsection
12-1-040B, "Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", or
12-1-050B8 of this chapter.
4.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
5.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
G.   Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones): Located within the areas of
special flood hazard established in subsection
12-1-040B of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet (1' - 3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
1.   Within the AO zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified
in feet on the community's FIRM or at least two feet (2') if no depth number is
specified.
2.   Within the AO zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM or at least two feet (2') if no depth
number is specified or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the requirements of this
section are satisfied.
4.   Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be constructed around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009; amd. Ord. 1428, 4- -2020)
12-1-090: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
12-1-040B of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since a floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
A.   All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development are prohibited unless it can be
demonstrated by a registered professional engineer or architect through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of sections
12-1-060 and
12-1-080 of this chapter.
C.   Under 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national flood insurance
regulations, the city may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevation, provided the
city first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(Ord. 914, 9-22-2009)
12-1-100: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine, or by imprisonment in the
county jail, or by both as provided by law. Such person, firm, or corporation
shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which
any portion of any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person, firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable as
herein provided. (Ord. 914, 9-22-2009)
TITLE 13
CRIMINAL CODE
CHAPTER 1
ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
SECTION:
13-1-010: Utah Criminal Code
13-1-020: Utah Code Of Criminal Procedure
13-1-030: Utah Controlled Substances Act
13-1-040: Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act
13-1-050: Imitation Controlled Substances Act
13-1-060: Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
13-1-070: Limitations
13-1-080: Omission Not A Waiver
13-1-090: Citation
13-1-100: Rules Of Construction
13-1-110: Copies Of Codes
13-1-120: Penalties
13-1-130: Fine Schedule
13-1-010: UTAH CRIMINAL CODE:
The Utah criminal code, set forth at Utah Code Annotated section 76-1-101 et
seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the criminal code of Draper City. (Ord.
178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-020: UTAH CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE:
The Utah code of criminal procedure, as set forth at Utah Code Annotated
section 77-1-1 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the code of criminal
procedure of Draper City. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-030: UTAH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT:
The Utah controlled substances act, as set forth at Utah Code Annotated section
58-37-1 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the controlled substances act
of Draper City. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-040: UTAH DRUG PARAPHERNALIA ACT:
The Utah drug paraphernalia act, as set forth at Utah Code Annotated section
58-37a-1 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the drug paraphernalia act
of Draper City. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-050: IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT:
The imitation controlled substances act as set forth at Utah Code Annotated
section 58-37b-1 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the imitation
controlled substances act of Draper City. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-060: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT:
The alcoholic beverage control act, as set forth at Utah Code Annotated section
32B-1-101 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the alcoholic beverage
control act of Draper City. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-070: LIMITATIONS:
Each of the codes and acts adopted herein are hereby adopted as if fully set
forth at length; provided, however, that any provision which is classified as a
felony or a class A misdemeanor or which is not enforceable by Draper City
under the laws of the state of Utah, is excluded. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-080: OMISSION NOT A WAIVER:
The omission to specify or enumerate in this chapter those provisions of
general criminal law and offenses applicable to all cities shall not be
construed as a waiver of the benefits and enforcement of any such provisions.
(Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-090: CITATION:
For purposes of referring or citing to provisions of the codes and acts adopted
herein, the specific provision of the code or act shall be cited by number
preceded by title 13 of this code, e.g., 13/76-1-101. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-100: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
Insofar as possible, the provisions of this title and the codes and acts
adopted herein shall be construed in a manner to ensure the enforcement of the
criminal laws of the state of Utah. In the event any provisions are
inconsistent, the inconsistency shall be resolved as follows:
A.   Any provision of this title which was at one time, but is not now,
consistent with the codes and acts adopted herein shall be controlled by the
law as it is reflected in the most recent version of the code or act, as
amended.
B.   Any provision of this title which deals with the particular local needs
and policies of Draper City and is otherwise lawful shall control. (Ord. 178,
5-2-1995)
13-1-110: COPIES OF CODES:
One copy of each of the codes and acts adopted in this chapter shall be
available in the city recorder's office for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 962, 2-1-2011)
13-1-120: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of this title shall be a class B
misdemeanor. This section shall not limit the authority of the court to impose
any other sanction or order any other relief as may be appropriate and lawful
under the laws of the state of Utah. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-1-130: FINE SCHEDULE:
Fines for violations of this title shall be assessed in accordance with the
uniform fine schedule as adopted and amended by the judicial council. (Ord.
178, 5-2-1995)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS
SECTION:
13-2-010: Curfew
13-2-020: Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew
13-2-030: Contributing To The Delinquency Of A Minor
13-2-040: Soliciting The Service Of Others
13-2-050: Procuring Prohibited Admission Or Articles For Minors
13-2-010: CURFEW:
A.   Findings: The council of Draper City finds, due to a seemingly ever
increasing incidence of violence and other crime among juveniles in the city,
including drug related and gang related crime, that such crimes may be
significantly inhibited and reduced by the enactment and enforcement of local
laws establishing a curfew prohibiting juveniles from remaining idly and
purposelessly on the public streets late at night.
B.   Definitions:
   EMERGENCY: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately seek
to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or
potentially criminal activity, or fire, accident, or natural disaster, and
shall include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency
response personnel or the purchase of medications.
   MINOR: Any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed
forces of the United States and who is under the age of sixteen (16) for the
purposes of subsection C of this section or under the age of eighteen (18) for
the purposes of subsection D of this section.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place open to the public, whether publicly or privately
owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and
exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of
entertainment.
C.   Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16)
years to remain, loiter, or be in any public place or on any public street,
sidewalk or alley within Draper City between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:
00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
D.   Under Eighteen: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years to remain, loiter, or be in any public place or on any public
street, sidewalk or alley within Draper City between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
E.   Exceptions: The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to situations:
1.   Where the minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person
having the legal care and custody of said minor;
2.   Where the presence of the minor is connected with or required by some
legitimate employment or business of the minor;
3.   Where the presence of the minor is connected with a bona fide meeting,
dance, party, sporting event or practice sponsored by a church, school, league,
youth club or theater;
4.   Where the presence of the minor is connected with an emergency;
5.   Where the minor is in a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel
beginning in, traveling through, or ending in Draper City; or
6.   Where the minor is in the immediate vicinity of the minor's place of
residence. (Ord. 870, 11-25-2008)
13-2-020: AIDING MINOR TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
A.   Generally: It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage
any minor to violate the provisions of section
13-2-010 of this chapter.
B.   Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other
person having legal care of any minor, to allow or permit such minor to be in
any public place or public street, sidewalk, or alley within Draper City in
violation of section
13-2-010 of this chapter.
C.   Owner Or Operator Of Business: It is unlawful for any person owning or
operating a business to permit any minor to be or remain on the premises where
such business is conducted in violation of section
13-2-010 of this chapter. (Ord. 870, 11-25-2008)
13-2-030: CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR:
A.   Offenses: The following shall be offenses when committed by adults against
minors:
1.   Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who solicits, requests,
commands, encourages, or intentionally aids or who acts with a juvenile in the
violation of any federal, state, or city ordinance, or who tends to cause
children to become or remain delinquent, or who aids, contributes to, or
becomes responsible for the neglect, abuse, or delinquency of any child;
2.   Any person eighteen (18) years or older, having a child in his or her
legal custody, or under his or her care, or in his or her employment, who
wilfully abuses or ill treats, neglects, or abandons the child in any manner
likely to cause the child unnecessary suffering or serious injury to his or her
health or morals;
3.   Any person eighteen (18) years or older who forcibly takes away a child
from, or wrongfully encourages him or her to leave, the legal or physical
custody of any person, agency, or institution in which the child lawfully
resides or has been legally placed for the purpose of care, support, education
or adoption, or any person who knowingly detains or harbors a child whom he or
she has reasonable grounds to believe has escaped or fled from the custody of
any agency or institution in which the child lawfully resides or has run away
from his or her parent, guardian, or custodian;
4.   Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who provides a child with
an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, or who encourages or permits a
child to consume an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance; or
5.   Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who fails to report child
abuse, as required by Utah Code Annotated section 62A-4a-401 et seq., as
amended.
B.   Conviction Not Necessary: It shall not be necessary in order to obtain a
conviction under this statute to establish that the minor had become a
delinquent or committed a delinquent act. (Ord. 870, 11-25-2008)
13-2-040: SOLICITING THE SERVICE OF OTHERS:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) to solicit or
utilize the services of any other person to procure any prohibited article or
admission to any prohibited premises. (Ord. 870, 11-25-2008)
13-2-050: PROCURING PROHIBITED ADMISSION OR ARTICLES FOR MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person to procure for any person under the age of twenty
one (21) prohibited articles or admission to prohibited premises. (Ord. 870,
11-25-2008)
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC SCHOOLS
SECTION:
13-3-010: Possession Or Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages
13-3-020: Dangerous Materials
13-3-030: Criminal Trespass
13-3-040: Disturbing The Peace
13-3-010: POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
It is unlawful for any person to possess or drink an alcoholic beverage:
A.   Inside or on the grounds of any building operated by a part of the public
education system; or
B.   In those portions of any building, park, or stadium which are being used
for an activity sponsored by or through any part of the public education
system. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-3-020: DANGEROUS MATERIALS:
A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to possess a weapon, explosive,
flammable material, or other material dangerous to persons or property in a
public or private elementary or secondary school, on the grounds of the school,
or in those parts of a building, park, or stadium which are being used for an
activity sponsored by or through the school.
B.   Exceptions: This subsection does not apply when:
1.   Possession is approved by the responsible school administrator; or
2.   The item or material is present or to be used in connection with a lawful,
approved activity and is in the possession or under the control of the person
responsible for its possession or use. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-3-030: CRIMINAL TRESPASS:
A.   Prohibited Acts: A person shall be guilty of criminal trespass upon school
property if the person does the following:
1.   Enters or remains unlawfully upon school property; and
a.   Intends to cause annoyance or injury to a person or damage to property on
the school property;
b.   Intends to commit a crime; or
c.   Is reckless as to whether the person's presence will cause fear for the
safety of another.
2.   Enters or remains without authorization unlawfully upon school property if
notice against entry or remaining has been given by:
a.   Personal communication to the person by a school official or an individual
with apparent authority to act for a school official;
b.   The posting of signs reasonably likely to come to the attention of
trespassers;
c.   Fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude trespassers; or
d.   A current order of suspension or expulsion.
B.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   ENTER: Intrusion of the entire body.
   SCHOOL OFFICIAL: A public or private school administrator or person in
charge of a school program or activity.
   SCHOOL PROPERTY: Real property owned or occupied by a public or regularly
organized private school, including real property temporarily occupied for a
school activity or program. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-3-040: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
A person shall be guilty of disturbing the peace if the person does any of the
following:
A.   Disturbs, interferes with, or otherwise prevents the orderly conduct of
the activities, administration or carrying on of classes of any school;
B.   Annoys, disturbs, assaults, or molests any student or employee of any
school while in the school or on the school grounds;
C.   Loiters, idles, wanders, strolls or plays in or about any school grounds
or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle without having some lawful
business therein or thereabouts, or in connection with the school or the
employees thereof, or without being engaged in permitted recreational activity;
D.   Conducts himself or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in
speech or behavior in, about, or on any school building or grounds;
E.   Parks or moves a motor vehicle within one hundred (100) yards of any
school building or grounds for the purpose of annoying or molesting any student
or employee of the school or in an effort to induce, entice, or invite any
student or employee into or on the vehicle for illegal or immoral purposes.
(Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
13-4-010: Interfering With Official In Discharge Of Duty
13-4-020: Concealing Identity Or Furnishing False Information
13-4-010: INTERFERING WITH OFFICIAL IN DISCHARGE OF DUTY:
A.   It is unlawful for any person to deter, interfere with, or prevent a
fireman, law enforcement officer, or any other city employee from performing
any official duty imposed upon such officer, firefighter or employee.
B.   It is unlawful to wilfully resist, physically delay, or physically
obstruct a police officer, firefighter, or any other city employee, or fail to
comply with a lawful command of a police officer, fireman, or any other city
employee in the discharge or attempt to discharge his or her official duties.
(Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-4-020: CONCEALING IDENTITY OR FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally conceal or attempt
to conceal his or her identity, to falsely identify himself or herself, or to
furnish or give false or misleading information to any person charged with the
enforcement or administration of any Draper City ordinance. (Ord. 178, 5-2-
1995)
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY AND SAFETY
SECTION:
13-5-010: Lewd Or Obscene Behavior
13-5-020: Lewd Or Obscene Material
13-5-030: Cheats And Swindlers
13-5-040: Free Speech Zones
13-5-010: LEWD OR OBSCENE BEHAVIOR:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any lewd, lascivious or obscene
conduct, to associate in a lewd, lascivious or obscene manner with any person,
or to make any exposure of his or her genitals, pubic area, nipple portion of
the female breast, or buttocks in any public place or any place exposed to
public view. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-5-020: LEWD OR OBSCENE MATERIAL:
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly permit or authorize the public display
of any obscene performance or materials or to knowingly own, lease, or manage
any theater, building, structure, room or place for the purpose of presenting
such obscene performance or materials. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-5-030: CHEATS AND SWINDLERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or practice any game, trick or
device with intent to defraud, cheat, or swindle another. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
13-5-040: FREE SPEECH ZONES:
A.   Establishment: The city manager or the manager's designee may establish a
content neutral free speech zone for any event which the city manager or the
manager's designee determines the establishment of a free speech zone would
serve a substantial government interest such as traffic flow, crowd control, or
public safety on public property. All free speech zones established by the city
manager or the manager's designee shall be content neutral and appropriately
marked as a free speech zone. All free speech zones shall provide ample
opportunity for protestors to communicate their messages, and be of ample size
to accommodate the number of persons the city manager or manager's designee
reasonably anticipates will exercise their free speech rights during the event.
B.   Designation Of Area And Duration: For each event in which the city manager
or the manager's designee establishes a free speech zone, the city manager or
the manager's designee shall make available to the public at least twenty four
(24) hours before the event a map and description of the location of the event,
boundaries of the event, location of the free speech zone, boundaries of the
free speech zone, the hours of the regulations on free speech, and any other
restrictions. The free speech zone, duration of the protest regulations, and
other restrictions shall be narrowly tailored to meet the legitimate government
interest of crowd control, traffic control, or public safety.
C.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   FREE SPEECH ZONE: The area in which protesting is allowed.
   PROTEST: Any demonstration, picketing, speechmaking, marching, vigil or
religious service, and all other like forms of conduct which involve the
communication or expression of views or grievances.
   UNLAWFUL PROTEST: A protest at an event designated by the city manager or
the manager's designee except in the designated free speech zone or use of
sound amplification devices at any event that the city manager or the manager's
designee has restricted or prohibited the use of such mechanical or sound
amplification devices.
D.   Restrictions: In any area designated as a free speech zone area,
protestors may not engage in activities that obstruct or impede pedestrians or
vehicles, or harass bystanders with physical contact. Protestors may not tie,
nail, or otherwise physically attach any banners, signs, pictures,
instructional materials, symbols, or other personal property to any city
property or private property.
E.   Sound Amplification Devices: The city manager or the manager's designee
may restrict or prohibit the use of mechanical loudspeakers or sound
amplification devices in the free speech zone, including, but not limited to,
megaphones, bullhorns, and electric amplifiers, if the city manager or
manager's designee determines that the use of sound amplification devices will
substantially interfere with the event or will substantially interfere with
crowd control, traffic control, or public safety and that the protestors have a
reasonable opportunity to communicate their message without sound
amplification.
F.   Penalties: Unlawful protest is an infraction, which offense is punishable
by a fine in an amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If
the offense continues after a request by the police to desist, or if a person
refuses to comply with the lawful order of the police to protest in the free
speech zone, or if a person refuses to comply with the lawful order of the
police regarding the use of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplification
device at an event that the city manager or the manager's designee has
restricted or prohibited such mechanical or sound amplification devices, that
person is guilty of unlawful protest, a class C misdemeanor, which offense is
punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days and a fine
not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or by both the fine and the
term of imprisonment. (Ord. 871, 12-2-2008)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
13-6-010: Destruction Of Property
13-6-020: Trespass By Persons And Motor Vehicles
13-6-030: Temporary Auto Theft
13-6-010: DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY:
A.   Wood Or Timber: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully cut down,
destroy, injure, sever, or carry away any kind of wood or timber growing or
lying upon the land of another without the permission of the owner or occupant
thereof.
B.   Earth, Soil Or Stone: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully dig,
sever, or carry away any earth, soil or stone from the land of another without
the permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
C.   Affixing Or Painting: It shall be unlawful for any person to put up,
affix, or paint any sign, notice, advertisement, or other item upon the
property of another without permission of the owner or occupant thereof. (Ord.
178, 5-2-1995)
13-6-020: TRESPASS BY PERSONS AND MOTOR VEHICLES:
A.   Exposing Enclosed Premises: It is unlawful for any person to open any
gate, take down any fence, or let down any barrier so as to expose any enclosed
premises of another without the permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
B.   Presence On Premises: It is unlawful for any person to drive or park any
motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other contrivance, or to walk, lodge, camp, or
sleep upon the premises of another without the permission of the owner or
occupant thereof.
C.   Presence On City Premises: It is unlawful for any person to drive or park
any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other contrivance upon any city owned
property which is not designated for vehicular traffic or parking.
D.   Violation: A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor. (Ord.
854, 9-16-2008)
13-6-030: TEMPORARY AUTO THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle which is not his or her
own, without the consent of the owner thereof and with the intent to
temporarily deprive the owner of possession of the vehicle, even though he or
she may not have the intent to steal the vehicle. The consent of the owner of a
vehicle to its taking or driving shall not in any case be presumed or implied
because of such owner's consent on a previous occasion to the taking or driving
such vehicle by the same or a different person. (Ord. 178, 5-2-1995)
TITLE 14
TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 1
DRAPER CITY TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
14-1-010: Adoption Of State Motor Vehicle Act, Traffic Code, And Related
Provisions
14-1-020: Adoption Of State Transportation Code
14-1-030: Adoption Of State Driver License Act
14-1-040: Short Title
14-1-050: Rules Of Construction
14-1-060: City To Administer
14-1-070: Applicability Generally
14-1-080: Applicability To School Property
14-1-090: Exceptions
14-1-100: Penalties
14-1-110: Fines
14-1-010: ADOPTION OF STATE MOTOR VEHICLE ACT, TRAFFIC CODE, AND RELATED
PROVISIONS:
Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapters 1a, 6a, 8, 12a, 21 and 22, as amended,
are hereby adopted by this reference as if fully set forth in this code;
provided, however, that those provisions which are exclusive to the state of
Utah or which are not enforceable by Draper City under the laws of the state of
Utah, are excluded. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-020: ADOPTION OF STATE TRANSPORTATION CODE:
Utah Code Annotated title 72, as amended, the transportation code, is hereby
adopted by this reference as if fully set forth in this code; provided,
however, that those provisions which are exclusive to the state of Utah or
which are not enforceable by Draper City under the laws of the state of Utah,
are excluded. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-030: ADOPTION OF STATE DRIVER LICENSE ACT:
Utah Code Annotated title 53, chapter 3, as amended, known as the "uniform
driver license act", is hereby adopted by this reference as if fully set forth
in this code; provided, however, that those provisions which are exclusive to
the state of Utah or which are not enforceable by Draper City under the laws of
the state of Utah, are excluded. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-040: SHORT TITLE:
This title and the codes adopted herein shall constitute the DRAPER CITY
TRAFFIC CODE. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-050: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
Insofar as possible, the provisions of this title and the Utah Code Annotated
provisions adopted herein shall be construed in a manner to ensure the
enforcement of the traffic laws of the state of Utah. In the event any
provisions are inconsistent, the inconsistency shall be resolved as follows:
A.   Any provision of this title which was at one time, but is not now,
consistent with the provisions adopted herein shall be controlled by the law as
it is reflected in the most recent version of the provision, as amended.
B.   Any provision of this title which deals with the particular local needs
and policies of Draper City and is otherwise lawful shall control. (Ord. 1054,
7-30-2013)
14-1-060: CITY TO ADMINISTER:
Draper City is hereby vested with the powers necessary to administer the
provisions of the Draper City traffic code and all laws relating to the
operation of vehicles on the highways of the city. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-070: APPLICABILITY GENERALLY:
Pursuant to the authority vested in municipalities under Utah Code Annotated
section 10-8-30, as amended, and to the extent permitted by law, the Draper
City traffic code shall be applicable to all vehicular traffic and parking on
any public roads, streets and highways within the jurisdiction of Draper City.
The provisions of the Draper City traffic code shall be enforceable by any law
enforcement officer having jurisdiction over such roads, streets and highways.
(Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-080: APPLICABILITY TO SCHOOL PROPERTY:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 53A-3-504, as amended, the Draper City
traffic code is hereby made applicable to vehicular traffic and parking on all
public school property within Draper City. All law enforcement officers having
jurisdiction within Draper City are hereby vested with the authority to
interpret and enforce the traffic code of Draper City to vehicular traffic and
parking on all public school property within Draper City. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-
2013)
14-1-090: EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Emergency Vehicles: The provisions of this traffic code shall not apply to
official emergency or law enforcement vehicles or persons driving such vehicles
when the authorized vehicle is being driven in response to an emergency, or
when used in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the laws, or
when responding to a fire alarm or other emergency, as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-212, as amended.
B.   Maintenance Vehicles: The provisions of this traffic code shall not apply
to official maintenance vehicles or persons driving such vehicles while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within the jurisdiction
of Draper City, as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-212, as
amended. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
14-1-100: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of this title shall be a class C
misdemeanor. This section shall not limit the authority of any other relief as
may be appropriate and lawful under the laws of the state of Utah. (Ord. 1054,
7-30-2013)
14-1-110: FINES:
Fines for all criminal and traffic offenses set forth herein shall be set and
imposed in accordance with the uniform fine/bail schedule established by the
Utah administrative office of the courts. (Ord. 1054, 7-30-2013)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
SECTION:
14-2-010: Traffic Signs And Signals
14-2-020: Curb Markings
14-2-030: Failure To Obey
14-2-010: TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
The city shall place and maintain official traffic signs, signals, and markings
upon highways under its jurisdiction as necessary to regulate and guide traffic
and parking within Draper City and to carry out the provisions of this title.
All signs and signals erected under this section shall conform to and be
maintained in conformance with the department of transportation manual and
specifications for a uniform system of traffic control devices under Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-301 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-2-020: CURB MARKINGS:
The city shall paint and maintain traffic markings upon curbs of any highway
under its jurisdiction as necessary to restrict or prohibit the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles in such areas and to carry out the provisions
of this title. For purposes of this section, any curb which is painted red
shall mean that no stopping, standing or parking is permitted at any time. For
purposes of this section, any curb which is painted yellow shall mean that
stopping, standing or parking is only permitted as designated by appropriate
signs. All markings made hereunder shall conform to the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated title 41, as amended. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-2-030: FAILURE TO OBEY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey any lawfully erected
traffic sign, signal or curb marking provided herein, unless otherwise directed
to do so by a law enforcement or public safety official. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 3
ACCIDENTS
SECTION:
14-3-010: Written Report Required
14-3-020: False Information
14-3-010: WRITTEN REPORT REQUIRED:
The operator or owner of a vehicle involved in any accident occurring within
Draper City shall fill out a state traffic incident reporting form as provided
by Draper City or the contracted law enforcement agency and shall provide
additional information regarding the accident upon the request of any city
official or investigating officer. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-3-020: FALSE INFORMATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person involved in an accident within Draper City
to falsely identify himself or herself, to conceal or attempt to conceal his or
her identity, or to give false information to any law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 4
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
14-4-010: Prima Facie Speed Limit
14-4-020: Posted Limits
14-4-010: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT:
The prima facie speed for all highways under the jurisdiction of Draper City
shall be as follows:
A.   Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing a school building or its grounds
during school recess or while children are going to school or leaving school
during opening or closing hours;
B.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour when passing through a residential
district; and
C.   Thirty (30) miles per hour when passing through a business district. (Ord.
169, 3-7-1995)
14-4-020: POSTED LIMITS:
The city shall declare and post alternative speed limits for highways under the
jurisdiction of Draper City when it is determined after an engineering and
traffic investigation that the reasonable and safe speed limit may be as
posted. Any speed limit altered under this section is effective when
appropriate signs giving notice are erected upon the affected highway. (Ord.
169, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
14-5-010: Restrictions As To Spec ified Areas
14-5-020: Winter Parking
14-5-030: Parking For Certain Purposes
14-5-040: Prohibited Parking Of Vehicles Leaking Fluids
14-5-050: Storing Vehicle On Street
14-5-060: Hazardous Parking
14-5-070: Truck Parking
14-5-080: Owner’s Responsibility For Parking Violation
14-5-090: Penalty
14-5-010: RESTRICTIONS AS TO SPECIFIED AREAS:
A.   For purposes of this section, an intersection is defined as the area
embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or,
if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) or more
roads, alleys, or highways that join one another. Intersections begin at a stop
bar, or in the absence of a stop bar, at the terminus of the points of
curvature for the adjacent sidewalk or landscaping. See the diagram labeled
"Figure 14-5-010-1" below.
B.   This section covers restrictions and exceptions in addition to, or more
restrictive than, those covered in the Utah State Traffic Code. Parking or
stopping a vehicle is prohibited:
1.   In front of or within five feet (5') of a public or private driveway;
2.   Within an intersection or within thirty feet (30') of any intersection;
3.   Upon a highway in such a manner that parking or stopping leaves less than
twelve feet (12') of unobstructed street width for free movement of vehicular
traffic;
4.   Within a marked traffic travel lane;
5.   On any highway or alley where the width of the highway or alley is less
than twenty feet (20'); or
6.   In a marked shoulder or bike lane or designated parking area if any
portion of the vehicle protrudes over or upon a solid white edge line of a
traffic travel lane.
C.   The restrictions of subsection (B) above shall not apply:
1.   When necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic; or
2.   When parking or stopping in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
   FIGURE 14-5-010-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4861.png]
 
(Ord. 1421, 5-19-2020)
14-5-020: WINTER PARKING :
No person shall park or leave a vehicle or trailer on any highway or street
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 AM, or while snow is on the street, from
November 1 through April 30. Vehicles or trailers that are parked on a highway
in violation of the provisions of this section may be removed at the owner's
expense. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-2020; amd. Ord. 1597, 12-6-2023)
14-5-030: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway within the jurisdiction of
Draper City for the principal purpose of greasing or repairing such vehicle,
other than repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-2020)
14-5-040: PROHIBITED PARKING OF VEHICLES LEAKING FLUIDS:
No person shall park on any highway any vehicle which is leaking any measurable
quantity of oil, grease, transmission fluid, radiator coolant, battery acid or
any other fluid, other than water, onto the street. Owners of vehicles parked
in violation of this section are guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-
2020)
14-5-050: STORING VEHICLE ON STREET:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park a vehicle or other
conveyance upon any highway within the jurisdiction of Draper City for more
than a continuous twenty four (24) hour period. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-2020)
14-5-060: HAZARDOUS PARKING:
No persons shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any hazardous or congested
place within the jurisdiction of Draper City as properly designated by the city
with official signs or markings. In no event shall any person stop or park a
vehicle in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic along
the highway upon which it is parked. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-2020)
14-5-070: TRUCK PARKING:
No person shall park any vehicle having a total gross weight, loaded or
unloaded, in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or having a total length
in excess of twenty four feet (24'), within any residential zone or along any
collector or arterial street within the jurisdiction of the city, except while
actually loading or unloading cargo on or in said vehicle. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-
2020)
14-5-080: OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARKING VIOLATION:
The person in whose name a vehicle is registered shall be prima facie
responsible for violations of this chapter and subject to the penalties of any
ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking. (Ord. 1421, 5-19-2020)
14-5-090: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of this chapter shall be an
infraction. This section shall not limit the authority of any other relief as
may be appropriate and lawful under the laws of the State of Utah. Any person
receiving multiple notices for violating the parking provisions of this
chapter, or those set forth in Utah Code Annotated title 41, within the
jurisdiction of Draper City, within a one hundred eighty (180) day period,
which have not been dismissed, may be subject to additional fines. (Ord. 1421,
5-19-2020)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS RULES
SECTION:
14-6-010: Driving To The Left Of Double Centerline
14-6-020: Driving Within Safety Zones
14-6-030: Driving Over "Wet" Traffic Markings
14-6-040: Driving On New Pavement
14-6-050: Avoiding Intersection Or Highway
14-6-060: Duty To Keep Proper Lookout
14-6-070: Interference With Control
14-6-080: Seating
14-6-090: Hanging On Outside Of Moving Vehicle
14-6-100: Attaching Sled Or Other Conveyance
14-6-110: Tampering With Vehicle
14-6-120: Excessive Acceleration
14-6-130: Safe Operation
14-6-140: Driving While Impaired
14-6-150: Parades And Processions
14-6-160: Discharge Of Debris
14-6-170: Load Limitation
14-6-180: Obstruction Of Traffic
14-6-190: Roller Skating And Skateboard Restrictions
14-6-200: Livestock On Streets
14-6-010: DRIVING TO THE LEFT OF DOUBLE CENTERLINE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle along the street or
highway to the left of a double centerline or other space, median, or barrier
of a divided highway, except where authorized by an official traffic control
device, marking or peace officer. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-020: DRIVING WITHIN SAFETY ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through or within a
safety zone, dividing section, roadway traffic island or any area within or
along a roadway from which vehicular traffic is intended to be excluded. (Ord.
169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-030: DRIVING OVER "WET" TRAFFIC MARKINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or ride any vehicle or animal
over, on or across any painted traffic markings which are indicated as being
"Wet". (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-040: DRIVING ON NEW PAVEMENT:
No person shall drive or ride any vehicle or animal over or across any newly
made pavement in any public street when there is a person, sign, or barrier
warning persons not to drive or ride over or across such pavement or that the
street is closed. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-050: AVOIDING INTERSECTION OR HIGHWAY:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to avoid designated
intersections or highways, or the traffic regulations set forth herein, by
cutting through any service station lot, parking lot, or other public or
private lot. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-060: DUTY TO KEEP PROPER LOOKOUT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle without keeping a
reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic, objects, and persons. (Ord.
169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-070: INTERFERENCE WITH CONTROL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity that interferes
with the safe control and operation of any vehicle while the same is in motion.
(Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-080: SEATING:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to have in his or her lap
any other person, adult or child, or animal, or for the driver to be seated in
the lap of any other person while the vehicle is in motion. (Ord. 169, 3-7-
1995)
14-6-090: HANGING ON OUTSIDE OF MOVING VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb, swing, or otherwise hold onto the
outside of any moving vehicle. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-100: ATTACHING SLED OR OTHER CONVEYANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly drive or operate a vehicle
upon any street within the jurisdiction of Draper City while any person riding
a bicycle, moped, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, or similar
conveyance is attached or connected to such vehicle. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-110: TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper, or interfere with
another person's vehicle without the authority of the owner or the person
lawfully in charge of the vehicle. Such acts include, but are not limited to,
climbing upon or into the vehicle, sounding the horn or any other signalling
device, manipulating any of the levers, starter, brakes or machinery thereof,
or setting the vehicle in motion. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-120: EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to race the motor of any vehicle
unnecessarily in such a manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated that
the vehicle emits a loud noise unusual to its operation or whereby the tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the pavement or other surface. (Ord.
169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-130: SAFE OPERATION:
No person shall drive a vehicle in such a manner as to endanger life or
property by failing to keep his or her vehicle under safe and proper control,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle with such lack of
due care and in such negligent manner as to cause the same to collide with any
vehicle, person or object. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-140: DRIVING WHILE IMPAIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle while his or her
ability or alertness is so impaired through fatigue, illness or any other cause
as to make it unsafe for him or her to drive such vehicle. This section shall
not be interpreted to include circumstances amounting to "driving while
intoxicated" or "reckless driving", as defined in Utah Code Annotated section
41-6a-501 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-150: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
A.   Permit Required: Any persons desiring to engage in a procession or parade,
including a funeral procession, shall obtain a permit from the city before
occupying, marching, or proceeding along any street within the jurisdiction of
Draper City.
B.   Permit Request: All requests for permits shall be made in writing at least
ten (10) days prior to the actual time of the procession or parade and shall
state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and
such other information as the city may require.
C.   Time, Place And Manner: The city may alter the time, place and manner of
the parade or procession as it deems necessary to promote the health, safety,
welfare and convenience of the public.
D.   Supervision: The person or persons obtaining a permit, together with the
sponsoring organizations, shall provide at their own expense, police or other
law enforcement supervision for such parades or processions which are not of a
community wide nature when the city determines that such supervision is
necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 169,
3-7-1995)
14-6-160: DISCHARGE OF DEBRIS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or load, or cause to be operated
or loaded, a vehicle upon any public highway within the jurisdiction of Draper
City from which any kind of sand, gravel, rocks, materials, or debris fall,
discharge, or otherwise escape therefrom. This section shall not apply to
official street maintenance crews, agricultural vehicles, or to other persons
who have obtained a proper permit from the city. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-170: LOAD LIMITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or load, or cause to be operated
or loaded, any vehicle upon any public highway within the jurisdiction to
Draper City in which the contact points of the material being hauled are less
than six inches (6") from the top of the bed, unless the vehicle is
sufficiently covered or tied down so as to prevent such materials from
littering, spilling or otherwise escaping therefrom. This section shall not
apply to official street maintenance crews or to other persons who have
obtained a proper permit from the city. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-180: OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on any
street or highway within the city or to otherwise obstruct or prevent the free
passage and use of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the streets, sidewalks
and crosswalks within the city. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-190: ROLLER SKATING AND SKATEBOARD RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, rollerblades,
skateboards, or riding in or by means of any coaster, sled, toy wagon, scooter,
or similar device, to obstruct or restrict vehicular traffic upon any roadway
within Draper City or to otherwise use such devices in a dangerous or unsafe
manner. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
14-6-200: LIVESTOCK ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive livestock upon any streets within
the jurisdiction of Draper City not designated for such purpose, except as
otherwise provided by permit obtained from the city. (Ord. 169, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 7
TRAFFIC SAFETY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
14-7-010: Purpose
14-7-020: Definitions
14-7-030: Speed Limit And Passing Restrictions
14-7-040: Restrictions On Use Of Roads
14-7-050: Flammable Liquid, Explosive And Corrosive Carriers
14-7-060: Penalty
14-7-010: PURPOSE:
This chapter and the regulations and restrictions contained herein are adopted
and enacted:
A.   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare; and
B.   To regulate truck traffic within the city. (Ord. 879, 3-3-2009)
14-7-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT RATING: The maximum total weight of a powered unit,
plus trailer(s) for a specific combination of vehicles plus its load.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING: The registered gross weight of the vehicle,
including both the weight of the vehicle and any potential load.
RESTRICTED VEHICLE: All vehicles, combination of vehicles or combinations of
vehicles and load having a length of more than forty five feet (45'), all
tandem axle trucks, and all vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or a
gross combination weight rating more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds.
TANDEM AXLE TRUCKS: Has the same definition as that found in Utah Code
Annotated section 72-7-404(1)(a)(ii), wherein it states that tandem axle means
two (2) or more axles spaced not less than forty inches (40") nor more than
ninety six inches (96") apart and having at least one common point of weight
suspension. (Ord. 879, 3-3-2009)
14-7-030: SPEED LIMIT AND PASSING RESTRICTIONS:
A.   A speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour is hereby established for
all restricted vehicles traveling on Traverse Ridge Road between Mike Weir
Drive and Highland Drive.
B.   Restricted vehicles are prohibited from passing other vehicles while
traveling on any streets with single travel lanes within the city. (Ord. 879,
3-3-2009; amd. Ord. 1546, 7-19-2022)
14-7-040: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF ROADS:
A.   Subject to 14-7-040(B), the following restrictions apply due to steep
grades:
1.   Restricted vehicles are not permitted on Rambling Road;
2.   Trucks with three axles or more are prohibited from traveling westbound
(downhill) on Traverse Ridge Road between Suncrest Drive and Mike Weir Drive.
B.   The restrictions in 14-7-040(A) do not apply to:
1.   Emergency vehicles;
2.   Vehicles owned or operated by the city;
3.   School busses;
4.   Public transportation vehicles; or
5.   Vehicles owned or operated by any of the following while engaged in
repair, maintenance, snowplowing, or construction of city streets or public
utilities:
a.   Public utilities;
b.   TRSSD; or
c.   Contractors of the city, a public utility, or the TRSSD.
C.   The following streets are designated as truck routes. Any restricted
vehicle shall use only those routes specified herein or additional temporary
routes as shall be established by the chief of police:
Draper Parkway from 900 East to northern city boundary;
Highland Drive from western city boundary to northern city boundary;
Interstate 15, including all exits, from northern city boundary to southern
city boundary;
Lone Peak Parkway/125 West from 11400 South to 13490 South;
Minuteman Drive from 12300 South to 13275 South and from 13800 South to
southern city boundary;
Pony Express Road from 12650 South to 13490 South and from 13775 South to
southern city boundary;
State Street from northern city boundary to 12300 South;
150 East via 13200 South to Bangerter Highway;
700 East from northern city boundary to 12300 South;
700 West from northern city boundary to 12300 South;
200 West from 13490 South to 13775 South;
1300 East from northern city boundary to Draper Parkway;
12300 South from western city boundary to 900 East;
12650 South from 125 West to Pony Express Road;
13490 South from Pony Express Road to Bangerter Hwy Interchange;
13775 South from Pony Express Road to Bangerter Hwy Interchange;
13800 South from Bangerter Highway to Minuteman Drive;
Bangerter Highway from western city boundary to 13800 South; and
Bangerter Highway from western city boundary to 13800 South.
(Ord. 879, 3-3-2009; amd. Ord. 1546, 7-19-2022)
14-7-050: FLAMMABLE LIQUID, EXPLOSIVE AND CORROSIVE CARRIERS:
All explosive and corrosive carriers and flammable liquid carriers capable of
carrying in excess of three thousand (3,000) gallons or licensed for a gross
weight in excess of nine thousand (9,000) pounds are responsible to obey all
requirements set forth in the applicable fire code as adopted as part of this
code. (Ord. 879, 3-3-2009)
14-7-060: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is punishable as a class C misdemeanor. (Ord.
879, 3-3-2009)
TITLE 15
PARKS, TRAILS, AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 1
PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
SECTION:
15-1-010: Purpose
15-1-020: Authority
15-1-030: Definitions
15-1-040: Regulation Of Public Use
15-1-050: Regulation Of General Conduct
15-1-060: Regulation Of Recreational Activity
15-1-070: Motorized Vehicle Restrictions
15-1-075: Regulations For Public Property Adjacent To Parade Routes
15-1-080: Encroachments
15-1-090: Enforcement
15-1-100: Equestrian Center
15-1-110: Amphitheater
15-1-120: Draper Historic Park
15-1-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to further develop parks, trails, and
recreational facilities for the welfare and enjoyment of its residents, and to
ensure the orderly and suitable use of such facilities, thus furthering the
safety, health, comfort, and welfare of all persons in the use thereof. (Ord.
749, 7-17-2007)
15-1-020: AUTHORITY:
A.   Parks And Recreation Director: The Parks and Recreation Director may
propose the establishment of certain parks, trails, and recreational
facilities, which shall, upon the advice and consent of the City Council, be
created as the City Council deems, fit. The Director shall advise the City
Council on the establishment of parks, trails, and recreation facilities and
may recommend funding sources to pay for said improvements.
B.   Impact Fee: The City Council may set an impact fee for all new parks,
trails and recreation development within the City in accordance with State law.
C.   Managers: The Parks Manager, Recreation Manager and/or the Trails and Open
Space Manager may prescribe certain uses and restrictions on use for the City
parks, trails and recreation facilities as deemed reasonable and necessary for
the protection and preservation of public health, safety and welfare, as well
as protection and maintenance of the natural resources and public facilities
consistent with this chapter and other City ordinances. The Managers may
coordinate rulemaking and enforcement with law enforcement officers. (Ord.
1370, 12-11-2018)
15-1-030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BICYCLE: A wheeled vehicle: propelled by human power by feet or hands acting
upon pedals or cranks; with a seat or saddle designed for the use of the
operator; designed to be operated on the ground; and whose wheels are not less
than fourteen inches (14") in diameter. "Bicycle" includes an electric assisted
bicycle.
DEPARTMENT: The Draper City Parks and Recreation Department.
DIRECTOR: The Draper City Parks and Recreation Department Director.
ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE: A bicycle with an electric motor that:
A.   Has a power output of not more than seven hundred fifty watts (750 W);
B.   Has fully operable pedals on permanently fixed cranks;
C.   Is fully operable as a bicycle without the use of the electric motor; and
D.   Is one of the following:
1.   Class I is an electric assisted bicycle equipped with a motor or
electronics that:
a.   Provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling; and
b.   Ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty
(20) miles per hour;
2.   Class II is an electric assisted bicycle equipped with a motor or
electronics that:
a.   May be used exclusively to propel the bicycle; and
b.   Is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty (20) miles per hour; or
3.   Class III is an electric assisted bicycle equipped with a motor or
electronics that:
a.   Provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling;
b.   Ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty
eight (28) miles per hour; and
c.   Is equipped with a speedometer.
MANAGER: The Manager of the Draper City Parks Division, Recreation Division
and/or the Manager of the Trails and Open Space Division.
MUDDY TRAIL: The condition of a trail in which the surface is saturated with
enough water to cause damage such as erosion, rutting and/or soil displacement
or other damage when traveled upon.
NATURAL RESOURCE: Any open space, conservation area, land, water, vegetation,
mineral, fossil, wildlife, wildlife habitat or other space under the control of
the City, regardless of whether such control is through ownership, dedication,
lease, easement, covenant, memorandum of understanding, intergovernmental
agreement, contract or other mechanism of control.
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV): Any snowmobile, all-terrain type I vehicle, all-
terrain type II vehicle or motorcycle.
OPEN SPACE: Draper City-owned land that is in a predominantly open and
undeveloped condition, which is primarily used for conservation, scenic,
wildlife habitat, or non-motorized recreation uses.
PARK: A specific piece of ground, either within the City or that is under the
ownership or control of the City that is operated and maintained by the City
and set apart for the use of the general public, whether developed or
undeveloped, including natural parks and open space, and that may be planted
with trees, lawns and other shrubbery. A park may include within its boundary
facilities for sport, entertainment, dancing, recreation, swimming, or similar
functions. A park may be planned for any beneficial use by the citizenry. A
park may have numerous facilities or may have no facilities.
RECREATION: A leisure activity or diversion which restores one's strength,
spirit or vitality and which refreshes the mind or body.
RECREATION FACILITIES OR FACILITIES: Parks, trails, recreation areas, and
recreation centers which are owned or operated by the City, or for which the
City has enforcement or maintenance responsibilities.
STREET LICENSED VEHICLE: Any motorized vehicle such as an automobile,
motorcycle or truck that is equipped and licensed for use on public roads.
TRAIL: A linear corridor of property which is part of the parks, trails and
recreation master plan or which connects planned trails and is maintained by
the City for the purposes of hiking, walking, jogging, running, equestrian,
cycling, or other such use allowed by this chapter.
YIELD: To slow down, establish communication, be prepared to stop if necessary,
and pass in a safe manner. (Ord. 1370, 12-11-2018)
15-1-040: REGULATION OF PUBLIC USE:
A.   Designated Hours And Days: Except for unusual or unforeseen events, City
recreational facilities shall be open to the public every day of the year
during designated hours. Unless otherwise noticed by sign or other
communication, facilities shall open each day at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
shall be closed at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Any section or part may be declared
closed to the public by the Manager at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, and either entirely or
for certain uses as the Manager shall find necessary. With the exception of
government, police, fire, emergency, or other authorized vehicles, no person
shall enter a recreational facility during the hours or days it is closed.
B.   Fees: The City may establish fees for the use of certain parks, trails,
and recreational facilities. Such fees shall be set by resolution of the City
Council and shall be published in the City's consolidated fee schedule. (Ord.
1370, 12-11-2018)
15-1-050: REGULATION OF GENERAL CONDUCT:
A.   Destruction Or Defacement Of Facilities Or Signs: It shall be unlawful for
any person to deface, vandalize, or remove recreation facility property,
buildings, or equipment, or to deface, destroy, cover, damage, or remove any
placard notice, or sign or parts thereof, whether permanent or temporary,
posted or exhibited by the City at such facilities.
B.   Disturbance Of Natural Resources: It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove, alter, injure, or destroy any natural resource at a recreation facility
or from open space without authorization from the Manager, excepting City
personnel in furtherance of their duties.
C.   Disturbance Of Wildlife: Except for peace officers acting in performance
of their official duties or persons acting under the authority or direction of
a peace officer or animal control officer, it shall be unlawful for any person
to kill, trap, hunt, pursue, or in any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed,
or have in possession any species of wildlife found within the confines of any
recreation facility. Fishing may be permitted in accordance with the official
rules established by the City Manager for a given facility.
D.   Littering: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, scatter, drop,
or abandon in or along any recreation facility any paper, bottles, cans,
sewage, waste, trash, or other debris, except in receptacles provided by the
City Public Works Department for such purpose. No person shall deposit in any
receptacle in any facility any accumulation of waste or trash generated outside
the boundaries of the recreation facility.
E.   Disorderly Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
fighting or indulge in riotous, disorderly, threatening, or indecent conduct or
use any abusive, threatening, profane, or indecent language while on or in a
recreation facility.
F.   Alcohol And Controlled Substances: It shall be unlawful for any person to
use, possess, or sell any alcoholic beverages or illegal controlled substances
while on or in a recreation facility except as permitted by the City for
specific events.
G.   Discharge Of Firearms, Dangerous Weapons, Or Fireworks: It shall be
unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, bow, or explosive of any
kind, including fireworks, at a recreation facility excepting law enforcement
officers and those who are allowed by State Code or have received written
consent to do so from the Manager.
H.   Noise Restrictions: No person may play or cause to be played amplified
music or sound in a recreation facility without the express written approval of
the Manager and without obtaining a license for such purpose. Such permission
or license may be denied by the Manager where it is reasonably believed that
such noise would disturb other patrons of the facility, annoy residents
neighboring the facility, or disturb wildlife. The written permission and
license to play amplified sound must be provided to any City employee or
official upon demand during the time for which it is granted. Issuance of
permission and a license does not exempt the holder or permittee from all other
rules, regulations, ordinances or statutes, whether State, County or City.
I.   Fires: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn an open fire in a
recreation facility except in barbecue or grill areas provided by the City. The
Manager may restrict allowed uses for the protection and preservation of public
health, safety and welfare, and public facilities.
J.   Unlawful Occupancy: It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any
recreation facility building, installation, or area that may be under
construction, locked, or closed to public use; or to enter, remain in, or be
upon any building, installation, or area after the closing time or before the
opening time, or contrary to the posted notice in any recreation facility.
K.   Domesticated Animal Restrictions: At any recreation facility, any owner of
a domesticated animal or person having charge, care, custody, or control of
such animal shall remove and properly dispose of any feces left by the animal.
It is prohibited for any person to take or permit any unrestrained domesticated
animal in a recreation facility not specifically designated by the City for
that purpose. Such animals must be continually kept on a leash. Such animals
shall not enter or be watered at any fountain, pond, lake, or stream, except as
locations specifically designated by the City for that purpose.
L.   Grazing: It shall be unlawful to use any recreational facility for the
purposes of grazing domestic livestock, such as horses, donkeys, mules, llamas,
cattle, sheep, or goats without authorization from the Manager.
M.   Concessions: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any dispensary
or concessions stand in any recreational facility without the express written
consent of the Manager or without first obtaining a current, valid business
license from the City.
N.   Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in a recreation
facility or open space.
O.   Inflatable Attractions, Mechanical Rides, Water Slides: It shall be
unlawful for any person to set up a private attraction, including, but not
limited to: inflatable bounce houses, water slides, mechanical bulls, and
carnival type rides in any City park except as permitted by the Director for
specific City events.
P.   Trail Etiquette Standard: It shall be unlawful to fail to yield to other
trail users in the manner posted by the City.
Q.   Bridges: It shall be unlawful for any user to climb, attach rope swings,
hammocks, locks, signs, or any other item to any bridge or engage in any
activity on a bridge that is reckless or unreasonable. (Ord. 1370, 12-11-2018;
amd. Ord. 1455, 10-6-2020)
15-1-060: REGULATION OF RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY:
A.   Reserved Use: No person may assume exclusive use of a recreation facility,
including a reservation picnic site, shelter, or field, without a reservation
permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a portion of a recreation
facility, including a reservation picnic site, shelter, or field, without a
permit if the area is reserved by a permitted group.
B.   Walking, Hiking, Jogging: It shall be unlawful for any person to walk,
hike, or jog at a recreation facility, which prohibits such use, or in areas
closed to public use, or on muddy trails.
C.   Bicycling: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle in a
recreation facility, except on designated bikeways, roadways, trails, and other
areas designated for that purpose and except as close to the right hand side of
a trail or roadway as conditions permit. It shall be unlawful to operate Class
II or Class III electric assisted bicycles on a trail. It shall be unlawful to
operate a bicycle in a careless or reckless manner or on muddy trails.
D.   Roller Skating, In-Line Skating, Skateboarding: It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate skates or a skateboard at a recreation facility, except
on designated bikeways, roadways, trails, and other areas designated for that
purpose and except as close to the right hand side of a trail or roadway as
conditions permit. Skates and skateboards shall not be operated in a careless
or reckless manner.
E.   Equestrian Riding: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead, or
allow a horse, donkey, mule, llama, or similar hoofed animal at a recreation
facility except on designated equestrian trails and other areas designated for
equestrian purposes; neither shall a person ride a hoofed animal in a reckless
manner so as to create a nuisance or to endanger the safety or property of any
visitor to a recreation facility or on muddy trails. Such animals shall not be
tethered to a tree, other plant, building, or recreation facility equipment.
Such animals shall not enter or be watered at any fountain, pond, lake, or
stream, except at locations specifically designated by the City for that
purpose.
F.   Designated Trails: All trail users are required to remain on designated
trails. It is unlawful for users to leave designated trails without
authorization from City. It is unlawful for a trail user to utilize a trail
when muddy conditions exist.
G.   Camping: It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, or remain
overnight at any recreation facility or open space, except in cases of local
emergency as declared by the City Council.
H.   Swimming: It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, or wade in
any lake, pond, fountain or stream, including flood detention ponds when water
is present, not specifically designated by the City for that purpose, except
that persons wearing fishing waders may wade where fishing is allowed. No
person shall pollute the water of any recreation facility, including any
fountain, pond, lake, or stream.
I.   Winter Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person to ice skate, sled,
slide, snowshoe, or ski at a recreation facility except in designated areas.
J.   Golfing: It shall be unlawful for any person to golf at a recreation
facility not specifically designated by the City for that purpose.
K.   Paintball: It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any projectile or
paintball in any recreational facility not specifically designated by the City
for that purpose. (Ord. 1370, 12-11-2018)
15-1-070: MOTORIZED VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS:
A.   Off Highway Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an
off highway vehicle, including any motorized recreation vehicle at a recreation
facility, except for governmental, police, fire, emergency, or other authorized
vehicles.
B.   Street Legal Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
street legal vehicle at a recreation facility other than in areas specifically
designated and posted by the City for that particular purpose, except for
government, police, fire, emergency, or other authorized vehicles. The Manager
shall have the authority to order roads or parking lots within any recreation
facility closed during the process of construction, reconstruction, or repair,
or when, in the opinion of the Manager, weather conditions render travel unsafe
or unduly destructive.
C.   Parking: It shall be unlawful to park at a recreation facility or open
space:
1.   On any vegetation,
2.   In violation of posted signs,
3.   In such a manner that poses a danger to others, or
4.   In such a manner that blocks, or restricts access to a recreation facility
or open space. (Ord. 1370, 12-11-2018)
15-1-075: REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC PROPERTY ADJACENT TO PARADE ROUTES:
The following apply to public property adjoining parade routes and staging
areas for parades.
A.   Time Restrictions: Prior to 6:00 p.m. of the day three days before a
parade, no person shall claim, reserve, occupy or otherwise control public
property, or attempt to claim, reserve, occupy or otherwise control public
property either in person or by the placement of any object along the parade
route. A non-exhaustive list of prohibited claiming activities include the
placement of chairs, tents, sleeping bags, blankets, ropes, tapes, banners,
vehicles, barricades or barriers of any kind; except if such placement is made
by authorized and designated city personnel pursuant to a special event permit.
B.   Occupy Public Property: After 6:00 p.m. of the day three days before a
parade, until the conclusion of the parade, a person may, by the placement of
ropes, chairs, sleeping bags, blankets, or other devices or barriers, claim or
reserve or attempt to claim or reserve any public property as a position for
observing the public parade.
C.   Damage or Obstructions Prohibited: No person shall obstruct public
sidewalks, paved portions of streets, private drives, or occupy any unsafe
position or occupy a position that may cause damage to public or private
property.
D.   Vehicle Parking Restrictions: Notwithstanding any provision of this code
to the contrary, from and after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the day before the
parade, and continuing until the conclusion of the parade, a person may park a
motor vehicle, trailer, or tent trailer on the adjoining parade route. Only
motor vehicles or trailers that are entries in the parade may be allowed in the
areas designated as staging areas. Any motor vehicle, trailer or tent trailer
parked in violation of this section may be towed from the prohibited area at
the owner's expense.
E.   Reserved Spectator Viewing Areas: As part of the special event permitting
process, the parks and recreation director or designee may authorize the permit
holder or the city to reserve places for the observation of the parade and to
erect and control such seating on such reserved public property.
F.   Violations: Violations of this subsection may be enforced in accordance
with Subsection
15-1-090. (Ord. 1542, 6-7-2022)
15-1-080: ENCROACHMENTS:
A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to encroach on any City
recreation facility or public open space with landscaping, fencing, retaining
walls, structures, sprinkling systems, drainage pipes, curbing, or other
equipment or to disturb the natural or planted landscaping, vegetation, or
public structures or equipment on such facilities or open space except as
allowed in this section or elsewhere in this Code.
B.   Private Fences: Private fences within or extending into City recreation
facilities or public open space areas shall be removed within thirty (30) days
of the effective date of this section by the abutting property owner. They may
be reinstalled by the abutting property owner upon the property line of the
facility or open space and the abutting property, at the abutting property
owner's expense.
C.   Private Structures, Equipment: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, private structures and equipment other than fences, including, but not
limited to, trampolines, gazebos, swimming pools, sports courts, retaining
walls, curbing, and sprinkling systems may not exist on City recreation
facilities or on public open space and shall be removed by the abutting
property owner responsible for its placement, maintenance, or existence, as
directed by the City's open space specialist.
D.   Existing Vegetation: Existing trees, shrubs, grass, and other vegetation
placed within City recreation facilities or public open space by abutting
property owners may remain if they blend with or enhance the natural setting of
such facilities or open space, or are necessary to control erosion, as
determined by the City's open space specialist.
E.   Hardship Permit For Existing Structures: Existing structure encroaching
into the City's recreation facilities or open space may receive a hardship
permit issued by the City Council on a case by case basis depending on
circumstances such as the difficulty and cost of removal, the extent of the
encroachment, the circumstances surrounding their construction, or evidence of
prior agreement with the City. In lieu of a permit, the City Council may in its
discretion execute a lease agreement or consider an adjustment to property
lines upon payment of value determined by the City or an equivalent property
trade, plus damages and costs.
F.   Failure To Remove: If the abutting property owner fails to timely remove
an offending fence or structure, the City may do so and may cause the costs for
such work to be assessed against the abutting property and collected through
court or other lawful action. Failure to remove the fence or structure as
directed by the City's open space specialist shall result in an administrative
fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) being added to the costs of removal.
The City shall not be liable for any costs, damages, or claims associated with
such removal. If the abutting property owner denies any interest in the
structure or fence, the City shall remove the structure or fence at its own
expense.
G.   Signage: The City may erect signs designating City recreation facilities
or public open space and describing rules for public use of the same.
H.   Inspection, Enforcement: The City's open space specialist shall annually
inspect the City's recreation facilities and public open space and vigorously
enforce this section to prevent new encroachments by private individuals.
I.   Written Disclosure Of Hardship Permit: With regard to subsection E of this
section where a hardship permit has been granted, a written disclosure by the
existing homeowner to a future homeowner is required and shall be repeated
every time the home changes ownership. This disclosure needs to be in a form
that is approved by the Draper City Attorney and a copy of the signed
disclosure kept on file with the Draper City Recorder. All property lines need
to be clearly marked by the homeowner to avoid structural encroachment in the
future. (Ord. 1370, 12-11-2018)
15-1-090: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Eviction: Any person violating any of the rules or instructions
established by the City or the Manager may be evicted immediately from the
facility by any City official or employee who has been granted that authority
by the Manager. Any person who, having been given direction to leave by such
employee and who does not leave is guilty of violating this chapter.
B.   Penalty: Violations of this chapter shall be punished as a Class C
misdemeanor for a first offense and as a Class B misdemeanor for subsequent
violations.
C.   Enforcement: Law enforcement officers, in connection with their duties
imposed by law, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may issue
citations, and evict any persons acting in violation of the provisions of this
chapter. These law enforcement officers shall have the authority to seize,
confiscate and impound any substance, plant, animal, or other similar article
which is used or possessed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-11-
2018)
15-1-100: EQUESTRIAN CENTER:
Use of the equestrian center will be regulated by the Recreation Division of
the Department of Public Works. It is the intent of the City to rent the
facility, to the extent possible, as a revenue source to maintain and improve
the facility. Reservation fees shall be as established in the consolidated fee
schedule. (Ord. 886, 7-7-2009)
15-1-110: AMPHITHEATER:
The amphitheater will be used on a priority basis by Draper City. Other users
may reserve the amphitheater when, in the opinion of the City, it furthers the
image of the community and will not be disruptive to the surrounding
neighborhood. Reservation fees shall be as established in the consolidated fee
schedule.
A.   Use Number Permitted: A maximum not to exceed three (3) events or
productions a week that require the use of any loudspeakers will be allowed at
the amphitheater in a calendar week Sunday to Saturday.
B.   Noise Level: Sound broadcast from any loudspeakers at the amphitheater may
not exceed a ninety five (95) dB level when measured on the "A" weight at the
property boundaries.
C.   End Time: All events, productions, concerts, festivals, etc., held at the
amphitheater must end by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. All loudspeakers must be
turned off by this time.
D.   Time Of Loudspeaker Use: No loudspeakers may be used to broadcast sound at
the amphitheater before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. any day of the week.
E.   Outside Agreements: Draper City may enter into an agreement to partner
with or cosponsor with any outside agency or promoter to bring events to the
amphitheater when it is deemed to be beneficial to the amphitheater and a
valuable opportunity.
1.   All negotiations and agreements/contracts must be finalized to be
official. This includes contracts with the promoter and talent agency.
2.   All fees including a "per ticket" fee charged by the City to the partner/
promoter must be as in the consolidated fee schedule.
3.   Some or all production costs, including lights, sound, talent purchase,
director's costs, etc., are to be paid by the promoter or cosponsoring agency.
4.   If ticket sales are to be sold through a ticket outlet other than the
current Draper Amphitheater ticket outlet, it must be approved by the City and
all payments made to the City within five (5) business days.
F.   Rental By Private Contractors: The amphitheater may be rented by private
contractors under the following conditions:
1.   The Draper Amphitheater rental agreement is signed and executed by the
renter and Draper City.
2.   All rental fees are paid as per the consolidated fee schedule.
3.   All Draper City police or UFA staff as deemed necessary by the City staff
are paid for per the consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 1028, 9-18-2012)
15-1-120: DRAPER HISTORIC PARK:
A.   Rent Permitted: Draper Historic Park, located at 12625 South 900 East, may
be rented for the use of outdoor events, such as weddings, reunions, and other
events at the fee established in the consolidated fee schedule.
B.   Tents; Staking Prohibited; Deposit: If tents are to be used for an event
they are required to be anchored by water, cement or sand barrels. No staking
will be allowed. If the City determines that staking has been used, the deposit
will not be refunded. If the City determines that stakes have resulted in
damage to the grounds, the renter will be required to pay the actual cost of
repairs. The deposit will be held by the City for two (2) weeks following the
scheduled event.
C.   End Time: All events must be concluded by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
D.   Exception For City Events: Events sponsored by Draper City are exempt from
this section. (Ord. 886, 7-7-2009)
CHAPTER 2
ADVISORY BOARDS
SECTION:
15-2-010: Advisory Boards
15-2-010: ADVISORY BOARDS:
The city manager may appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council,
an advisory board consisting of up to five (5) members of the city who are
selected from a broad cross section of the city for a representation on the
park board. The purpose of the park board is to advise the city manager and
city council as to proposed uses, times, fees, and future acquisitions and
improvements to the parks and recreational facilities owned and maintained by
the city. A chairperson may be proposed and chosen by the city manager, with
the advice and consent of the city council, and terms of office of the
respective members may also be determined by the city manager, with the advice
and consent of the city council. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
OUTDOOR SMOKING PROHIBITIONS
SECTION:
15-3-010: Definitions
15-3-020: Outdoor Smoking Prohibited
15-3-030: Violations And Enforcement
15-3-010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY PARK: Means and includes City-owned property designated for recreational
activities, including but not limited to ball diamonds, soccer fields, sports
fields, splash parks, dog parks, skate parks, arenas, amphitheater, including
the bleacher or spectator areas adjacent thereto, and other recreation areas,
natural parks, pocket parks, playgrounds, outdoor swimming pools, open space,
trails, and cemeteries.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE/E-CIGARETTE: Means any electronic oral device that
provides a vapor of nicotine or other substance, and simulates smoking through
its use or through inhalation of the device.
ELECTRONIC ORAL DEVICE: Means an oral device that is composed of a heating
element, battery, or electronic circuit, and is marketed, manufactured,
distributed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe or any other product
name or descriptor used for a similar function.
MASS GATHERING: Means an outdoor assembly of one hundred (100) or more people
on City-owned property that continues or reasonably can be expected to continue
for two (2) or more hours.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Means the possession, carrying, or holding of any lighted or
heated tobacco product in any form; inhaling, exhaling, burning, or heating a
substance containing tobacco or nicotine intended for inhalation through a
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or hookah; use of an e-cigarette; or using an oral
smoking device intended to circumvent the prohibition of smoking. (Ord. 1281,
10-3-2017)
15-3-020: OUTDOOR SMOKING PROHIBITED:
Smoking is hereby prohibited in all City parks, transit stations, within twenty
five feet (25') of bus stops, and within fifty feet (50') of mass gatherings,
except in designated smoking areas. (Ord. 1281, 10-3-2017)
15-3-030: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
A.   A violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to
exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00). Police officers shall have the discretion
to issue a "warning" if they deem it is in the best interests of the City for
the first offense.
B.   Law enforcement officers, in connection with their duties imposed by law,
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may issue citations and evict
any persons acting in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Law
enforcement officers shall have the authority to seize, confiscate and impound
any substance, or other similar article used or possessed in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 1281, 10-3-2017)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
15-4-010: Purpose
15-4-020: Scope
15-4-030: Definitions
15-4-040: Special Event Permits
15-4-050: Special Events Allowed
15-4-060: Application And Standards For Special Events
15-4-070: Special Events On Vacant Properties
15-4-080: City Support Services
15-4-090: Conditions Of Issuance
15-4-100: Grounds For Denial
15-4-110: Enforcement And Penalties
15-4-120: Revocation Of Special Event Permit
15-4-130: Delegation Of Director's Authority
15-4-140: Map
15-4-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish permit requirements for special
events. The permit requirements and other regulations in this chapter are
designed to promote, protect and assure the safety and convenience of residents
and visitors by mitigating potential issues that may occur as a result of the
special event. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate in any manner
the content of speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for lawful
time, place and manner regulations necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-020: SCOPE:
This chapter imposes regulatory requirements on certain activities that are
defined as "special events". The requirements imposed by this chapter do not
alter, supersede or nullify any requirements contained in other Federal, State
or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations that may also regulate special
events. These requirements shall be applied in a content neutral manner and
without discrimination as to race, sex, national origin, political affiliation,
or other unlawful discriminatory classification. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd.
Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-030: DEFINITIONS:
                     Any person or organization that seeks a special event
APPLICANT:           permit from the City to conduct a special event governed
                     by this Chapter.
                     An organized competitive or recreational event in which a
                     group of people collectively engage in a sport or form of
ATHLETIC EVENT:      physical exercise, including, but not limited to, running,
                     jogging, walking, bicycling, or skating, on any City
                     street or sidewalk or other City property.
                     An outdoor party put on by residents of a neighborhood
BLOCK PARTY:         that requires closing down a City street, sidewalk, or
                     other City property.
                     A special event that is organized and operated by the
CITY EVENT:          City, whether directly or by contract with a third party
                     operator.
                     An organized event having its primary purpose the
                     entertainment or amusement of a group of people,
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT: including, but not limited to, parades, festivals,
                     carnivals, fairs, concerts, or similar activities on any
                     City street or sidewalk or other City property.
                     Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news
FILMING EVENT:       purposes), filming of a motion picture or television
                     broadcast, or still commercial photography, in any case
                     involving more than four (4) human participants.
                     A special event, not sponsored by the City, with an
LARGE SCALE EVENT:   estimated combined attendance of five hundred (500) or
                     more participants and spectators.
                     An organized event in which a group of people or an
                     organization engages in the sale of products including,
OUTDOOR SALES EVENT: but not limited to, displays and exhibitions, farmers'
                     markets, craft fairs, outdoor sales, tent sales and other
                     similar activities.
PERSON:              Includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
                     association, or other entity whether public or private.
                     An organized event involving the preplanned participation
                     of more than fifty (50) people, not including an athletic
                     or entertainment event, having as its primary purpose the
POLITICAL EVENT:     exercise of expressive activities of a political nature,
                     including, but not limited to, speechmaking, picketing,
                     protesting, marching, demonstrating or debating public
                     issues, on any City street or sidewalk or other City
                     property.
                     City roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way and City property
                     that has by tradition been used by the public for assembly
PUBLIC FORUM:        and expression, or City property that has not
                     traditionally been open for public assembly and debate but
                     that the City has opened for use by the public as a place
                     for assembly and expression.
                     Any athletic event, City event, entertainment event,
                     filming event, large scale event, block party, political
SPECIAL EVENT:       event, or outdoor sales event, whether held for profit,
                     nonprofit or charitable purposes held on private or public
                     property within the City.
                     A special event that is occasioned by news or affairs
SPONTANEOUS EVENT:   coming into public knowledge fewer than fourteen (14) days
                     before the special event. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord.
                     1515, 12-14-2021)
 
15-4-040: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful:
1.   To hold a special event without first obtaining a special event permit
unless otherwise excepted by
15-4-040(B);
2.   To hold a special event not in accordance with an issued special event
permit; or
3.   To hold a special event that fails to comply with all other City
ordinances, including, but not limited to, obtaining a single event business
license, if applicable.
B.   Exceptions: A special event permit shall not be required for the following
events. However, any event exempted herein from the provisions of this chapter
may request the assistance provided through the permitting process by
submitting a complete application, including payment of all necessary fees, for
a special event permit.
1.   Gatherings, demonstrations, or protests of fifty (50) or fewer people who
gather at a public forum to exercise their constitutionally protected rights
under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
2.   Spontaneous events held at a public forum.
3.   Use of sidewalks, trails, or other pedestrian pathways not associated with
a special event and which do not require the use of Draper City public safety
personnel.
4.   Activities or events within a permanent structure or on a site for which
the permanent structure or site was specifically designed, including, but not
limited to:
a.   School sports, activities or events, on school property, regardless of
public or private schools, sponsored or sanctioned by the Utah High School
Activities Association (UHSAA) or the school district in which the school is
located;
b.   Meetings or gatherings as a part of the normal course of business;
c.   On site school programs or activities for the attendance of students,
relatives, and guests which are not of a money raising nature; or
d.   Activities, gatherings, or events for religious groups that fully comply
with subsection B5 of this section.
5.   Events or activities that fully comply with all of the following:
a.   The event or activity is completely contained on private property for
which the property owner has given permission for the event or activity;
b.   Attendance at the event or activity does not exceed the determined
capacity for any building in which the event or activity will be held;
c.   No public services such as police, fire, or ambulance, are anticipated to
be needed on site for the event, whether for traffic control, on standby, or
for security at the site;
d.   Adequate restroom facilities are readily available on the site for
attendees at the event or activity;
e.   Sales of alcohol will not be conducted as a part of the event;
f.   Traffic, crowd, or parking control is not needed to accommodate attendees;
g.   No vendors profiting separately from the overall event are within, a part
of, or associated with the event; and
h.   Special event signs as described in subsection
9-26-080B of this Code are not needed.
6.   An amateur or not for profit filming event not intended for public release
and does not disrupt the general operation of a public park, street or
facility. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-050: SPECIAL EVENTS ALLOWED:
Any person may sponsor or conduct special events. The special events listed in
this section will be allowed up to the time limits specified for each event and
are subject to the terms of this chapter. Unless otherwise specified herein,
occurrences shall be counted based on the applicant or location of the event,
whichever is greater.
A.   A multiday athletic event, entertainment event, outdoor sales event, or
filming event may be conducted for up to eight (8) days per occurrence with a
maximum of four (4) occurrences per year. Vendors operating booths, displays,
demonstrations, or services as a part of these events will be considered
permitted as a part of the permit for the entire event, but necessitate
independent business licensure, as required by this title.
B.   A single day athletic event, entertainment event, block party, outdoor
sales event, or filming event may be conducted for up to one day per occurrence
with a maximum of four (4) occurrences per year.
C.   A person or entity is restricted to four special events per calendar year
and no more than one special event within a three-month period.
D.   Off site motorized vehicle sales conducted by a licensed dealer on private
property may be held for up to twenty one (21) days per occurrence with not
more than three (3) occurrences per year.
E.   The launching of fireworks displays may be conducted during times
permitted under State law. Fireworks displays are subject to the approval and
requirements of all appropriate fire agencies. The launching of fireworks
displays may also be subject to location restrictions of the City and all
appropriate fire agencies.
F.   Auctions with outside storage, screened from view from any adjacent street
by a six foot (6') sight obscuring fence, may be conducted for up to three (3)
days per occurrence with no more than four (4) occurrences per year per site.
Up to two (2) occurrences may run consecutively, when applied for as such, but
shall be counted as separate occurrences.
G.   Large scale events in Draper Park shall be limited to no more than three
(3) events per calendar year regardless of the number of applicants.
H.   Only City-sponsored events may be held on any City trail appearing on
Figure 15-4-1. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-060: APPLICATION AND STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS:
A person seeking a special event permit shall submit an application to the City
on forms provided by the City. The application shall be filed not less than
forty five (45) and not more than three hundred sixty five (365) days before
the activity is proposed to commence. Any application for a filming event
permit shall be submitted no later than four (4) business days before the
filming event is scheduled to occur The application is not consider filed until
the Special Event Permit Application has been received, an application fee has
been paid, and complete plans have been received.
A.   Application And Processing Fees: Application and processing fees, as
determined in section
5-4-010 of this Code, shall be paid to the City by the applicant when the
application is filed with the department in order to cover the administrative
costs of processing the permit application.
B.   Late Notification Fee: Any applicant for a special event permit (except
applicants for filming events) who fails to give at least forty five (45) days'
notice to the City before the activity is proposed to commence shall remit to
the City a late notification fee of forty dollars ($40.00) in addition to the
application and processing fee.
C.   Complete Copy Of Application: The application for any special event
requiring a mass gathering permit pursuant to Salt Lake Valley Health
Department regulations must include a complete copy of their required
application.
D.   Access: Specific areas shall be designated for ingress and egress of
emergency vehicles, including appropriate barriers to regulate vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
E.   Plans: The following plans must be submitted with the application for a
special event permit:
1.   Site Plan: The site plan shall depict the proposed layout of the entire
property to be used for the special event. This site plan must include the
exact address of the property, the name and address of the property owner, and
the name and twenty four (24) hour contact information of the contact person or
coordinator. The site plan must clearly show all entrances, exits, roadways,
walkways and parking, all sanitation facilities, medical and first aid
stations, waste containers, food stands, vendor areas, lighting, types of
merchandise being sold, types of food being prepared/sold, alcohol sales, types
of live entertainment, sound systems, temporary structures, temporary and
permanent power sources, amusement rides, and all other activities associated
with the event.
2.   Control Plan: A plan shall be submitted and approved establishing adequate
provisions for traffic, crowd, and patron control and assurance of compliance
with City, State, and Federal laws including, but not limited to, fire, health,
security, and Americans With Disability Act regulations. Only Draper City
public safety personnel shall be used for traffic control on Draper City
streets, trails, or sidewalks for special events. No more than two (2) special
events per calendar month shall be allowed when public safety personnel such as
police, fire, or ambulance services are necessary. No special events requiring
public safety personnel shall be allowed in the month of July, except for
events associated with Draper Days. Exceptions may be made by the City Council.
3.   Sign Plan: Applicants shall provide a plan showing the location of all
signs to be placed in association with the event. The sign plan must include
the total number of signs with the dimensions and size of each sign. All signs
must meet the requirements of title 9, chapter 26 of this Code.
4.   Security Plan: A security plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
City establishing the number and type of enforcement and security personnel
needed to monitor and facilitate the event and provide spectator or participant
control and direction.
5.   Parking Plan: A parking plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
City identifying areas for parking in a capacity to accommodate the reasonably
expected attendance at the event. Parking areas shall meet all requirements and
specifications of the Fire Department. If parking spaces are not marked,
parking personnel must be provided to ensure orderly and safe ingress and
egress from the parking area.
F.   Emergency Services: First aid supplies, equipment, and emergency medical
services must be made available to meet public health and safety concerns and
legal requirements.
G.   Sanitation Facilities: Adequate sanitation facilities shall be provided
based on the duration of the event and on the number of persons reasonably
expected to participate.
H.   Trash Removal: All trash shall be removed and the site restored to the
condition the property was in prior to the event before the applicant or event
sponsors leave the site. All trash must be disposed of properly and any
equipment used returned to its designated location. It is the sole
responsibility of the event organizers to provide appropriate means of trash
disposal and site cleanup.
I.   Events On Public Property: With proper authorization from appropriate City
departments, special events may be held in public places or on City owned
property. Events on public property must end by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any
given day unless an extension of time is granted by the Parks and Recreation
Director. A written request to the Parks and Recreation Director must be
submitted with detailed information as to the need to extend the end time of an
event. This approval must be completed before a special event permit is issued.
J.   Events On Private Property: Special events are allowed on private property
with the property owner's written approval. Notification of the event taking
place shall be issued to all adjacent property owners prior to the event.
Events on private property may not exceed hours of operation as dictated in the
City's nuisance ordinances.
K.   Insurance: Applicants for a special event permit must provide liability
insurance to ensure the health and safety of the public. Mandatory
Comprehensive General/Special Events liability insurance with a minimum two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence, with three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) general aggregate coverage will be required prior to the
issuance of a special event permit, unless the Risk Manager requires a higher
or lower level based on level of risk. The liability insurance must also name
the City as an additional insured by endorsement. Applicants must submit a
Certificate of Insurance and an actual copy of the additional-insured
endorsement. The Certificate of Insurance and endorsement must be submitted at
least seven business days prior to the proposed special event date.
1.   The following special events shall be exempt from the insurance
requirement:
a.   Political events, unless the event will include fireworks or other
similarly hazardous features.
b.   School events located on, or directly adjacent to, school property;
c.   Events sponsored in whole by the City; and
d.   Block parties.
2.   In consideration for the issuing of a special events permit and use of
City streets and sidewalks or City property, the applicant agrees to indemnify,
save harmless and defend the City, its officers and employees, against any
claim for loss, damage or expense sustained by any person on account of injury,
death or property damage occurring by reason of or arising out of the special
event.
L.   Performance Bond: The City may require the applicant or sponsor of a
special event, in addition to the aforementioned liability coverage, to protect
the City's interests with a performance bond in a form and amount as determined
by the City Parks and Recreation Director.
M.   Inspections: Authorized Law Enforcement Officers, Code Compliance and
Zoning Enforcement Officers, Fire Control Officers, and other government
personnel shall be permitted free access to the event to make inspections to
ensure compliance with all City, State, and Federal laws.
N.   Approval Of Other Public Agencies: The applicant has obtained the approval
of any other public agency within whose jurisdiction the event or portion
thereof will occur.
O.   Facility Reservations: If the application proposes the use of any City
facility designated and designed to be available on a reservation basis and
subject to a facility use agreement, the applicant shall also be responsible to
comply with all rules and regulations applicable to the reservation and use of
such facility, and pay all applicable fees and deposits prior to the issuance
of the special event permit.
P.   Exclusive Use Of Public Property: The event will not require the exclusive
use of park or other public areas in a manner which will adversely impact upon
the reasonable use or access to those areas by the general public unless such
exclusive use has been approved by the Parks and Recreation Director pursuant
to the department's policies.
Q.   Filming Events: For a filming event, the number of dates of filming and
the number of locations to be used, and a report regarding discussions with
property owners or occupants in the affected neighborhoods. The applicant shall
provide a short written description of and schedule for the proposed filming to
the owners and occupants in the affected neighborhoods (as defined by
boundaries set by the Parks and Recreation Director). The applicant shall talk
with owners and occupants of all such property and submit as part of the
application a report noting any owner's or occupant's reaction along with the
addresses and phone numbers of all such property owners and occupants.
R.   Large Scale Event Application: For a large scale event, an applicant shall
submit an application to the Parks and Recreation Department not less than
ninety (90) days before the event is proposed to commence and shall be subject
to the nonrefundable large scale event application fee. All conditions of a
large scale event permit will be outlined therein. Priority for large scale
event permits in Draper Park shall be based on past history of holding the same
event in Draper Park, value of event to Draper residents, and order of
submission.
S.   Prior Experience: Applicants must submit documentation of prior
experience, if any, of holding a similar event, including where the event was
held and when.
T.   Additional Information: Any additional information that the City finds
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a special event
permit should issue. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-070: SPECIAL EVENTS ON VACANT PROPERTIES:
Special events may be allowed on properties which are vacant or undeveloped
following application for and issuance of a special event permit in compliance
with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-
2021)
15-4-080: CITY SUPPORT SERVICES:
City support services shall be provided for special events as determined by the
City to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, at cost as
stated in the City's consolidated fee schedule, payable by the organizer.
A.   Payment Of Estimated Support Costs: The City shall not issue a special
event permit until the organizer pays the estimated support costs as determined
by the City based on the application and past experience with similar events.
B.   Support Costs: City support costs include, but are not limited to, police
(but only for traffic control and cleanup), fire, and emergency medical
protection, park maintenance, power, water, road closures, cleanup of City
facilities before, during, or after the special event, and other costs to the
City directly attributable to the special event.
C.   Services Limited: City support services shall be limited to the minimum
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the
public's use of City property. Police protection needs shall be determined and
assigned by the Chief of Police or designee after considering relevant criteria
such as the size, location, duration, time, and date of the special event; the
number of streets and intersections blocked; and the need to detour or preempt
public travel and use of streets or sidewalks. Park maintenance as well as the
closure of roads and streets shall be administered by the appropriate City
departments or divisions.
D.   Payment Of Invoice: The City shall bill, and the organizer shall pay, the
remaining support costs within thirty (30) days after the date of invoice. Any
refund due to the organizer shall be paid by the City within thirty (30) days
after the special event if actual costs are less than the estimate.
E.   Police, Fire, And Traffic Crowd Control: The organizer shall provide
police and fire protection and traffic crowd control to the extent determined
by the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, or their designees, and shall pay the fees
therefor as stated in the City's consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 1354, 9-18-
2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-090: CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE:
A.   As a condition to issuing a permit, the Parks and Recreation Director may
impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning the time and place of such
event; the area and manner of conducting such event; the maximum number of
persons participating therein; the regulation of traffic, if required,
including the number and type of vehicles, the number and type of signs and
barricades to be provided by the applicant, if any, together with a plan of
their disposition following the event; permissible noise levels; and such other
requirements as the Director may find reasonable and necessary for the
protection of persons and property and the compliance with the requirements of
this Code.
B.   Issuance of a special event permit is conditioned on and subject to the
right of the City to suspend, revoke, restrict or modify such permit due to the
failure to pay event fees, costs or deposits, provide required insurance, or
for the planning, permitting or conduct of activities or programs which are a
violation of law or the conditions or parameters of the permit.
C.   The issuance of a special event permit herein shall not entitle a person
or entity to the issuance of a special event permit in the future.
D.   A special event permit granted herein is not transferable. (Ord. 1354, 9-
18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-100: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
An application for a special events permit may be denied on any of the
following grounds:
A.   The application for permit is not fully completed or fails to comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
B.   The application for permit contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
C.   The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued.
D.   The applicant or any person on whose behalf the application for permit was
made has on prior occasions:
1.   Damaged City property and has not paid in full for such damage, or has
other outstanding and unpaid debts to the City;
2.   Made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event
or activity previously permitted; or
3.   Has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the
applicant.
4.   Has held a special event in another jurisdiction that did not comply with
a permit or the ordinances of that jurisdiction.
E.   The applicant has failed to comply with all conditions and regulations
attendant to issuance of the permit.
F.   The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by the
provisions of this Code, regulations of the City, or otherwise prohibited by
law.
G.   The conduct of the special event will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its
route or location, unreasonably limit or obstruct access to private property,
or unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance
service to, areas contiguous to such public assembly areas.
H.   The proposed event will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the
public's ability to use public property for activities unrelated to the event.
I.   The conduct of the special event will require the diversion of so great a
number of City police officers to properly police the line of movement and the
areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the City.
J.   The conduct of the special event is reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property.
K.   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are not, or will
not be, available in or adjacent to any special event areas.
L.   There are insufficient parking places near the site of the special event
to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected.
M.   The special event, if conducted on City property, is for the primary
purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event that is primarily for
private profit. This prohibition against advertising products, goods, or events
shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or
sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the special event.
N.   A City event is scheduled for the same time and location.
O.   A special event permit application for the same time and location is
already granted or has been received and will be granted.
P.   An event is scheduled elsewhere in the City where the police resources
required for that event are so great that the deployment of police services for
the proposed special event would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the
welfare and safety of persons and property.
Q.   The special event permit application was filed less than:
1.   Forty five (45) days prior to the event for events with an estimated
combined attendance of fewer than five hundred (500) participants and
spectators; or
2.   Ninety (90) days for a Large Scale Event; or
3.   Four (4) days before the filming is scheduled to occur.
R.   The applicant failed to obtain a special event permit for a previous event
that was required to have a special event permit.
S.   The Parks and Recreation Director has the discretion to deny a permit for
any event that is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
(Ord. 1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-110: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished as a Class C misdemeanor for a
first offense and as a Class B misdemeanor for subsequent violations. (Ord.
1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-120: REVOCATION OF SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT:
A.   Any special event permit issued is subject to revocation if the Parks and
Recreation Director determines:
1.   That the event cannot be conducted without violating the standards or
conditions for special events; or
2.   The event is being conducted in violation of any condition of the special
event permit; or
3.   The event poses a threat to health or safety; or
4.   The applicant or any person associated with the event has failed to obtain
any other permit required pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law;
or
5.   The special event permit was issued in error or contrary to law.
B.   Notices of revocation shall be in writing and specifically set forth the
reasons for the revocation. However, if there is an emergency requiring
immediate revocation of a special event permit, the Parks and Recreation
Director may notify the permit holder verbally of the revocation. (Ord. 1354,
9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-130: DELEGATION OF DIRECTOR'S AUTHORITY:
A.   The Parks and Recreation Director may delegate any or all of his or her
functions under this chapter to his or her deputies or subordinates. (Ord.
1354, 9-18-2018; amd. Ord. 1515, 12-14-2021)
15-4-140: MAP:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5838.jpg]
(Ord. 1515, 1-18-2022)
TITLE 16
CITY UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
CULINARY WATER
SECTION:
16-1-010: Public Works Department Provides Culinary Water Service
16-1-020: Office Of Water Superintendent
16-1-030: Duties Of Superintendent
16-1-040: Service To Developments
16-1-050: Water Service
16-1-060: Application For Service To Developments
16-1-070: Extension Of Water System
16-1-080: Annexations
16-1-090: Replacement Of An Existing Service Pipe
16-1-100: Installation And Maintenance Of Meters And Stopcocks
16-1-110: Permit For Service Pipe Repair Or Alteration
16-1-120: Unauthorized Connection
16-1-130: Misrepresentation In Application
16-1-140: Restoration Of Water Service Authorized
16-1-150: Discontinuance Of Service
16-1-160: Resolution
16-1-170: Charges Due In Advance
16-1-180: Notice Of Delinquency
16-1-190: Notice Of Discontinuance
16-1-200: Discontinuance Of Utility Services; Deferred Payment Agreement
16-1-210: Allocation Of Amounts Received
16-1-220: Board Of Equalization
16-1-230: Legal Action
16-1-240: Meters
16-1-250: Tampering With Meters
16-1-260: Unauthorized Water Service
16-1-270: Duty To Maintain
16-1-280: Authority To Shut Off
16-1-290: Drinking Water Standards
16-1-300: Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair
16-1-310: Water Superintendent To Have Free Access
16-1-320: Waste Prohibited
16-1-330: Sprinklers
16-1-340: Curtailment
16-1-350: Damage To Water System
16-1-360: Maintenance And Control Of Hydrants
16-1-370: Free Use By City Departments
16-1-380: Use To Contractors
16-1-390: Installation And Financing
16-1-400: Use Of Water Service During Fire
16-1-410: Tampering With Hydrants
16-1-420: Control Of Backflow And Cross Connections
16-1-430: Construction Water Metering And Containment
16-1-440: Application For Water Connection
16-1-010: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT PROVIDES CULINARY WATER SERVICE:
The public works department shall have authority to operate and maintain the
Draper City culinary water system and to furnish water service to the residents
of Draper City for the fees set by the city council from time to time by
resolution. To accomplish these purposes, the public works department shall be
empowered to employ persons, purchase and improve real property, acquire
equipment and perform all other acts necessary or incidental to the
accomplishing of the above described purposes, subject to all applicable
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies and directives of the
mayor, city council and city manager. The city water department previously
created shall be the public works department. The city may also enter into
agreements with other political subdivisions to manage and operate the city's
water system pursuant to provisions acceptable to the city. (1994 Code)
16-1-020: OFFICE OF WATER SUPERINTENDENT:
There is hereby created the office of water superintendent. The water
superintendent shall be the public works director unless otherwise provided by
the governing body of the city. (1994 Code)
16-1-030: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The water superintendent shall administer and enforce this chapter under the
direction of the city manager and shall manage the city's water pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and pursuant to the resolutions, rules, regulations,
ordinances and directives adopted by the city council from time to time
prescribing his or her powers and duties. (1994 Code)
16-1-040: SERVICE TO DEVELOPMENTS:
The water system constructed or otherwise acquired by the city to supply
culinary water is the property of the city and shall be under the sole and
exclusive control and jurisdiction of the city. The water superintendent may,
and at the direction of the city council shall, make alterations and repairs to
the culinary water system. The city council may from time to time by resolution
make such rules and regulations as the council deems necessary or desirable for
the operation and control of the culinary water system. The city may enter into
contracts with other governmental entities and/or wholesale water delivery
providers for the purchase of water for the city's culinary water system. The
city may contract with other political subdivisions or entities to manage and
operate the city's water system. The city may acquire water rights and/or water
shares, etc., as it deems appropriate or desirable. (1994 Code)
16-1-050: WATER SERVICE:
The water superintendent may allow connections to the city's water system at
such time as the property owner or such owner's duly authorized agent complies
with all of the following provisions of this section:
A.   Application For Water Service: The record owner of any property being
served by the city's water system shall appear as the applicant and customer
for that water connection, and shall be held responsible to the city for
payment of all water service fees and charges incurred by that connection. Any
owner desiring water service from the city shall complete and submit an
application for water connection in a form provided by the city. The property
owner shall be liable for any water fees or service charges incurred by a
renter or lessee or other occupant of the owner's premises.
B.   Water Connections Nontransferable: Water connections shall not be
transferred to a location different from that shown on the application for
water service nor from where originally used, nor may a larger water connection
be subdivided into several smaller connections.
C.   Service Pipe: The property owner or his agents shall install a service
pipe to the curb or property boundary line of his or her property, which meets
the following requirements:
1.   The service pipe is of material and quality specified in the city's
construction standards.
2.   The service pipe will, when used, be buried at a depth and grade specified
in the city's construction standards.
3.   The service pipe is not roughed out closer than three feet (3') from the
sewer pipe at the foundation of any building and is not laid in the same trench
with any sewer line nor is so constructed as to cross the sewer line, and no
service pipe is laid in the same trench as a gas or any other pipe, but a
separate trench is provided for such service pipe at least three feet (3')
horizontally from all other pipelines.
4.   The service pipe does not run across property owned in fee by a person
other than the property owner who applied for the connection, unless a
satisfactory easement is obtained.
5.   The service pipe, when connected, will supply water to no more than one
building (accessory buildings excluded), except that where permission is
obtained by the property owner from the water superintendent, connection of
more than one building may be made to such a service pipe, if the property
owner applying for the connection is the owner of all buildings connected to
said service pipe. For the purpose of payment of fees under this chapter,
however, each building which shall receive water service through a common
service pipe shall be deemed to receive said water service through a separate
service pipe so that a property owner applying for connection shall pay the
charges set forth in subsection G of this section for each building which is to
receive water service.
D.   Illegal Use Of Water Pressure: The water provided through the connection
will not be used for the purpose of driving any motor, syphon, turbine, or
other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or for driving or
propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, or for any other purpose which the
city council by resolution or the water superintendent by regulation shall
include herein.
E.   Inspection: The service pipe of the building to be connected shall be
inspected by an inspector of the city public works department and found to
conform to these ordinances and to the Utah plumbing code prior to backfilling.
The service pipe and all other underground water lines or connections shall be
open and visible to the inspector at the time of inspection.
F.   Charges Current: The property owner requesting connection shall have no
unpaid delinquent water charge assessed against him or her by Draper City on
any property located within the city or connected to the city's water system.
G.   Fees Due At Connection: Subject to section
16-1-060 of this chapter, the property owner shall pay at the time he or she
files his or her application for connection all of the following applicable
fees which are not refundable for any reason:
1.   The connection charge specified by the city council by resolution, which
may include a capital development fee in addition to the actual cost of
connection.
2.   The cost of installing a special heavy duty meter box to withstand the
pressure of vehicular traffic (if required by regulation of the water
superintendent). (1994 Code)
16-1-060: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE TO DEVELOPMENTS:
A.   Developer's Application For Service: No individual, firm, corporation,
association, or other entity developing real property within city's boundaries
shall be permitted to connect onto city's water mains or to use water therefrom
until a formal written application for service has been received by the city on
a form provided by the city, and the city has accepted the application in
writing.
1.   Number And Type Of Service Connections: The application shall indicate the
size and number of water connections that applicant will require, whether
residential, multi-family, commercial, or industrial use is intended, and shall
be accompanied with such proof as required by city's legal counsel of
applicant's title to any water and water rights which applicant proposes to
transfer to city. Applicant shall also submit a master plan of applicant's
proposed development for review by city's engineer.
2.   Application Fee: Applicant shall pay an application fee in an amount
determined by the city council by resolution adopted by the city council to
offset the costs of reviewing this application by city's engineers and legal
counsel.
3.   Commitment To Serve: The application for service may be accepted and a
commitment of service letter shall be issued by city to the applicant upon a
finding by the city engineer, upon recommendation of the water superintendent,
that city has available water rights and water source capacity and water
distribution and storage facility capacity to serve the proposed development
with a year round supply of domestic and/or municipal and industrial water. The
city engineer shall forward a copy of all commitment letters to the city
council and inform the council of water capacities, distribution and storage
limits. Denial of service may be appealed to the city council in writing within
ten (10) days of the denial.
a.   The finding of available water rights may be based upon either water
rights and sources owned or controlled by city or upon water rights owned by
the applicant that are to be transferred to city in lieu of payment of the
water rights development fee as provided by this section.
b.   The finding of available water distribution and storage system capacity
shall be based either upon the existing system capacities of city, or, upon the
expansion and extension of the main transmission system and the augmentation of
storage capacity constructed by applicant and transferred to the city in lieu
of applicant's payment of the water system development fee as provided by this
section.
4.   Water Rights Development Fee/Donation Of Water Rights: All applicants
seeking water service from city for their development project shall either pay
a water rights development fee in order to cover the capital costs incurred by
the city in acquisition of water rights and the development of water sources,
or, in the city's sole discretion, the developer shall donate water rights to
the city.
a.   The water rights development fee shall be established by the city council
by resolution and shall be due and payable upon the acceptance of applicant's
application for water service.
b.   Applicant may donate water rights in lieu of payment of the water rights
development fee. Acceptance of the offered water rights shall be at the sole
discretion of the city and shall be conditioned upon applicant's compliance
with the conditions precedent of subsection B of this section. Upon legal
transfer of the donated water rights, all or a portion of the water rights
development fee may be waived.
c.   Where no water rights are donated and the water rights development fee is
paid, the city shall allocate a portion of the water rights development fee
paid per unit to a water source development account. These funds shall be used
by city to proportionately offset its costs in developing new wells and other
sources of water supply as required by city to meet the increasing source
demand requirements created by new developments. The remaining portion of the
water rights development fee shall be used to acquire water rights to serve
applicant's development.
5.   Water System Development Fee: In addition to the donation of water rights
and/or the payment of a water rights development fee, applicant shall also pay
a water system development fee in an amount to be determined by the city
council by resolution on each unit of system capacity demand required by
applicant to provide the requested water service to applicant's development.
The fee is required to offset the capital costs incurred by city in
constructing or extending the main transmission system required to provide
service to applicant's development.
6.   Development Fees Subject To Change: Both the water rights development fee
and the water system development fee are subject to change from time to time by
resolution of the city council.
B.   Conditions Precedent To Service Of Developments: Each applicant requesting
water service to a residential development, or commercial or industrial
development within the city, must comply with all of the following conditions
precedent in order to obtain water service from city, unless compliance is
expressly waived by city in writing:
1.   Water Rights For Development: Applicant shall either pay the water rights
development fee imposed by the city or, at the discretion of the city, donate
water rights in lieu of payment of these fees as provided herein. Any donated
water rights must be approved by the city engineer for year round use for
municipal, domestic or industrial purposes, prior to their donation to the
city. The water rights as approved must be of sufficient quantity and quality
to satisfy the current state division of drinking water standards and its rules
and regulations for applicant's intended use. Applicant shall obtain state
engineer approval for the year round use of this water right before the water
right may be accepted by city.
2.   Transfer Of Title Of Donated Water Rights: Applicant shall transfer to
city without cost, and by an appropriate instrument of conveyance acceptable in
form to city upon review of city's legal counsel, title to applicant's water
rights free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except as may be expressly
approved and accepted by city. Thereafter, city shall appear as the record
owner of the water rights involved. The water shall then be commingled and
become a part of the water rights and water supply for city through which all
of its customers will be served, including applicant's development.
3.   Water System Extensions: Applicant shall either pay the water system
development fee or construct at its expense and donate any required main
transmission system extensions as provided by this section. The improvements to
the city's main transmission system shall be limited to those required to serve
applicant's development, and shall be constructed in accordance with city's
approved specifications. All excavation and construction activities shall be
subject to city's engineer's inspection, approval and acceptance prior to
interconnecting these extended facilities with city's existing facilities, to
ensure that the extended and expanded system will be compatible with the
existing facilities.
a.   The city may, in its sole discretion, deem it necessary to construct
excess capacity into an extended main transmission line or storage capacity to
facilitate service to anticipated future customers in the immediate area. In
that case, applicant shall pay for only the capacity required for applicant's
property. The city shall either pay for the excess capacity constructed into
the extended line under a separate cost participation agreement or require
applicant to initially bear the entire expense under a line extension agreement
with city, which agreement shall govern the manner and timing of partial
reimbursement to applicant as other third parties connect onto and receive
service from the extended line and other facilities. Applicant shall be
reimbursed only for the incremental costs incurred in constructing the main
transmission system capacity in excess of applicant's needs. Applicant will be
required to pay for the minimum capacity required by applicant in these
facilities.
b.   Applicant shall install the extended main transmission system to a point
prescribed by city in accordance with acceptable plans and specifications, to
facilitate the orderly development of the next contiguous tract of land.
4.   Subdivision Improvements: Applicant shall construct at its sole expense
the internal or on site water distribution system required to serve the
individual consumers within applicant's subdivision or development, including
all booster pumps, on site storage, and other appurtenant facilities. The
internal water distribution system shall be constructed in accordance with the
city's specifications. Any booster stations and storage facilities shall be
placed at elevations which will be compatible with booster pumps, storage
facilities and pressure zones already existing or which may now or are proposed
as a part of the main water distribution system. Service shall not be provided
through these improvements from city's main transmission system until the
improvements are inspected and approved by city's engineers and accepted by
city.
5.   Pipeline Easement Locations: Where possible, provision shall be made for
the construction of all line extensions and distribution lines within public
streets and easements. However, where the lines must cross private property,
applicant shall obtain at applicant's sole expense all required and necessary
easements in satisfactory and recordable form. Title to any required storage,
pump station or other facilities along with the perpetual rights of ingress and
egress for operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the same, shall be
transferred to city.
C.   Transfer Of Title: Upon compliance with the conditions precedent of
subsection B of this section, applicant shall convey to city, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, except for those specifically agreed to in writing
by city, and by an instrument acceptable to city, the following items:
1.   Any extension of city's main transmission system constructed by applicant
and donated to city as provided in this section, together with all necessary
pipeline easements and rights of way for the operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of the same;
2.   The internal subdivision distribution system and all appurtenant
facilities, specifically including, but not limited to, all distribution lines,
pumps, storage facilities, booster pumps, and any required treatment
facilities, together with all appurtenant easements and rights of way for the
operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the same;
3.   Title to all storage and well sites, together with any and all easements
and appurtenances in connection therewith, including any required protection
zone easements to protect water sources, pipeline and utility easements and
rights of way;
4.   Title to any water and water rights donated to city as provided herein;
5.   Where any shares or water rights conveyed to the city by the applicant are
inadequate to meet the requirements herein provided, the applicant shall pay
the water rights development fee in an amount set by the city and such payment
shall be made to the city as a condition of approval for development within the
city;
6.   In the event the applicant is not required to furnish the total amount of
water that has historically been used on the developed parcel of land, the city
shall have the first right of refusal to purchase the remaining shares or water
rights which shall be set forth in writing and in recordable form and may be
recorded by the city in the office of the county recorder; and
7.   All water shares or water which may be held either by the city or by any
political subdivision created by the city to operate and maintain the city's
water system, including, but not limited to, a special service district, and
thereafter the city's or political subdivision's designee shall have the right
to vote any water shares held by the city or the political subdivision created
by the city in accordance with applicable rules and regulations governing the
same. (Ord. 961, 2-1-2011)
16-1-070: EXTENSION OF WATER SYSTEM:
In addition to the immediately preceding section, the following provisions
shall apply to anyone seeking to connect property to the city water system
where said system does not extend to such property:
A.   Agreement: Whenever a subdivider desires or is required to install water
connections and extensions for a subdivision, the subdivider shall enter into a
written extension agreement which shall constitute an application for
permission to make said extensions and connections and an agreement specifying
the terms and conditions under which the water extensions and connections shall
be made and the payments that shall be required.
B.   Dedication: Any extension of city water system granted in accordance with
the provisions of this or the immediately preceding subsection shall, upon
completion, become the property of Draper City.
C.   Outside City: Draper City may furnish water service from its water system
to persons outside the city in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Any person or persons located outside the city limits who desire to be supplied
with water service from the city water system and are willing to pay in advance
the whole expense of extending the water system to the property, may make
application to the city council by petition, which in addition to the water
requirements set forth in this section, shall contain a certified
acknowledgment that the petitioner understands that the city in granting the
petition need only supply such water to the petitioner from time to time as
shall be deemed by the city council to be available beyond the requirements of
water use within the city limits and that such extension shall be the property
of and subject to the control of Draper City. If the city council grants the
petition, or any portion thereof, the petitioner and Draper City shall enter
into an acceptable written water system extension agreement, which agreement
shall be executed prior to the commencement of any work upon said extension.
The agreement shall be subject to revocation and termination by the city upon
reasonable notice at any time the city determines in its sole discretion that
the surplus water no longer exists. The city shall have the right to allow
third parties to connect to any water line or facilities constructed pursuant
to this title in which case the city may enter into an agreement providing
partial reimbursement to the developer. (1994 Code)
16-1-080: ANNEXATIONS:
It is the intent that land annexed to Draper City be accompanied by water
rights sufficient to accommodate the needs of the existing and potential
occupants of said land. A donation of sufficient water rights to the city shall
be a condition of annexation; provided, however, that persons or entities
desiring to annex land into the city may in lieu of donating sufficient,
acceptable water rights to the city, pay a water rights development fee
satisfactory to the city to enable the city to serve the annexed territory with
culinary water. In such cases, the petitioner for annexation shall comply with
the provisions of subsection
16-1-060A4 of this chapter prior to the city's acceptance of the property for
annexation and recording of the annexation plat. In the event property is
annexed without the consent of the owner, the conveyance of water rights as set
forth herein shall not be required; provided, however, at the time of
development of such property, all provisions and requirements of section
16-1-060 of this chapter shall be complied with. (1994 Code)
16-1-090: REPLACEMENT OF AN EXISTING SERVICE PIPE:
The replacement of a previously used service pipe shall be deemed a connection
and the provisions of section
16-1-050 of this chapter shall apply to said replacement. (1994 Code)
16-1-100: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF METERS AND STOPCOCKS:
In connecting to a water main, the public works department shall install a
connection pipe of suitable quality under the street and a meter box, meter,
and stopcock at a location determined by the public works department. Said
connection pipe, meter box, meter and stopcock are and shall remain the
property of the city, which retains the sole right to maintain, repair, and
service said facilities. (1994 Code)
16-1-110: PERMIT FOR SERVICE PIPE REPAIR OR ALTERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, alter, repair, or connect to any
existing service pipe without it first having received a permit therefor from
the public works department. The violation of this section shall be a class B
misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by
applicable statute of the state of Utah. No permit authorizing such alteration
or connection shall issue if said alteration or connection results in the
availability of water service to a building to which such service was not
furnished before the alteration or connection is made, unless such building is
owned by the owner of all other buildings connected to said service pipe. Any
connection from an existing service pipe to a building to which water service
was not furnished before the connection is made shall be deemed to be a new,
original connection and the property owner shall pay to the city before
receiving the permit referred to above in this section the fees set forth in
subsection
16-1-050G of this chapter. (1994 Code)
16-1-120: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself or herself directly or
indirectly through family, servants, or agents to connect to, disconnect,
repair or alter the city water system or any part thereof, including, but not
limited to, any water line or water meter, except as herein provided, or
without prior authority first obtained to open any fire hydrant, stopcock,
valve, or other fixtures attached to the system of water supply, unless it is
done pursuant to a proper application, agreement or resolution. The violation
of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor, punishable by fine,
imprisonment, or both as prescribed by applicable statutes of the state of
Utah. (1994 Code)
16-1-130: MISREPRESENTATION IN APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to knowingly misrepresent a material fact in applying for
a water connection. Material facts include the identity of the applicant as the
owner of the property to be connected, and the purpose for which the water
service thereby provided will be used. Violation of this section shall be a
class C misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed
by applicable statutes of the state of Utah. (1994 Code)
16-1-140: RESTORATION OF WATER SERVICE AUTHORIZED:
The water superintendent shall cause water service to be restored if the person
requesting such service substantially complies with the following provisions:
A.   Application: The property owner requesting restoration of water service
completely fills out, signs, and files with the City Public Works Department an
application as set forth in section
16-1-050 of this chapter.
B.   Deposit: The person requesting water service pays a deposit in the amount
herein described. There shall be two (2) deposit amounts set by the City
Council by resolution, a greater and a lesser amount. All applicants shall pay
the lesser amount except:
1.   Applicants not residing in Draper City;
2.   Applicants who rent or lease the premises to be furnished with water
service;
3.   Applicants who will use the water service provided for industrial or
commercial purposes and thereby consume a significantly greater amount of water
than a single-family residential dwelling's occupants;
4.   Notwithstanding the above provisions, the City Council, on recommendation
of the Water Superintendent or City Manager, may require by resolution a
deposit in a different amount from any applicant. The Water Superintendent may
delay the provision of water service to such applicant to allow the City
Council to act on his or her recommendation or until sixty (60) days have
elapsed since application was made, whichever occurs first.
C.   Fee: The person requesting water service pays a fee for turning on water
service in an amount to be set by the City Council by resolution.
D.   Payment: The person requesting restoration of water service pays in
advance, before water service is provided, the base rate service charge for the
billing period in which he or she is applying, except that persons requesting
water service and filing applications therefor within the last four (4) days of
a billing period, shall pay the base rate service charge for the billing period
immediately after the billing period in which application is filed, and no
charge shall be made for any water service provided to such person by the City
during the last four (4) days of the billing period. (1994 Code)
16-1-150: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any user desiring to discontinue service shall notify the Public Works
Department in writing of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when
such service is to be discontinued. Upon giving such written notice, said user
shall not be responsible for water bill incurred after the date specified in
said notice. Any credit balance in favor of the user as a result of an advance
payment of bills or a deposit made will be refunded promptly after receipt of
notice of discontinuance of service, except that an amount to be set by the
City Council by resolution shall be retained by the City as a fee for turning
off water service. Water service shall be turned off as soon as is reasonably
possible after the date upon which the user requested the discontinuance to
take effect. (1994 Code)
16-1-160: RESOLUTION:
A.   The City Council shall by resolution set the amount of the following:
1.   The base rate service charge;
2.   Service charges other than the base rate;
3.   Connection fees;
4.   Water service deposits (as described in subsection
16-1-140B and section
16-1-210 of this chapter);
5.   Fee for use of water from hydrants pursuant to section
16-1-380 of this chapter.
6.   Fee for the temporary use of a device to bypass a water meter or
connection pursuant to section
16-1-380 of this chapter.
B.   The City Council shall also determine the duration of the billing period
and may change the amounts of the charges or the duration of the billing period
from time to time. (Ord. 1352, 9-18-2018)
16-1-170: CHARGES DUE IN ADVANCE:
All water charges and fees shall be paid in advance by the owner who requested
the service, except that some charges, other than the base rate, shall be
payable after the service is provided. Base rate service charges shall be due
and payable on the first day of the billing period for which the charge is
made. (1994 Code)
16-1-180: NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
If payment is not received within the billing period in which the charge is
made, the City may send written notice to the person who requested water
service, if his or her whereabouts are known, and the current occupant of the
premises served (if known or ascertainable on the records of the City) that the
amount is past due. A dishonored check shall not be considered payment
received. (1994 Code)
16-1-190: NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE:
If a service charge remains unpaid for two (2) complete billing periods, the
City shall notify in writing the occupant of the premises and the owner thereof
that water service will be discontinued if payment is not received within seven
(7) days after notice is sent. (1994 Code)
16-1-200: DISCONTINUANCE OF UTILITY SERVICES; DEFERRED PAYMENT AGREEMENT:
A.   Delinquency; Deferred Payments: If a water utility account is more than
sixty (60) days delinquent, all City utility services shall be discontinued
seven (7) days after notice has been given pursuant to section
16-1-190 of this chapter, and a notice has been left on the premises explaining
the reason for the discontinuance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may
forbear discontinuance of water service for a limited period of time by
entering into a written deferred payment agreement with the water user in
arrears for accounts meeting the following terms and where the customer is
willing to abide the terms of the agreement:
1.   Accounts owing less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall not be
eligible to enter a deferred payment agreement.
2.   Accounts shall not qualify for deferred payment agreements unless they
have a minimum two (2) year good payment history with the City, which is
defined as having no more than two (2) late payments within an eighteen (18)
month period.
3.   All account delinquencies between three hundred dollars ($300.00) and five
hundred ninety nine dollars ninety nine cents ($599.99) shall be repaid within
a three (3) month period of time from the date of execution of the deferred
payment agreement. One-third (1/3) of the delinquent balance shall be paid each
month by the twenty first day of the month.
4.   All delinquencies of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or more shall be paid
within a six (6) month period of time from date of execution of the deferred
payment agreement. One-sixth (1/6) of the delinquent balance shall be paid each
month by the twenty first day of the month.
5.   A deferred payment agreement shall contain language that the customer must
keep the current balance paid in full when due each month in addition to making
the deferred payment.
6.   The customer shall have the right to prepay the outstanding balance due
under a deferred payment agreement at any time during the term of the
agreement.
7.   A customer shall not be entitled to execute more than one deferred payment
agreement within any eighteen (18) month period of time. No more than three (3)
deferred payment agreements shall be granted within a five (5) year period.
8.   The terms of the deferred payment agreement shall be set forth in a
written agreement, a copy of which shall be provided to the customer.
9.   A deferred payment agreement shall include a finance charge of up to one
and one-half percent (11/2%) per month, plus a delinquent fee charge if service
has been discontinued. If a finance charge is assessed, the deferred payment
agreement shall contain notice of such charge.
10.   If an account holder breaches any condition or term of a deferred payment
agreement, the City may treat that breach as a delinquent account and shall
have the right to terminate service pursuant to this chapter and the account
holder shall not have the right to a renewal of the deferred payment agreement.
B.   Availability Of Personnel; Restoration: The City shall have personnel
available between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. each
business day to accept payment and submit a work order to reconnect utility
service. The Public Works Department shall have personnel generally available
to restore service on the same business day when payments are received before
three o'clock (3:00) P.M. Payments received after three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
shall cause the service restored on the next business day. (Ord. 1023, 8-21-
2012)
16-1-210: ALLOCATION OF AMOUNTS RECEIVED:
Where amounts are due for more than one billing period, any payment received
shall be applied toward the most recent billing for which an amount is due.
(1994 Code)
16-1-220: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION:
The City Council is hereby constituted a Board of Equalization of Water Rates
to hear complaints and make corrections of any assessments alleged to be
illegal, unequal or unjust. (1994 Code)
16-1-230: LEGAL ACTION:
The Water Superintendent is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the
payment of all delinquent water charges whether for water connection or for
water service, by an action at law in the corporate name of the City if the
amount paid in advance or in deposit, if any, by the defaulting water user is
not sufficient to fully extinguish the liability of said user to the City for
water connection or service. (1994 Code)
16-1-240: METERS:
A.   Required: All water delivered by the City to its customers shall be
metered through water meters owned by the City, except as provided in
subsection
16-1-380B of this chapter.
B.   Testing: If a user submits a written request for a test of his or her
water meter, the Water Superintendent may, if under the circumstances deemed
advisable, and in his or her discretion, order a test of the meter measuring
the water delivered to such user. If such request to test the meter is made
within twelve (12) months after the date of the last previous test, the user
may be required to pay the costs of such test if the meter is found in such
test to record from ninety seven percent (97%) to one hundred three percent
(103%) of accuracy under methods of testing that are satisfactory to the Water
Superintendent. In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety
seven percent (97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy,
the City shall make such adjustments in the user's previous bill as are just
and fair under the circumstances.
C.   Meter Failure: If meters fail to register at any time, the water delivered
of such a period shall be estimated on the basis of previous consumption. (Ord.
1352, 9-18-2018)
16-1-250: TAMPERING WITH METERS:
A.   Generally: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the discretion
of the City, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with in any manner or
removed by the user or any other person.
B.   Responsibility To Prevent: A user shall prevent any damage to the water
meter used by such user and shall pay the cost of repairing any damage to the
water meter other than normal wear and tear. Any amounts due by reason of this
subsection may be added to a user's bill for water service, and any amount
received from such user thereafter shall be applied first against the amount
due pursuant to this subsection and thereafter to any other amount(s) due from
such user for other purposes.
C.   Misdemeanor: The violation of subsection A of this section shall be a
Class B misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed
by applicable Statutes of the State of Utah. (1994 Code)
16-1-260: UNAUTHORIZED WATER SERVICE:
A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to provide oneself or others with, or
make use of, water service from the City water system without authorization
from the Public Works Department. When water service has been discontinued by
the Public Works Department for nonpayment of water charges, noncompliance with
these ordinances, or for any other reason, it shall be unlawful to restore
water service by self-help or other means without authorization by the Public
Works Department. Violation of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor,
punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by applicable Statutes
of the State of Utah.
B.   Plumbers: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the case
of leaks or other accidents damaging service pipes or other apparatus connected
with the water system, plumbers or other qualified persons may shut off the
water at the curb box to make necessary repairs, and turn on the water upon
completion of such repairs without obtaining authorization. (Ord. 1352, 9-18-
2018)
16-1-270: DUTY TO MAINTAIN:
The public works department shall keep the water system in good repair. Any
leaks, breaks, or equipment failures shall be repaired within a reasonable
time. (1994 Code)
16-1-280: AUTHORITY TO SHUT OFF:
The public works department shall have power and authority to temporarily
discontinue water service to any area without notice, for purposes of repairing
and/or maintaining the water system. (1994 Code)
16-1-290: DRINKING WATER STANDARDS:
The city will provide water that meets all applicable federal and state
drinking water standards. (1994 Code)
16-1-300: PIPES TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR:
A.   Required: Subject to the provisions of this chapter, all users of water
service shall keep their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in
good repair and protected from frost at their own expense.
B.   Repair, Upkeep Responsibility: Each individual customer water user shall
own and shall bear the sole responsibility for repair, upkeep and maintenance
of the service lateral from the property side of the water meter to the
premises being served. The city shall not accept nor bear any responsibility
for any leaks, or damages caused by leakage, in the service lateral. The
customer shall be solely responsible to maintain the service lateral upon his
or her property. The city shall own and maintain the shutoff valve, the water
meter and its appurtenances, regardless of whether the water meter was
installed at the street or inside the structure receiving service. Without
incurring liability to the property owner, the city may make emergency repairs
to service laterals in order to mitigate damage, prevent waste of water, and to
prevent contamination of the water supply. Any such repairs shall be at the
customer's expense and shall be billed to customer by city. The customer shall
pay any such bill within thirty (30) days of its date. (1994 Code)
16-1-310: WATER SUPERINTENDENT TO HAVE FREE ACCESS:
Free access at all ordinary hours shall be granted to the water superintendent
and his or her authorized representatives to any place supplied with water
service from the city's water system for the purpose of examining the
apparatus, the amounts of water used, manner of its use, and to make any and
all necessary adjustment to said systems. (1994 Code)
16-1-320: WASTE PROHIBITED:
A.   Maintenance Of Connected Facilities: All users of water service shall be
required to keep their sprinklers, faucets, valves, hoses and all apparatus
connected to the water system in good condition at their own expense and all
waterways closed when not in use. When it shall be found that any fixture on
the user's premises is broken or not in serviceable condition, the user shall
be notified at once of the fact and should said user fail to remedy the defect
within thirty (30) days, water service may be discontinued until such apparatus
has been inspected by the water superintendent or his agent and determined to
be in a serviceable condition. Any deposit or prepaid charges on the account of
such user shall be forfeited to the city as an inspection and handling fee.
After inspection and approval of any required repairs by the public works
department, service may be restored pursuant to conditions of this chapter.
B.   Service Interruption: If the water superintendent shall determine that a
user engages in practices which result in the needless waste of a significant
amount of water, and continues to do so after reasonable notice to discontinue
said wastefulness has been given, the superintendent may interrupt water
service for up to twenty four (24) hours per act of waste. Notice of an
interruption made hereunder shall be given at least one day prior to the time
at which the interruption occurs. It is a waste of water to permit water to run
without making due efforts to conserve the water.
C.   City Council Action: When referred to the council, the city council may
consider discontinuing permanently the water service to a wasteful user. If the
city council elects to consider the matter of discontinuance, it shall give
notice to the water user of the intention to discontinue his or her water
service at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the city council at
which such discontinuance is to be considered. The notice shall inform the user
of the time and place of the meeting and of the charges which led to the
consideration of discontinuance. Said water user shall have opportunity to
appear with or without legal counsel and present his or her reasons why the
water service should not be discontinued. Upon hearing, the city council shall
notify said user in writing of its determination and if the determination is to
discontinue the user's water service, it shall notify said user of the period
during which the service will remain discontinued. (1994 Code)
16-1-330: SPRINKLERS:
A.   Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to use such number of
outlets simultaneously or to use such sprinklers or combinations of sprinklers
or outlets as will, in the opinion of the water superintendent, materially
affect the pressure or supply of water in the city water system or any part
thereof, and the superintendent may specify by regulation combinations or
number of outlets which may have such effect.
B.   Notice: The water superintendent shall, after a determination that such
improper use exists, notify the offending water user, or the owner of the
premises whereon such use occurs, of such determination in writing and order
such use discontinued and advise said person that such continued usage
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
C.   Penalty: If the usage described in subsection A of this section is
continued or resumed at any time from seven (7) days after notice is given by
the city, the offending water user shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by applicable statutes
of the state of Utah, for each such unlawful usage. (1994 Code)
16-1-340: CURTAILMENT:
A.   Authority: In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment
of the city council be necessary, by proclamation, limit the use of water for
other than domestic purposes to such extent as may be necessary for the public
good.
B.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family servants
or agents, to violate any proclamation made by the mayor or council in
pursuance of this section and if any violation thereof, shall occur, then in
addition to any other penalty therefor, the water service to the premises upon
which such violation occurs shall be shut off, and if shut off on that account,
it shall not be turned on again until the payment of fifteen dollars ($15.00)
for each violation of the said proclamation is received and the affected user
follows the procedure set forth in this chapter.
C.   Water Emergencies: In times of water shortage due to drought or any other
natural or manmade conditions or occurrences, the city shall have full
authority to declare a water emergency, and to ration or otherwise regulate the
distribution and use of water from the city's system. Such action by the city
council may include a moratorium on new water connections until the emergency
has been alleviated. (1994 Code)
16-1-350: DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM:
A.   Prohibited: Any person who destroys, defaces, damages, or interferes with
the operation of any part, pipe, fixture, appliance, appurtenance or property
of the Draper City water system or any source of water supplying said system,
any substance poisonous to human life or harmful to human health or
detrimentally affecting the taste, smell, color, odor, or other aesthetic
characteristic of the water shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by applicable statutes
of the state of Utah.
B.   Restitution: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials
of the city on or near a user's premises caused by any act or neglect of the
user or his or her agents shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by
or at the expense of the user, and the user shall pay all costs and expenses,
including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the city
through its efforts to repair or recover expenses for the repair of the damage
to the lines, meters or other equipment of the city water system or public
works department. (1994 Code)
16-1-360: MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants are the property of Draper City and are under the control of and
shall be kept in repair by the public works department. (1994 Code)
16-1-370: FREE USE BY CITY DEPARTMENTS:
The fire department shall at all times have free and unrestricted access to all
fire hydrants. Other city departments or agencies may use fire hydrants with
the approval of the Water Superintendent. No department or agency of the City
shall be charged a fee for City use of water supplied by a fire hydrant. (1994
Code)
16-1-380: USE TO CONTRACTORS:
A.   The Water Superintendent may permit use of water from fire hydrants by
contractors of private development or public works projects, or by public
utilities who are engaged in work on public streets, subject to the conditions
of this chapter. A charge shall be paid in advance for use of water from fire
hydrants which shall be set by the City Council by resolution (see section
16-1-170 of this chapter).
B.   The Water Superintendent may permit use of a device to bypass temporarily
a water meter or connection for the use in minor construction purposes. The
bypass device shall not exceed one inch (1") in diameter and shall not be used
for dust control, irrigation, or earthwork compaction efforts. Contractors
found utilizing the bypass device for these purposes may be subject to an
additional charge or seizure of the bypass device by the Water Superintendent.
A charge shall be paid in advance for use of a device to bypass a water meter
or connection which shall be set by the City Council by resolution (see section
16-1-170 of this chapter). (Ord. 1352, 9-18-2018)
16-1-390: INSTALLATION AND FINANCING:
A.   One Lot Fee: Any person desiring to build or locate a building on a
subdivision consisting entirely of one lot shall pay to the Fire Hydrant Fund
of the City all required fees as provided in the consolidated fee schedule.
B.   Others: Any other person desiring to build or locate a building on a
subdivision other than one described in the immediately preceding subsection
shall install at his or her sole expense fire hydrants in such number that
there shall be at least one hydrant within two hundred fifty feet (250') of
each building to be built or located in said subdivision. The City Council may
specify additional terms for said agreement, and may require the subdivider to
contribute a specified sum of money to the Fire Hydrant Fund if a fire hydrant
is already in service within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any such building
in said subdivision.
C.   Installation: The City Public Works Department shall install or cause to
be installed a fire hydrant within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a building
described in subsection A of this section as soon as construction begins on
said building, or as soon as feasible thereafter, if a fire hydrant is not
already in service within two hundred fifty feet (250') of said building.
D.   No Building Permit: A building permit shall not be issued for any building
unless any amount required to be paid by this section is first paid.
E.   Special Fund: The monies of the Fire Hydrant Fund shall be used solely to
defray the costs of fire hydrant installation in Draper City. (1994 Code)
16-1-400: USE OF WATER SERVICE DURING FIRE:
In the event of a fire within the City, a firefighter, police officer, or
employee of the Public Works Department may order that all valves, taps, and
stopcocks connected to the plumbing systems of any property supplied with water
service by the City be closed and remain closed until the fire is extinguished.
Failure to follow such an order shall be a Class B misdemeanor, punishable by
fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by applicable Utah Statutes. (1994
Code)
16-1-410: TAMPERING WITH HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall not be tampered with and no one shall use, adjust, alter or
change any fire hydrant except the Draper City Fire Department or person
authorized by the City. Violation of this section shall be a Class B
misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by
applicable Statutes of the State of Utah. (1994 Code)
16-1-420: CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS:
A.   Responsibility:
1.   City Responsibility:
a.   The City operates a culinary water distribution system.
b.   Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system(s) shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by
individuals deemed qualified by and representing the City. Survey records shall
indicate compliance with the aforementioned health and safety standards. All
such records will be maintained by the City.
c.   The City shall notify, in writing, all consumers of the need for the
periodic system survey to ensure compliance with existing applicable minimum
health and safety standards.
d.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for containment
control required at the service connection shall be determined from the results
of the system survey.
2.   Consumer Responsibility:
a.   To comply with this chapter as a term and condition of supply and
consumer's acceptance of service is and shall constitute admittance of his/her
awareness.
b.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install, or
cause to be installed, test and maintain any backflow prevention device/
assembly required to comply with this chapter.
3.   Plumbing Inspector Responsibility:
a.   The plumbing inspector's responsibility to enforce the applicable sections
of the plumbing code begins at the discharge side of the water service valve
located inside the building or structure.
b.   The plumbing inspector will review all plans to ensure that unprotected
cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water system. If a
cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the installation
of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device/assembly, in accordance
with the plumbing code.
c.   Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so via approved air gap
or approved mechanical backflow prevention assembly, properly installed and in
accordance with the plumbing code.
4.   Water Superintendent Responsibility: The water superintendent's
responsibility to enforce the applicable sections of this chapter begins at the
supply side of the water service valve located inside the building or
structure.
5.   Certified Backflow Assembly Technician, Surveyor Or Repair Person
Responsibilities:
a.   Whether employed by the consumer or utility to survey, test, repair, or
maintain backflow prevention assemblies the certified backflow technicians,
surveyors or repair persons will have the following responsibilities:
(1)   Ensuring acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
(2)   Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the consumer, water
purveyor, and the Utah department of health, bureau of drinking water/
sanitation, and within the time frames prescribed by the bureau of drinking
water/sanitation.
(3)   The report shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
(4)   Ensuring replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally
supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
(5)   Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of the
assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
(6)   A certified technician approved by the city shall perform all tests of
the mechanical devices/assemblies and be responsible for the competence and
accuracy of all tests and reports.
(7)   Ensuring his or her license is current, the testing equipment being used
is acceptable to the city and state, and is in proper operating condition.
(8)   The certified, city approved technician conducting the test must tag each
double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly
and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date tested and by whom.
The technician's license number must also be on this tag.
b.   In the case of a consumer requiring a commercially available technician,
any certified, city approved technician is authorized to make the test and
report the results of that test to the consumer, water purveyor and the bureau
of drinking water/sanitation. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need
of repair, the plumbers law of Utah requires a licensed plumber make the actual
repair.
B.   Definitions:
   APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: Accepted by the Utah department of health,
bureau of drinking water/sanitation, as meeting an applicable specification or
as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the purveyor's public water supply will be considered as an
auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s), such as a
well, spring, river, stream, ditch, secondary water system, etc., or "used
waters" or "industrial fluids". These waters may be contaminated or polluted or
they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over
which the water purveyor does not have authority for sanitary control.
   BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
under pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from any source(s) other than the intended source.
   BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
(s), other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
   BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the Utah plumbing code, chapter 10 (appendix J), and the cross
connection control program for Utah.
   CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, auxiliary water supply, compounds
or other materials.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures which may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other
material of questionable quality to come in contact with potable water inside a
distribution system. This would include any temporary connections, such as
swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tubes or
other plumbing arrangements.
   CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water
system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention
assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's
water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot
be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection
(isolation).
   CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system
and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly
properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The service connection shall be defined as the water
meter yoke assembly with the city being responsible up to the discharge piping
from the meter yoke.
   WATER PURVEYOR: The water superintendent of the city is invested with the
authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross
connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
C.   Requirements:
1.   Policy:
a.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by State laws, regulations, codes, and this section. Service of water
to a consumer found to be in violation of this section shall be discontinued by
the water purveyor after due process of written notification of violation and
an appropriate time suspense for voluntary compliance, if:
(1)   A backflow prevention assembly required by this section for control of
backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested, and maintained; or
(2)   If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or
bypassed; or
(3)   If an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises; or
(4)   If the periodic system survey has not been conducted.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected to
the requirement of this section and to the satisfaction of the water purveyor.
b.   The customer's system(s) shall be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the water purveyor to determine whether
cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation
of this section, exist and to audit the results of the required survey.
c.   Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service connection's water
usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply or to the City's
water system, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on
the service line of the identified consumer's water system at or near the
property line, or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all
cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
d.   The type of protective assembly required under subsection C1c of this
section, shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of
cross connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and State
requirements or resulting from the required survey.
e.   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet
the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under
subsection C1f of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these
rules so long as the water purveyor is assured that they will satisfactorily
protect the public water system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from
the present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the
water purveyor finds that the operation or maintenance of this assembly
constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved
backflow prevention assembly meeting the local and State requirements.
f.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified surveys/
inspections, and operational tests made at least once per year at the
consumer's expense. In those instances where the water purveyor deems the
hazard to be great, he or she may require certified surveys/inspections and
tests at more frequent intervals. It shall be the duty of the water purveyor to
see that these tests are made according to the standards set forth by the State
Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation.
g.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10) working
days of initial installation. The owner shall notify the City within twenty
four (24) hours of installation of the backflow prevention assembly.
h.   No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a
safety hazard. Example: installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes,
boilers, pits, or above ceiling level.
2.   Discontinuance Of Service: If violations of this chapter exist or if there
has not been any corrective action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days
of the written notification of deficiencies noted within the survey, then the
water purveyor shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by
providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected
the condition(s) in conformance with the State and City Statutes relating to
plumbing, safe drinking water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto. (1994 Code)
16-1-430: CONSTRUCTION WATER METERING AND CONTAINMENT:
No person shall utilize water from the City's water system without having an
approved device and having an approved fee paid. Usage through fire hydrants,
device to bypass a meter, or water meter without first making application to
the Water Superintendent is a violation. An approved connection is required to
provide water for all development, construction, building or other construction
or related activities requiring water from the City's water system. When a
connection is through a fire hydrant or metered connection then water usage
shall be metered and paid for by the person using such water or the person
owning the real property on which the water is used. When a device to bypass a
meter is used, prepayment of usage fee is required. Violation of this section
shall be a Class B misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, as
prescribed by applicable Statutes of the State of Utah. (Ord. 1352, 9-18-2018)
16-1-440: APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION:
DRAPER CITY
APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION
(PLEASE PRINT)
Today's Date:
Contractor's Name:
Name of Applicant:
Spouses Name:
Address of Property to be Serviced:
Telephone #:
Lot #
Subdivision:
Service Start Date:
Mailing Address:
Zip Code:
Is the Applicant the Owner?
Purpose for the Water Connection?
Type of Connection Requested: Residential
Commercial                      Industrial
Number of Connections Requested:          
Size of Connections:
Driver's License #:                 
Date of Birth:
Place of Employment:
Work Phone #
Friend or Relative:
Phone # of Above:
Address of Above:
I hereby apply to the City of Draper for permission to connect the property
listed above to the Draper City Water System and hereby agree as follows:
   (1) The connection so made by the City at my request, including the meter,
shall remain the property of the City at all times and the City shall have free
and unrestricted access thereto at all times, together with the right to enter
upon my property to make repairs, inspections or replacements as may be
necessary.
   (2) The location of the meter, whether on my property or at some point near
my property, shall be decided solely by the City at its absolute discretion.
   (3) I hereby agree to pay all water fees and service charges before or on
the 20th of the month. It is understood that if the utility bill becomes 45
days or more delinquent, or if a delinquent charge comes to exceed $40.00, the
service will be turned off, and in order for services to be restored, the
delinquent bill will be paid and a reconnection fee charged.
   (4) I hereby agree to notify City of termination of service.
   (5) I agree to permit the City, its agents or employees, to enter the
property at the address shown above at all reasonable times for the purposes
necessary to rendering of such service. I agree to make certain that the meters
and related equipment are readily accessible to the City and that there are no
barriers or animals which would prevent reasonable access.
   (6) The applicant hereby represents that applicant is the owner of the
property for which this application is being submitted to the City. In the
event Owner rents or leases or otherwise allows occupancy of Owner's property
by any person, owner shall be responsible to the City for payment of all water
fees and service charges incurred by that connection on the premises covered by
this application. The City may terminate water service in the event owner fails
to pay any service charges or fees incurred by a renter or lessee or other
occupant. Owner further agrees that any delinquent charges may be transferred,
at the City's option, to any other existing or newly established account in the
name of the Owner with the City and that such delinquent charges shall be paid
by the Owner through the account to which they are transferred. All payments of
any delinquent charges from other accounts shall be in addition to any charges
incurred by the Owner or those persons renting or leasing from the Owner under
the accounts to which the delinquent charges have been transferred.
   (7) I hereby agree to pay reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred by the
City in collecting delinquent charges for water service.
   (8) I agree to pay 11/2% per month on any delinquent amount. The minimum
penalty will be listed on the fee schedule.
   (9) Any notices which are to be given to owner shall be sufficient if mailed
to owner at the address listed on this application.
   (10) I hereby agree to hold the City harmless for any loss, damage, or
injury caused by or arising out of any defect in the water meter, water meter
box, the connection applied for, or any other part of the City water system.
   (11) I will obey and abide by all ordinances, rules and regulations now or
hereafter promulgated or enacted by the City of Draper and applicable to the
City's water system.
DATED this          day of                , 19        .
 
   Owner's Signature
Witness:
(1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
STORMWATER UTILITY
SECTION:
16-2-010: Purpose
16-2-020: Definitions
16-2-030: Stormwater Utility Created
16-2-040: Ownership Of City Storm Drain Facilities
16-2-050: Applicability
16-2-060: Utility Administration
16-2-070: Responsibilities Of Administration
16-2-080: Minimum Standards; No Guarantee Of No Contamination
16-2-090: Service Charge Imposed
16-2-100: System Of Rates And Charges
16-2-110: Billing And Collection
16-2-120: Appeal Of Charges
16-2-130: Prohibited Activities
16-2-140: Illicit Discharges
16-2-150: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans, Permits, And Enforcement On
Construction Sites
16-2-160: Notification Of Illicit Discharge
16-2-170: Stormwater System Design And Management Standards
16-2-180: Postconstruction
16-2-190: Existing Locations And Developments
16-2-200: Enforcement
16-2-210: Appeals
16-2-010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
Draper City, its residents and downstream entities through the improvement of
the city's storm drain system by managing and controlling stormwater runoff,
protecting property, preventing polluted water from entering the city's storm
drain system and other receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable as
required by federal and state law. The objectives of this chapter are:
A.   To preserve, improve, regulate, and control the natural and manmade storm
drain facilities and conveyances that constitute the city's storm drain system;
B.   To minimize entrance of pollutants to the city's storm drain system;
C.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the city's storm drain
system;
D.   To guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use, and
maintenance of any development or other activity that results in the movement
of earth on land within the city limits;
E.   To minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from development that would otherwise degrade water quality;
F.   To reduce the amount of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution wherever possible, through stormwater management controls;
G.   To establish a viable and fair method of financing the construction,
management, operation and maintenance of the storm drain system;
H.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance,
monitoring and enforcement necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
I.   To establish a penalty procedure for violations of this chapter;
J.   To provide and maintain fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory rates and
charges for the storm drain system and related services which will generate
sufficient revenues for operating, improving and maintaining the storm drain
system at a level commensurate with stormwater management needs; and
K.   To establish a policy whereby present and future rates and charges for the
stormwater utility should be fixed with consideration of the difference in cost
fairly allocated to the various customers based upon such factors as the
intensity of development of the parcel; the types of development on the parcel;
the cost of maintenance, operation, repair and improvements of the various
parts of the storm drain system; the quantity of the runoff generated; and
other factors which present a reasonable basis for distinction, and which will
allow for management of the storm drain system in a manner that protects the
public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-
2023)
16-2-020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): The activities, practices, maintenance
procedures, design standards, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the waters of
the United States. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
educational activities, and practices to control site runoff spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
CITY: Draper City.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The federal water pollution control act enacted by
Public Law 92-500 as amended by Public Laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-483, and 97-117,
enacted 33 USC section 1251 et seq., and subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to the Utah pollutant discharge
elimination system (UPDES) construction permits including construction projects
resulting in land disturbance activities subject to titles 10 and 18 of this
code, which include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, building construction, and demolition.
COUNCIL: The Draper City council.
COUNTY: Salt Lake County or Utah County.
CULVERT: A covered channel or pipe that directs water flow below the ground
surface.
CUSTOMER OR PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation and its
officers, partnership, association, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, the
state or its departments, institutions, bureaus, agencies, county, city,
political subdivision, or any other governmental or legal entity recognized by
law.
DEGRADATION: The breakdown, both biological and chemical, of compounds into
simpler substances, usually less harmful than the original compound; also the
geological wearing down by erosion; or the lowering of the water quality of the
watercourse by an increase in the amount of pollutants.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of stormwater runoff for subsequent release.
DETENTION BASIN: A structure or ground surface feature that stores water
temporarily and releases it at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel whose surface has been altered by grading,
filling, or construction of any improvement.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to land, including, but not limited to, site
preparation, landscaping, filling, grading, paving, excavation and
construction.
DISCHARGE: The release of stormwater or other substance from a conveyance
system or storage container.
DISTURB: To alter the physical condition, natural terrain, or vegetation of
land by clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling, building, or other
construction activity.
DRAINAGE: The collection, conveyance, containment, or discharge of ground,
surface, and storm water runoff.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT OR ERU: The unit of measure used as an index to
compare the uses, needs and impact to the storm drain system by different sized
properties with different amounts of impervious surface, and is represented by
the average single- family residential parcel which is calculated to be equal
to three thousand (3,000) square feet of impervious surface area.
EROSION: The wearing away of land surface by wind, water, ice, gravity, or
mechanical processes, including vehicular traffic.
HOT SPOT: An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated
runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in
stormwater.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except discharges from emergency firefighting activities and
other discharges exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any physical connection to the storm drain system allowing
discharge of nonstormwater which has not been permitted by the city.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface which does not allow water to pass through to the
soil and causes water to run off in quantities or speeds greater than under
natural conditions, including rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways,
patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and gravel that has been
subjected to surface traffic, including compacted gravel surfaces.
INFILTRATION: The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil,
which capacity is expressed in terms of inches per hour.
INITIAL STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The portions of the stormwater collection system
designed to convey stormwater from a ten percent (10%) storm (10-year return
period) and may include inlets, piping, curb and gutter, detention basins, or
other conveyance channels or facilities and is designed to reduce street
maintenance costs, to provide protection against regularly recurring damage
from storm runoff of a ten (10) year recurrence interval or less, to help
create an orderly system, and to provide convenience to the customer.
INLET: An entrance into a ditch, culvert, storm drain, or other waterway.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): A stormwater management approach with a basic
principle that is modeled after nature. LID's goal is to mimic a site's
predevelopment hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter,
store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to its source.
MAJOR STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The system designed to convey the one percent (1%)
storm (100-year return period) which utilizes a combination of the initial
storm drainage system and the street right of way for conveyance, thereby
reducing damage to homes, buildings, and other structures.
MITIGATION: On site facilities or practices which reduce stormwater quantity or
improve stormwater quality.
NONPOINT SOURCE: Pollution caused by diffuse sources rather than a single
location such as a pipe, including agricultural or urban runoff.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Discharges that are not completely composed of
stormwater.
PARCEL: The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner,
boundaries and surface area, and is documented with a property number by the
county.
POLLUTANT: Any substance introduced into the environment that adversely affects
the usefulness of a resource including paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquids; solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and
accumulations so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The Draper City public works director or the director's
designee.
RECEIVING WATER: Bodies of water that receive water from upstream systems.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PARCEL: Any parcel of land containing a single-family
or duplex dwelling unit.
SOURCE CONTROL: A practice or structural measure to prevent pollutants from
entering stormwater runoff or other environmental media.
STATE STORMWATER PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES: The state required permit
issued by the Utah division of water quality to any person or business
intending to disturb more than one acre of property or less than one acre if
that property was part of a common plan of development or sale since 1992.
STORM DRAIN FACILITIES: Any facility, improvement, development or property made
for controlling stormwater quantity and quality.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: All initial and major manmade storm drain facilities and
conveyances, and natural systems including designated open spaces owned or
maintained by the city that store, control, treat, or convey stormwater.
STORMWATER: Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and
other water handled by the storm drain system.
STORMWATER MAINTENANCE AND PRESERVATION PLAN: A document created to guide the
owners of a parcel of land to inspect, document, and maintain any private
infrastructure used to contain or redirect stormwater runoff and to prevent
pollution from entering the city's drainage system.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT (MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT):
An agreement between the city and the owner of a parcel of land that requires
the owner to implement a stormwater maintenance and preservation plan.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN OR SWPPP: The document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, storm drain
facilities, or receiving waters, and which plan must be prepared prior to
obtaining a state stormwater permit for construction activities.
STORMWATER UTILITY OR UTILITY: The utility created by this chapter, which
operates, maintains, regulates and improves storm drain facilities and programs
within the city.
STREET: The entire area of the right of way, whether public or private,
including curb, gutter, sidewalk, drive approaches, park strips, and surface
area.
UNDEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has not been altered by grading, filling,
or construction.
UTAH POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (UPDES) STORMWATER REGULATIONS: The
statewide program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment
requirements under the Utah water quality act. The UPDES rules promulgated
pursuant to the Utah water quality act are intended to be compatible with the
federal regulations adopted pursuant to CWA.
WATERS OF THE STATE: Defined by Utah administrative code R317 as "all streams,
lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon this state or any portion of the
state or any portion thereof, except that bodies of water confined to and
retained within the limits of private property, and which do not develop into
or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a menace to fish and
wildlife, shall not be considered to be "waters of the state" under this
definition (section 19-5-102)".
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined
in title 40 part 122.2 of the code of federal regulations (CFR) including all
natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may
carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and
storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
WETLANDS: An area that is regularly saturated by surface or ground water and is
subsequently characterized by a prevalence of vegetation that is adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016; amd. Ord. 1240, 12-
20-2016)
16-2-030: STORMWATER UTILITY CREATED:
There is hereby created the Draper City stormwater utility. The utility shall
operate, maintain and improve all city storm drain facilities used for the
conveyance of stormwater through, under or over lands, beginning at a point
where stormwater first enters the storm drain facilities and ending at a point
where the stormwater exits the facilities. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord.
1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-040: OWNERSHIP OF CITY STORM DRAIN FACILITIES:
All of the city's storm drain facilities and structures are hereby made a part
of the stormwater utility. Governmentally owned streets and storm drain
facilities operated and maintained by, or for, the state or county shall not be
deemed city storm drain facilities. Streets and storm drain facilities operated
and maintained by a private entity shall not be deemed city storm drain
facilities. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
16-2-050: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system unless
explicitly exempted by the public works director. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd.
Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-060: UTILITY ADMINISTRATION:
The stormwater utility shall be administered by the public works director.
(Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-070: RESPONSIBILITIES OF ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works department shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the city staff may be delegated by the public
works director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or
in the employ of the city. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-080: MINIMUM STANDARDS; NO GUARANTEE OF NO CONTAMINATION:
The standards set forth in this chapter and promulgated pursuant thereto are
minimum standards. This chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by
any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or
unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-
10-2023)
16-2-090: SERVICE CHARGE IMPOSED:
All persons responsible for a parcel within the city storm drain system who
otherwise use or benefit from the stormwater utility shall be responsible for
paying the stormwater utility fees as set forth in the consolidated fee
schedule. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-100: SYSTEM OF RATES AND CHARGES:
A.   Service Fees Imposed: The city will impose stormwater fee rates and
charges on each parcel of real property within the city except streets and
storm drain facilities operated and maintained by or for the stormwater
utility, the county or the state of Utah. The charges shall fund the
administration, planning, design, construction, water quality programming,
operation, maintenance and repair of existing and future storm drain
facilities.
B.   Methods Of Determining Use, Need And Impact To Storm Drain System:
1.   Use, need, and impact to the storm drain system for nonresidential parcels
and residential parcels that are not single-family or duplex residential
parcels have been ascertained through aerial photography by evaluating land
surface and measuring the amount of impervious surface.
2.   Use, need and impact to the storm drain system from residential parcels
have been established by estimating residential impervious areas.
C.   Method Of Determining Service Fee Rates: Stormwater utility fees shall be
applied to each parcel of real property within the city including city owned
properties, except streets, government owned utilities, and state or county
storm drain facilities. Service fees shall be set forth in Draper City's
consolidated fee schedule and may be differentiated according to the following
classifications:
1.   Residential Parcels: Single-family residential and duplex parcels shall
constitute one ERU per month.
2.   Undeveloped Parcels: Undeveloped parcels shall have no charges applied.
3.   Other Parcels: Charges for all other parcels, except those described in
subsection C4 of this section, shall be computed by multiplying the total ERUs
for a parcel by the monthly rate. Total ERUs shall be calculated by dividing
total square feet of impervious surface by three thousand (3,000), rounded to
the nearest whole number.
4.   Private Road Parcels: Parcels consisting of a private road adjacent to
single-family or duplex residential parcels will not be subject to stormwater
utility fees. (Ord. 1213, 6-7-2016)
16-2-110: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
A.   Enterprise Fund Established: There is hereby created a stormwater utility
enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial transactions
related to the operation, maintenance and improvement of storm drain facilities
within the city. All stormwater utility fees collected shall be deposited in
the stormwater utility enterprise fund. Monies in the stormwater utility
enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to other city
funds. However, the stormwater utility enterprise fund may pay other city funds
for services and expenses directly attributable to the utility's activities.
The stormwater utility enterprise fund shall be operated according to state law
and city ordinances, rules, regulations and policies.
B.   Billing: The city shall bill, or cause to be billed, property owners for
stormwater utility services. Billing amounts shall be included as a separate
line item on utility bills. A billing shall also be sent to owners of parcels
within the city who do not pay other city utilities.
C.   Collection: Fees and charges shall be considered delinquent if not paid as
determined by the procedures established by the city and will be a debt to the
city, which shall be subject to recovery in an administrative, civil or
criminal action. The stormwater utility is hereby specifically authorized to
impose late fees, interest charges and costs of collection, including attorney
fees, on delinquent properties or accounts, as set forth in the city's
consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-120: APPEAL OF CHARGES:
A.   Public Works Director; Fee Adjustment: Any nonresidential customer who
disagrees with the stormwater user fee for their parcel may apply to the public
works director for a user fee adjustment. The adjustment request must state the
grounds for adjustment and must be filed in writing no later than thirty (30)
days after receipt of billing. The director shall review the request and basis
for user charges to determine whether an error was made in the calculation or
application of the fee. The director may approve an adjustment to the fee.
B.   City Manager: An appeal of the public works director's decision may be
brought before the city manager within thirty (30) days after the date of the
director's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final.
C.   Credit: If an appeal of charges is successful, credit shall be applied to
all charges from the time of the appealed billing and will be reflected on a
future billing after the appeal is granted. (Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord.
1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-130: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the obstruction
of the flow of stormwater runoff or nonstormwater runoff into any sump,
retention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other associated
structural controls that convey stormwater or nonstormwater runoff, unless the
obstruction is authorized and granted with the issuance of a permit signed by
the public works director.
B.   It is unlawful for any person to cause any obstruction that inhibits the
normal flow of stormwater or nonstormwater runoff in any curb and gutter unless
the obstruction is authorized and granted with the issuance of a permit signed
by the public works director.
C.   It is unlawful for a person to cover over any drain inlet for any reason
or purpose unless the obstruction is authorized and granted with the issuance
of a permit signed by the city engineer or designee.
D.   Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply during cleanup periods
established by the city, provided the materials are placed according to any
directions from the city and do not obstruct drain inlets.
E.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or other public
place unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom, except that sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose
of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a
roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway for the travel of the general
public.
F.   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track or drop mud, stones,
dirt, concrete, gravel or other similar material onto public streets. It shall
be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops or deposits mud,
stones, concrete, gravel or other similar material or permits the load or any
portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street or other public
place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. It shall be the
duty of the driver of any vehicle to clean the tires and vehicle undercarriage
of dirt or debris before the vehicle enters onto a paved surface public right
of way.
G.   No person shall discharge waste or excess concrete or concrete truck rinse
water except into preapproved discharge facilities or designated areas. (Ord.
1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
H.   It is unlawful for any person to dump or allow to be dumped into any sump,
detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other storm
drainage facility any type of debris, landscaping waste, chlorinated or
contaminated pool water, petroleum product, chemical, paint, pesticide,
herbicide, heavy metal, acid or acid based product, solid or liquid waste
product, hazardous waste product, or human or animal waste. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-
2016)
16-2-140: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city storm
drain system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards. The
responsible party shall immediately cease any discharge of pollutants or
improper disposal practices upon notification by the city.
B.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the
storm drain system is prohibited. The following are generally considered to be
legal discharges into the storm drain system:
1.   Water line flushing or flushing of other potable water sources;
2.   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
3.   Diverted stream flows;
4.   Rising groundwater;
5.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
6.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
7.   Groundwater collected by foundation or footing drains (not connected to
floor drains);
8.   Groundwater collected by crawl space sump pumps;
9.   Air conditioning condensation;
10.   Springs;
11.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
12.   Water produced by emergency firefighting activities; and
13.   Discharges specified in writing by the public works director as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
C.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge but requires a verbal notification
to the public works director prior to the time of the test.
D.   Prohibited discharges shall not include any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental
protection agency or Utah department of water quality, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver,
or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
E.   Prohibited discharges expressly include illicit connections made in the
past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. Connections of
sanitary sewer lines to the city's storm drainage system are prohibited.
F.   With the discovery of an illicit discharge or an illicit connection, the
public works director shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to this chapter at all reasonable times and as often as necessary to
determine compliance. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
16-2-150: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS, PERMITS, AND ENFORCEMENT ON
CONSTRUCTION SITES:
A.   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Requirements: An SWPPP is
required prior to the issuance of the permits described in subsections A1, A2,
and A3 of this section. An SWPPP shall describe how the applicant will prevent
erosion, sediment, chemicals, trash, construction debris, and other pollutants
that originate on a project site from leaving the site and/or entering any
waters of the state through the implementation of housekeeping and other BMPs.
An SWPPP shall provide sufficient information, including, but not limited to,
maps, BMPs installation and maintenance specifications, hydrologic calculations
to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the
potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and
future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the
measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. An
SWPPP may change as a project progresses and as unforeseen conditions arise.
The intent of this planning process is to determine the type of stormwater
management measures necessary for the proposed project and ensure adequate
planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development.
1.   An SWPPP is required on all projects prior to obtaining any state UPDES
permits. The SWPPP shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Utah
department of environmental quality. (Ord. 1240, 12-20-2016)
2.   An SWPPP shall be required prior to obtaining a land disturbance permit
from the city that is not required to obtain a UPDES permit and shall conform
to the requirements set forth in title 18, "Land Disturbance", of this code.
3.   An SWPPP shall be required prior to obtaining a building permit that is
not required to obtain a UPDES permit and shall conform to the requirements set
forth in title 10, "Building Regulations", of this code.
B.   Review And Approval: The public works director will review each SWPPP to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The public works
director shall, in writing:
1.   Approve the SWPPP;
2.   Approve the SWPPP subject to such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter; or
3.   Deny the SWPPP, indicating the reasons for denial and the procedure for
submitting a revised plan or submission.
C.   Responsible Parties: The applicant shall identify the party responsible
for the proper implementation of the SWPPP prior to issuance of any permits for
land disturbance or building activities. Where required by the city, a legally
binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance
of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any
permits for land disturbance activities. An SWPPP may be required prior to
issuance of permits for land disturbance. An SWPPP shall provide sufficient
information, including maps and hydrologic calculations to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all
proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water
resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this planning
process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary
for the proposed project and ensure adequate planning for management of
stormwater runoff from future development. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
D.   Required Permits: The following permits shall be required, where
applicable:
1.   State Stormwater Permit For Construction Activities: Any person or
business responsible for disturbing one acre or more of ground, or who will
disturb less than one acre but whose project is part of a larger common plan of
development, shall obtain a state stormwater permit for construction activities
from the Utah division of water quality. The appropriate fee must be paid to
the state. An SWPPP must be prepared and kept on the construction site for this
application. The SWPPP shall include all maintenance easements required to
access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices and to perform routine
maintenance as necessary. The SWPPP shall also include provisions allowing city
personnel for access and inspections on a reasonable basis.
2.   Conditions When State Stormwater Permit For Construction Activities Is Not
Required: A state stormwater permit for construction activities is not required
for: (Ord. 1240, 12-20-2016)
a.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of
life, property, or natural resources; or
b.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main
or accessory use; or
c.   Development on construction sites that are less than one acre and part of
a common plan of development created or sold before October 1992.
3.   Stream Alteration Permit: A stream alteration permit is filed with the
state department of natural resources, division of water rights. This permit
overlaps the EPA 404 wetlands permit because it is applicable to the area equal
to the stream plus two (2) times the bankfull width up to thirty feet (30').
Any modifications to the stream or banks within this area must comply with the
stream alteration permit. A copy of the permit must be submitted to the city
prior to the preconstruction meeting for the proposed development. All
appropriate fees must be paid.
4.   EPA 404 Wetlands Permit: This permit is filed with the U.S. army corps of
engineers. It is applicable for all wetlands within a development. This applies
to all wetlands depending upon the presence of water, soil type, and vegetation
as determined in a wetlands delineation report. All "waters of the U.S." are
affected to the normal high water mark. A letter of nonregulated wetlands may
be applicable. Any mitigation that may be required must be done prior to
recording a final plat. A copy of the permit shall be submitted to the city
prior to the preconstruction meeting for the proposed development. All
appropriate fees must be paid.
E.   Municipal Inspections: Municipal inspections of active construction sites
for SWPPP compliance shall be conducted by the public works director. (Ord.
1233, 11-15-2016)
F.   Stormwater Enforcement Of Construction Activity: All stormwater treatment
practices, BMPs, and owner/operator inspections shall comply with the approved
SWPPP to ensure the system functions as designed. If a responsible party fails
or refuses to meet the requirements of the SWPPP, the city engineer or building
official shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater
management facility in writing. Upon receipt of notice, the responsible person
shall have up to thirty (30) days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility. If no action has been taken by the responsible party within the
thirty (30) days, the city engineer or building official may cause the work to
be done to correct the violation of the SWPPP by performing all necessary work
to place the facility in proper working condition; and the cost of the work
shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of
the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes
by the county assessor. (Ord. 1240, 12-20-2016)
16-2-160: NOTIFICATION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGE:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which
are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging
into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., the person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials, the
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, the person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person
or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city public utilities department, 1020 East Pioneer
Road, Draper, UT 84020, within three (3) business days of the phone notice.
(Ord. 1043A, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 1575, 1-10-2023)
16-2-170: STORMWATER SYSTEM DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Stormwater Design, BMPs, And LID:
1.   Adoption: The city adopts as its stormwater design and best management
practices (BMP) manuals the following publications, which are incorporated by
reference in this chapter as is fully set out herein:
a.   "City Of Draper Drainage Design Criteria";
b.   "Draper City Storm Drain Master Plan";
c.   "Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual Volume 3-Best Management Practices
2011".
   These documents include a list of acceptable LID and BMPs that include
specific design performance criteria and operation and maintenance requirements
for each stormwater practice. The documents may be updated and expanded from
time to time, at the discretion of the city council, upon the recommendation of
the city engineer, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitory and
local maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed,
constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria
will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards.
2.   Design: LID/BMPs are required to be incorporated into site drainage and
water quality for sites that require a UPDES Utah construction general permit.
Selection and design shall be required to fit into the constraints described by
the "City Of Draper Drainage Design Criteria" and the following titles of this
code:
a.   Title 9, "Land Use And Development Regulations";
b.   Title 10, "Building Regulations";
c.   Title 12, "Flood Damage Regulations";
d.   Title 17, "Land Development";
e.   Title 18, "Land Disturbance".
3.   LID/BMPs: LID and BMPs including, but not limited to, the following, shall
be considered for new development within the city:
a.   Oil/water separators, snouts, or equivalent structural BMPs to treat
runoff of sediment and other contaminants that may discharge into the Draper
City storm sewer system.
b.   Rainwater harvesting practices as allowed by local, state, and federal
code.
c.   Depressed swales or bioswales incorporated into landscaped areas designed
for filtration, infiltration and/or evapotranspiration.
d.   Detention ponds that incorporate sedimentation and pollution reduction,
percolation for groundwater recharge, utilized native vegetation and features,
or provide multiuse features in addition to runoff detention.
e.   Green roofs, preservation of existing native vegetation, or reduction of
impervious areas to reduce runoff.
f.   Substitution of pervious hardscape for impervious hardscape for
infiltration.
B.   Stormwater Maintenance And Preservation Plan Requirements: Private
properties with private storm drain systems are responsible to develop a
stormwater maintenance and preservation plan. The plan shall detail the
property owner's inspection and maintenance requirements for on site drainage
infrastructure including the prevention and removal of potential pollutants.
(Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
C.   Maintenance Agreement: New development and redevelopment construction
sites completed after January 1, 2003, disturbing greater than or equal to one
acre including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale, and to be served by a private on site stormwater
management facility shall execute a maintenance agreement. The maintenance
agreement shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current property
owner and all subsequent property owners. The maintenance agreement shall:
(Ord. 1240, 12-20-2016)
1.   Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater
facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located.
2.   Assign responsibility for periodic annual inspection and documentation to
the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs.
3.   Grant permission to the city to enter the property at reasonable times and
to inspect the drainage facilities, maintenance and preservation plan, and
owner annual inspection records to ensure maintenance and preservation plan is
being executed.
4.   Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a
schedule to be determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
5.   Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the
prescribed schedule, the city engineer shall perform the maintenance and repair
at the city's expense, and bill the same to the property owner. (Ord. 1240, 12-
20-2016)
16-2-180: POSTCONSTRUCTION:
A.   Inspection Of Privately Owned Stormwater Management Facilities: Annual
inspections of facilities shall be performed by the owner of a private
stormwater management facility. The owner shall submit an annual inspection
report to the city and it shall be retained by the owner for at least five (5)
years. These inspection reports shall be made available to the public works
director during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon
request.
B.   Records Of Installation And Maintenance: Property owners responsible for
the implementation of the maintenance and preservation plan shall make records
of the installation and any stormwater facility and/or maintenance and repairs
to the facility and shall retain the records for at least five (5) years. These
records shall be made available to the public works director during inspection
of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
C.   Failure To Meet Or Maintain Design Or Maintenance Standards: If a property
owner fails or refuses to meet the inspection, design or maintenance standards
required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the public works
director, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the
facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater
management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the
public works director shall notify in writing the party responsible for
maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice,
the responsible person shall have fifteen (15) days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective
action is not undertaken within that time, the public works director may take
necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the public works
director under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. (Ord.
1233, 11-15-2016)
16-2-190: EXISTING LOCATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS:
A.   Requirements For All Existing Locations And Developments: The following
requirements shall apply to all locations and development at which land
disturbance activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this chapter:
1.   Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and
guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the city
engineer.
2.   Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/
or retaining walls constructed.
3.   Drainageways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with
riprap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion.
4.   Trash, junk, rubbish, etc., shall be cleared from drainageways.
5.   Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent
pollution of local waters. Such control measures shall include those methods
and measures identified in section
16-2-180 of this chapter.
B.   Requirements For Existing Problem Locations: The city engineer shall in
writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments of specific
drainage, erosion or sediment problems affecting such locations and
developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The
notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-
2016)
C.   Inspection Of Existing Facilities: The city engineer may, to the extent
authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify
that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well
as after the adoption of this chapter, are functioning within design limits.
These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis,
including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the municipality's
UPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting
under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control
facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and
other BMPs. (Ord. 1240, 12-20-2016)
D.   Corrections Of Problems Subject To Appeal: Corrective measures imposed by
the city engineer under this section are subject to appeal under section
16-2-210 of this chapter. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
16-2-200: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Enforcement Provisions: This chapter may be enforced through the
provisions of this code or by filing civil or criminal actions in the district
court as provided by law. The city has sole discretion to decide whether to
file a civil or criminal case for a violation. The city may file both, or one
or the other. The possibility of an administrative remedy pursuant to this
chapter shall in no way interfere with the city's right to prosecute violations
of this chapter as criminal offenses. The city may use any of the remedies
available under the law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If the city
chooses to file both civil and criminal charges for the same violation, no
civil penalties may be assessed, but all other remedies shall be available.
(Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
B.   Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event any person or any
holder of a state stormwater permit for construction activities, Draper City
land disturbance permit, Draper City building permit, or other city issued
permit violates the terms of the permit, any provision of this chapter, or
implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect
the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or development site or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood, the public works director may issue a stop work order such
that no further work on the development shall be performed or approved, until
otherwise authorized by the public works director.
C.   Violation And Penalties: In addition to subsections A and B of this
section, the city may avail itself of any of the following nonexclusive
remedies to enforce the provisions of this chapter: (Ord. 1240, 12-20-2016)
1.   Notice And Order: Whenever the public works director finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
director may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
a.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
d.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
e.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
f.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs; and
g.   The immediate removal of mud, dirt, or debris left by any vehicle on a
street that drains into the storm drain system.
2.   Nuisance Abatement: The violation of subsection C1g of this section may
also be declared and treated as a nuisance and enforced by city inspectors or
code enforcement officers. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
3.   Criminal Penalties: Any person knowingly, recklessly, or intentionally
violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. City
employees in the performance of their assigned duties and responsibilities
shall be exempted from any criminal penalty violation.
4.   Responsibility: For the purpose of this chapter, the following persons or
entities shall be considered responsible for leaving mud, dirt, or debris on a
street within the city:
a.   The driver of the vehicle leaving the mud, dirt, or debris; and
b.   The general contractor or owner in charge of the job site from which the
mud, dirt, or debris comes.
5.   Other Penalties And Remedies:
a.   Violators of this chapter may also be subject to prosecution, fines and
penalties from the state of Utah and the United States EPA.
b.   In addition to other remedies for a violation of this chapter, the city
shall have the right to install and maintain appropriate erosion and sediment
control measures on any site which is required to have such measures in the
event that construction activity is commenced or continued without such
measures having been installed as required by this chapter. The city shall have
the right to have such measures installed or maintained by city personnel or to
hire a private contractor to perform such work and the contractor and the
property owner shall be liable for any and all expenses related to performing
such work plus a twenty five percent (25%) penalty charge. The city may assess
the charges against the security posted by the contractor or property owner.
6.   Failure To Enter Into Or Execute Maintenance Agreement:
a.   Costs Incurred For Inspection And Maintenance Costs: If a property owner
fails or refuses to enter into a maintenance agreement with the city, the
public works director may inspect and correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the
facility in proper working condition or to hire a private contractor to perform
such work. The cost of any action by the public works director under this
section shall be charged to the responsible party. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
b.   Permit Denial For New Development: Owners of a proposed development that
are to be served by a private storm drain system are required to enter into a
maintenance agreement with the city. Property owners may not obtain a city land
disturbance permit or building permit until the agreement is executed. (Ord.
1240, 12-20-2016)
16-2-210: APPEALS:
Any person or entity that believes that any provision of this chapter was
interpreted or applied erroneously may appeal to the public works director. The
appeal shall be in writing, state any facts supporting the appeal, and be made
within ten (10) working days of the decision or action being appealed. The
director may elect to hold a hearing on the appeal. The director shall decide
the appeal within ten (10) working days of when the appeal is filed. If the
person or entity is not satisfied with the director's decision, a further
appeal may be made to the city manager. The appeal to the city manager shall
follow the same procedure as the appeal to the director. The city manager's
decision shall be final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 1233, 11-15-2016)
TITLE 17
LAND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17-1-010: Short Title
17-1-020: Purpose
17-1-030: Interpretation
17-1-040: Definitions
17-1-050: General Considerations
17-1-060: General Responsibilities
17-1-065: Accurate Information
17-1-070: Compliance Required
17-1-075: Repealed (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-080: Required Certificates, Permits And Reviews
17-1-085: Public Notification
17-1-090: Prohibited Acts
17-1-100: Penalties
17-1-110: Repealed (Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
17-1-120: Appeals
17-1-130: Staff Authority
17-1-140: Text Amendments
17-1-150: Inactive Applications
17-1-160: Exactions
17-1-010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the DRAPER CITY SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE or as the
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE. This title shall also be known as title 17 of this code.
It may be cited and pleaded under any of the above stated designations. (Ord.
480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-1-020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title, and any rules, regulations, standards and
specifications hereafter adopted pursuant hereto or in conjunction herewith
are:
A.   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B.   To regulate future growth and development activity within the city in a
manner which promotes the physical integration of diverse housing forms, the
preservation of Draper City community values and the social integration of
residents from diverse backgrounds in accordance with the general plan; and to
promote the efficient and orderly growth of the city. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
C.   To provide procedures and standards for the physical development of
subdivisions of land and construction of buildings and improvements thereon
within the city, including, but not limited to, the construction and
installation of roads, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parks, trails, and
open spaces, drainage systems, water and sewer systems, design standards for
public facilities and utilities, access to public rights of way, dedication of
land and streets, granting easements or rights of way and to establish fees and
other charges for the authorizing of a subdivision and for the development of
land and improvements thereon.
D.   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population.
E.   To provide for harmonious and coordinated development of the city, and to
assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation. (Ord. 480,
12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-1-030: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
considered as minimum requirements for the purposes set forth. Where the
provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than any statute, other
regulation, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of this title shall prevail.
Where the provisions of any statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant
impose greater restrictions than the provisions of this title, the provisions
of such statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant shall prevail. (Ord.
480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-1-040: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the present tense
include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term "shall" is
mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. The following terms as used in this
title shall have the respective meanings hereinafter set forth:
ABUT OR ABUTTING: See definition of abut or abutting in
9-3-040.
ACCESS POINT: A two-way roadway access into a subdivision or development that
provides unrestricted access to residents, the public, and emergency services.
This definition does not prohibit a gated community entrance that is designed
to service residents, guests, and the general public.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty six feet (26') wide for the use
of pedestrians and vehicles providing a secondary means of access to the rear
of abutting properties.
APPLICANT: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or such owner's duly
authorized agent. Any agent must have written authorization from the owner.
BLOCK: Land surrounded by streets and other rights of way other than an alley,
or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
BOND AGREEMENT: An agreement to install improvements secured by a standby
irrevocable letter of credit, or an escrow agreement with funds on deposit in a
federally insured bank in an amount corresponding to the city engineer's
estimate. All bonds shall be on forms approved by the city council wherever a
bond is required pursuant to this title.
BUILDING, COMMERCIAL: Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any commercial use or occupancy.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: Building shall mean any one- and two- family dwelling or
portion thereof, including townhouses, that is used, or designed or intended to
be used for human habitation, for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
or any combination thereof, and shall include accessory structures thereto.
CAPITAL PROJECT: An organized undertaking which provides, or is intended to
provide, the city with a capital asset. "Capital asset" is defined according to
generally accepted accounting principles.
CITY: Draper City, Utah, a municipal corporation.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Draper City.
COLLECTOR STREET: See definition of Street, Major Collector or Street, Minor
Collector.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: That department of the city authorized by the
city to oversee the zoning administrator and the building official, and to
carry out the general land use and development goals and policies of Draper
City.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The individual appointed by the city council to
oversee the administration and functions of the community development
department, and/or his/her designee.
CONCEPT PLAN: A sketch or concept drawingsubmitted prior to the preliminary
plat application to enable the potential subdivider to receive guidance from
the Development Review Committee in a pre-application meeting as to the
requirements for subdivisions within the city.
CONDOMINIUM: Property conforming to the definition set forth in Utah Code
Annotated section 57-8-1 et seq., as amended. A condominium is also a
"subdivision" subject to these regulations and the condominium ownership act of
the state of Utah.
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE: The schedule or any appendix of fees adopted
periodically by resolution of the city council setting forth various fees
charged by the city.
CROSS ACCESS: See definition of cross access in
9-3-040.
CUL-DE-SAC: See definition of Street, Cul-De-Sac.
DEVELOPER: As the case may be, either: a) an applicant for subdivision
approval; b) an applicant for a building permit or another permit issued; or c)
the owner of any right, title, or interest in real property for which
subdivision approval or site plan approval is sought.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY:
   A.   Any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use that
creates additional demand and need for public facilities;
   B.   Any change in use of a building or structure that creates additional
demand and need for public facilities; or
   C.   Any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need
for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE: See Development Review Committee in Section
9-4-080 of this Code.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for or occupied as
separate living quarters which provide sleeping and sanitary facilities and
which includes one kitchen, but may include not more than two (2) kitchens,
where all rooms are for exclusive use by a single family maintaining a
household in the dwelling unit and in accordance with title 9, chapter 30 of
this Code (Zoning Ordinance).
EASEMENT: A present or future right of use under, on, or above the surface of
property by a person or agency other than the legal owner of the property.
FAMILY: See definition of family in Section
9-3-040 of this code.
FLOOD, 100-YEAR: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
FLOOD, 10-YEAR: A flood having a ten percent (10%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
FLOODPLAIN: Land that:
   A.   Is within the 100-year special flood hazard area designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency; or
   B.   Has not been studied or designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, but presents a likelihood of experiencing chronic flooding or a
catastrophic flood event from any flood source.
GENERAL PLAN: The comprehensive, long range general plan for proposed future
development of land in the City, as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-
9a-401 et seq., as amended.
HALF STREETS: See definition of street, half.
LOT: A tract of land, regardless of any label, that is created by and shown on
a final subdivision plat that has been recorded in the office of the county
recorder.
LOT, CORNER: A lot or parcel abutting two (2) intersecting or intercepting
streets where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not
exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). Corner lots shall have two (2)
front yards and two (2) rear yards.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: A lot or parcel abutting two (2)
parallel or approximately parallel streets.
LOT, FLAG OR FLAG LOT: A lot or parcel located to the rear of another lot or
parcel, the main body of which does not front on a street and is accessed by a
narrow corridor.
MASTER TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION PLAN: That portion of the general plan which
defines the future alignments of streets and their rights-of-way, including
maps or reports or both, which have been approved by the Planning Commission
and City Council as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-401 et seq.,
as amended.
MIXED USE: See definition of mixed use in
9-3-040.
NATURAL DRAINAGE COURSE: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs, or washes which are natural drainage channels.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a
representative capacity (including, without limitation, an authorized agent,
executor or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property.
PARK: A playground or other area or open space providing opportunities for
active or passive recreational or leisure activities.
PARK STRIP: See definition of park strip found in section
9-3-040 of this code.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity, including a trustee, receiver,
assignee or similar representative of any of the foregoing.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of Draper City, Utah. The planning
commission acts as the administrative land use authority for preliminary
subdivision plats.
PLAT, FINAL: The final drawing of a subdivision and dedication prepared for
filing with the county recorder which complies with applicable requirements set
forth in this title and other titles of this code and provisions adopted
pursuant thereto. Such plat shall also be in conformity with Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-9a-603, 17-23-17, or 57-8-13 et seq., as amended.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The initial formal plat of a proposed land division or
subdivision showing information and features required by the provisions of this
title.
PROTECTION STRIP: A strip of land running parallel and adjacent to a public
street and the abutting private property, created for the purpose of
controlling the access of property owners abutting the street until such time
as the adjacent owners share in the cost of infrastructure improvements.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk, water and sewer lines,
storm sewers, flood control facilities and other similar facilities which are
required to be dedicated to the city in connection with subdivision,
conditional use, or site plan approval.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any road, street, alley, lane, court, place, viaduct,
tunnel, culvert or bridge laid out or erected as such by the public, or
dedicated or abandoned to the public, or made such in any action by the
subdivision of real property, and includes the entire area within the right of
way.
SECONDARY ACCESS ENTRANCE: See definition of Access Point.
SECONDARY WATER SYSTEM: Any system which is designed and intended to provide,
transport and store water used for watering of crops, lawns, shrubberies,
flowers and other nonculinary uses.
SIDEWALK: A passageway or pathways for pedestrians, excluding motor vehicles.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended
to serve as a major trafficway and is designated in the master transportation
plan as a controlled access highway, major street parkway, or other equivalent
term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street
plan.
STREET, CUL-DE- SAC: A minor terminal street provided with a turnaround.
STREET, DEAD END: An improved street or subsystem of streets with only one
point of connection to the overall street system.
STREET, FREEWAY: A street with a fully controlled access designed to link major
destination points. A freeway is designed for high speed traffic with a minimum
of four (4) travel lanes, and is owned by the state of Utah.
STREET, HALF: The portion of a street within a subdivision comprising at least
one-half (1/2) of the minimum required right-of- way on which improvements are
constructed and in accord with one-half (1/2) of an approved typical street
section.
STREET, LOCAL: A minor street which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
STREET, MAJOR COLLECTOR: A street, existing or proposed, which is the main
means of access to the major street system.
STREET, MINOR COLLECTOR: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary
to a collector street and of limited continuity which serves or is intended to
serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
STREET, PRIVATE: A right-of-way which has been reserved by dedication unto the
subdivider, lot owners, or homeowners' association to be used as a private
access to serve property and complying with the adopted street cross section
standards of the City. All private streets shall be approved by the City and
maintained by the subdivider or other private entity.
STREET, PUBLIC: A right-of-way which has been dedicated to the City and
accepted by the City Council, or which the City has acquired by prescriptive
right, deed or by dedication, or a thoroughfare which has been made public by
use and which affords access to abutting property, including highways, roads,
lanes, avenues and boulevards.
STREET, STUB: A street ending extended up to an abutting property that is
intended to be extended through the abutting property and/or provide cross
access in the future.
STREET TREE: See definition of street tree found in section
9-3-040  of this code.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes to create a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: The same as defined in Section
9-3-040  of this Code.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A subdivision of ten (10) or fewer lots which meets the
requirements of this title for minor subdivisions.
TRAIL: A path, hard or soft surfaced, intended for public use for recreation
and/or alternative transportation methods, and which may provide access to
City, State, or Federal open lands or recreation areas.
UTILITIES: Includes culinary water lines, pressure and gravity irrigation
lines, sanitary sewer, and flood control facilities, electric power, natural
gas, cable television and telephone transmission lines, underground conduits
and junction boxes.
WATER AND SEWER IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT: Any water or sewer improvement districts
existing or hereinafter organized which have jurisdiction over the land
proposed for a subdivision.
WATER CONVEYANCE FACILITY: A ditch, canal, flume, pipeline, or other
watercourse used to convey water used for irrigation or storm water drainage
and any related easement for the ditch, canal, flume, pipeline, or other
watercourse. This definition does not include a ditch, canal, flume, pipeline,
or other watercourse used to convey water used for culinary or industrial
water, or any federal water project facility.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed by the City Manager to perform the
duties and responsibilities of Zoning Administrator, as defined by the City
Zoning Ordinance (Title 9).
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Draper City Planning and Zoning Ordinance as presently
adopted and as amended hereafter by the City Council, and also referred to as
title 9 of this Code.
(Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 661, 1-3-2006; Ord. 1132, 2-17-
2015; Ord. 1206, 5-17-2016; Ord. 1395, 7-2-2019, eff. retroactive to 5-9-2019;
Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord. 1535,
5-3-2022; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-050: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:
A.   General Plan: The general plan shall guide the use and future development
of all land within the corporate boundaries of the City. The size and design of
lots, the nature of utilities, the design and improvement of streets, the type
and intensity of land use, and the provisions for any facilities in any
subdivision shall conform to the land uses shown and the standards established
in the general plan, the zoning ordinance, and other applicable ordinances.
B.   Preservation; Design: Trees, native land cover, natural watercourses, and
topography shall be preserved where possible. Subdivisions shall be so designed
as to prevent excessive grading and scarring of the landscape. The design of
new subdivisions shall consider, and relate to, existing street widths,
alignments and names.
C.   Community Facilities: Community facilities, such as parks, recreation
areas, trails, and transportation facilities shall be provided in the
subdivision in accordance with general plan standards, this title, and other
applicable ordinances. This title establishes procedures for the referral of
information on proposed subdivisions to interested boards, bureaus, and other
governmental agencies and utility companies, both private and public, so that
the extension of community facilities and utilities may be accomplished in an
orderly manner, coordinated with the development of this subdivision. In order
to facilitate the acquisition of land areas required to implement this policy,
the subdivider may be required to dedicate, grant easements over or otherwise
reserve land for schools, parks, playgrounds, public ways, utility easements,
and other public purposes. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-1-060: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES:
A.   The subdivider shall prepare subdivision plans and plats consistent with
the City development standards and shall pay for the design, City review,
construction and City inspection of all public improvements and private storm
drain and on site culinary water within City's service area. The City shall
process said plans and plats in accordance with the regulations set forth
herein. The subdivider shall not alter the terrain or remove any vegetation
from the proposed subdivision site or engage in any site development until
subdivider has obtained the necessary approvals as described in title 18, "Land
Disturbance", of this Code, and this title. The subdivider is responsible to
obtain and be familiar with all applicable subdivision ordinances, rules and
standards of the City. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
B.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the plans and plats for design; for
conformity to the general plan and to the zoning ordinance; for the
environmental quality of the subdivision design; and shall process the
subdivision plats and reports as provided for in this title.
C.   Plats and/or plans of proposed subdivisions may be referred by the Zoning
Administrator to any City departments and special districts, governmental
boards, bureaus, utility companies, and other agencies which will provide
public and private facilities and services to the subdivision for their
information and comment. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for
coordinating any comments received from public and private entities and shall
decide which agencies to refer proposed subdivision plats and plans to. (Ord.
480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
D.   The City Engineer shall review for compliance the engineering plans and
specifications for the City required improvements for the subdivision and
whether the proposed City required improvements are consistent with this title,
City design and construction standards, and other applicable ordinances and
shall be responsible for inspecting the City required public improvements,
private storm drain and on site culinary water improvements within the City's
service area, security proceeds collection and administration, and the
collection of certain fees. Street layout and overall circulation shall be
coordinated with the City Engineer by the Zoning Administrator.
E.   The Public Works Director shall review and make comments on the design
engineering plans and specifications for the City required improvements related
to long term maintenance and preservation provisions, snowplowing, snowplow
storage areas, waste management collection and vehicle turnaround, City
culinary water infrastructure and service lateral maintenance, streetlight
service and all other related aspects pertaining to public works utility and
infrastructure maintenance to the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator.
The Public Works Director may assist the City Engineer in performing
inspections. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
F.   Upon completion of the staff review process, the Planning Commission shall
hold a public meeting to consider the proposed preliminary subdivision plat
application. The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions or,
if the project does not meet requirements specified in section 17-3-040, deny
the preliminary subdivision plat application. If a final subdivision plat
application complies with the City code and the preliminary subdivision plat
approval, the Zoning Administrator shall approve the final subdivision plat
application. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018)
G.   The City Attorney shall verify that the security proceeds provided by the
subdivider is acceptable, that the subdivider dedicating land for use of the
public is the owner of record, that the land is free and clear of unacceptable
encumbrances according to the title report submitted by the subdivider, and may
review matters of title such as easements and restrictive covenants prior to
signing the mylar of the final plat. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-
16-2024)
17-1-065: ACCURATE INFORMATION:
A.   All documents, plans, reports, studies and information provided to the
City by the applicant in accordance with the requirements of this title shall
be accurate and complete. Any action taken or approval given by the City based
upon incomplete or inaccurate documents, plans, reports, studies or information
supplied to the City by the applicant may be voidable prior to recording a
plat.
B.   All engineering drawings, plats, reports, and other similar documents
shall be stamped by a registered engineer, licensed to practice in the State of
Utah.
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
17-1-070: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide any tract or parcel of
land which is located wholly or in part in the City except in compliance with
this title. No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded until it has been
submitted and approved as set forth herein. A plat shall not be approved if the
Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator determines such plat to be in
conflict with any provision or portion of the general plan, master traffic and
transportation plan, zoning ordinance, this title, or any other State law or
City ordinance. (Ord. 1347, 9-18-2018)
B.   Land or lots within a proposed subdivision shall not be transferred or
sold until a final plat of a subdivision has been recorded in accordance with
this title and any applicable provisions of State law. Recordation of the plat
shall not occur until the improvements required in connection with the
subdivision have been completed and conditionally accepted; however, upon the
developer's request, the City may record the plat prior to the installation of
all improvements if the developer has first guaranteed the installation of
improvements as provided herein. Construction of any improvements related to
the subdivision, including any land disturbance, shall not be commenced until a
land disturbance permit has been issued for the project. Building permits shall
not be issued until all infrastructure improvements have been completed, been
conditionally accepted by the City Engineer, the warranty period has begun,
and/or without written approval of all public agencies involved. No building
depending on public or private water (potable), and sewer, energy facilities,
or fire protection shall be permitted to be occupied until such facilities are
fully provided and operational as determined by the City's building official
and other departments of the City.
C.   All lots, plots or tracts of land located within a subdivision shall be
subject to this title whether the tract is owned by the subdivider or a
subsequent purchaser, transferee, devisee, or contract purchaser of the land or
any other person.
D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive a building permit to
construct a building or structure on a parcel or tract of land within a
residential subdivision until:
1.   All underground utilities located under the street surface are installed
and accepted by the City and appropriate agencies.
2.   Continuous access to the lot through the subdivision is provided by a
street, acceptable to the City, with an all weather asphalt or concrete
surface.
3.   A trash receptacle with a secured lid or secured cover has been located
onto the site of a size and nature suitable for containing all construction
related debris until the debris is removed from the site.
4.   A sanitary toilet has been located onto the site for the use of
construction workers. In situations where a general contractor has more than
one residential dwelling unit simultaneously under construction in a
subdivision plat, one toilet shall be sufficient for every ten (10) dwellings
the contractor has under construction.
5.   Fire hydrants are fully operational in the area of the subdivision where
permits are requested.
6.   Streetlights and street signs are installed.
E.   The issuance of a building permit for one model home per twenty (20) lots
within a recorded subdivision, not to exceed four (4) total model homes in any
one recorded subdivision plat, may be allowed prior to the completion of all
required subdivision improvements, subject to the following conditions:
1.   Curb and gutter are installed unless the obligation to construct frontage
improvements has been paid in lieu by agreement with the city; and (Ord. 1132,
2-17-2015)
2.   All underground utilities located under the street surface are installed
and accepted by the city and appropriate agencies; and
3.   Continuous access to the lot through the subdivision is provided by a
street, acceptable to the city, with an all weather rolled and compacted road
base surface which is capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus
weighing at least seventy five thousand (75,000) pounds, and also meets all
applicable AASHTO standards for construction; and
4.   Fire hydrants are fully operational in the area of the subdivision where
permits are requested; and
5.   Said model home is limited to nonresidential occupancy. This limitation
shall be formalized in an agreement acceptable to the city which shall be
executed prior to the issuance of any building permit for the structure. Said
agreement shall include the requirement that conversion to residential
occupancy shall be subject to an additional final building inspection and the
installation of all required subdivision requirements in the entire
subdivision; and
6.   Model homes shall only be constructed within seven hundred fifty feet
(750') of the subdivision's entrance where it meets a fully improved public
street. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
F.   Until the subdivision is completed and conditionally accepted by the city
engineer and all appropriate agencies, the subdivider shall be responsible for
the following in the area where building permits have been issued: (Ord. 1132,
2-17-2015)
1.   Maintaining roads in a manner that allows continuous access for emergency
vehicles; and
2.   Maintaining roadways and drainage facilities free and clear of dirt and
debris which might obstruct water flow or quality of stormwater flows; and
3.   Maintaining continuous flow capacities to all hydrants in the subdivision.
(Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
G.   All public improvements must be done in accordance with the following:
1.   The city's subdivision standards and specifications;
2.   The requirements of the city engineer;
3.   The improvement agreement between the subdivider and the city; and
4.   All other applicable city ordinances and regulations.
H.   There shall be no occupancy of any building in any commercial subdivision
until an occupancy permit has been issued. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful
for any subdivider to sell any portion of an approved and recorded commercial
subdivision until the prospective buyer or builder has been advised that
occupancy permits will not be issued until all required improvements are
completed. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until the following
conditions are met at the commercial lot where an occupancy permit is requested
and all work is acceptable to the city and appropriate agencies:
1.   All necessary utilities are installed; e.g., culinary water lines,
sanitary sewer, flood control facilities, electric power, and natural gas
lines.
2.   Finished road surfaces are installed.
3.   All building code requirements are met as confirmed by the building
official or his appointee.
4.   All city conditions of approval have been met.
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-075: REPEALED: (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-080: REQUIRED CERTIFICATES, PERMITS AND REVIEWS:
A.   Application: Applications for each of the separate stages of subdivision
approval (preliminary plat and final plat) shall be made to the city's
community development department. Applications shall be made on the respective
forms provided and shall be accompanied by the proper fee and by the documents
and information required by this chapter and other applicable titles of this
code.
B.   Review: Action on that application for a stage of a subdivision approval
shall be completed in a timely manner after the date of submittal of all
required information and items to the community development department. The
review cycle restrictions and requirements of this section do not apply to the
review of subdivision applications for property within identified geological
hazard areas.
1.   Preliminary Plat: No later than 15 business days after the day on which an
applicant submits a complete preliminary subdivision plat application, the City
shall complete the initial review of the application, including subdivision
improvement plans.
2.   Final Plat: No later than 20 business days after the day on which an
applicant submits a complete final subdivision plat application, the City shall
complete the initial review of the application.
3.   In reviewing the application submittal, the City may require additional
information to ensure compliance with City ordinances and approved standards
and specifications for construction of public improvements and modifications to
plans that do not meet current ordinances, applicable standards or
specifications, or do not contain complete information.
a.   The City's request for additional information or modifications to plans
shall be specific and include citations to ordinances, standards, or
specifications that require the modifications to plans, and shall be logged in
an index of requested modifications or additions.
4.   Resubmittal: The applicant's resubmittal shall include a written
explanation in response to the City's review comments, identifying and
explaining the applicant's revisions and reasons for declining to make
revisions, if any.
a.   The applicant's written explanation shall be comprehensive and specific,
including citations to applicable standards and ordinances for the design and
an index of requested revisions or additions for each required correction.
b.   If an applicant fails to address a review comment in the response, the
review cycle is not complete and the subsequent review cycle may not begin
until all comments are addressed.
5.   Subject to the circumstances listed in 5a through 5b below, the City may
not require more than four review cycles for each application.
a.   Unless a change or correction is necessitated by the applicant's
adjustment to a plan set or an update to a phasing plan that adjusts the
infrastructure needed for the specific development, a change or correction not
addressed or referenced in the City's review is waived.
b.   A modification or correction necessary to protect public health and safety
or to enforce state or federal law may not be waived.
6.   If an applicant makes a material change to a plan set, the City has the
discretion to restart the review process at the first review of the final plat
application, but only with respect to the portion of the plan set that the
material change substantively affects.
7.   If the City fails to respond within 20 business days on the fourth and
final review, the property owner may request an appeal as provided in Section
17-1-120(D). (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-085: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION:
A.   Required Notice: Any public hearing required herein shall be scheduled and
held by the planning commission. Required notice of such hearing shall be given
as follows not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing:
1.   The city shall mail notice of a public hearing to consider a proposed
subdivision plat amendment or a minor subdivision with deviation requests to
the record owner of each parcel within three hundred feet (300') of the subject
property. The notice shall contain at a minimum the information included in a
notice summary statement as defined by Utah Code Annotated, 63G-30- 101(3), as
amended.
2.   If the plat amendment proposes to vacate some or all of a public street or
municipal utility easement, the city shall:
a.   Mail a notice of the public hearing to the record owner of each parcel
that is accessed by the public street or municipal utility easement.
b.   Mail a notice of the public hearing to each affected entity as defined in
Section 9-3-040 of this Code; and
c.   Post a notice of the public hearing as follows:
(1)   If the affected area is a public street, the notice shall be posted on or
adjacent to the public street; or
(2)   If the affected area is an easement, the notice shall be posted on or
adjacent to the easement, or in a public location that is reasonably likely to
be seen by persons who are likely to be impacted by the easement.
3.   Mailed to each affected entity as defined in section 9-3-040 of this Code
that provides a service to an owner of record of the portion of the plat that
is being vacated or amended.
4.   Published on the city’s website and on the Utah Public Notice Website.
B.   The applicant shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of the actual
costs incurred by the city in mailing and posting the notice.
C.   Notice for an amendment to public improvements in a subdivision or
development: Prior to implementing an amendment to adopted specifications for
public improvements that apply to subdivisions or development, a municipality
shall give thirty (30) days mailed notice and an opportunity to comment to
anyone who has required the notice in writing.
D.   Notice for Continued Items: When an application requiring notice under
this section is continued to a future meeting date, including when a specific
date is listed in the continuation, a new notice shall be provided as outlined
in this section. No additional notice shall be required when an item is
continued as an action item and the public hearing has been closed.
E.   Water Conveyance Facility Owner Notice: If a water conveyance facility is
located entirely or partially within one-hundred feet (100') of a subdivision
as determined using information made available to the city as prescribed in
Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-603, as amended, the city shall provide notice of the
application to the water conveyance facility owner within twenty (20) days of
receiving the complete application. The city shall provide the facility owner
twenty (20) days to comment on the application prior to making a decision on
the application. A facility owner’s failure to provide comments to the city
shall not affect or impair the city’s authority to approve the subdivision
plat. (Ord. 1075, 11-19-2013; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1467, 11-17-
2020; Ord. 1488, 5- 4-2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-090: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A.   1.   An owner of any land located in a subdivision, as defined in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-103, who transfers or sells any land in that
subdivision before a plat of the subdivision has been approved and recorded
violates this chapter for each lot or parcel transferred or sold.
2.   The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring does not exempt the
transaction from being a violation of subsection A1 of this section or from the
penalties or remedies provided in this chapter.
3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection A, the recording of
an instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring real property that violates this section:
a.   Does not affect the validity of the instrument or other document; and
b.   Does not affect whether the property that is the subject of the instrument
or other document complies with applicable municipal ordinances on land use and
development.
B.   1. The City may bring an action against an owner to require the property
to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
2.   An action under this subsection B may include an injunction, abatement,
merger of title, or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
enjoin, or abate the violation.
3.   The City need only establish the violation to obtain the injunction. (Ord.
480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-1-100: PENALTIES:
It shall be a Class C misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with the
provisions of this title. In addition to any criminal prosecution, the City may
pursue any other legal remedy to ensure compliance with this title including,
but not limited to, injunctive relief. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-1-110: REPEALED: (Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
17-1-120: APPEALS:
A.   Subject to subsection D, an appeal may be made to the Appeals and Variance
Hearing Officer from any decision, determination or requirement of the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission hereunder by filing with the community
development department an application and notice thereof in writing within ten
(10) calendar days after such decision, determination or requirement is made.
Such notice shall set forth in detail the action and grounds upon which the
subdivider or other adversely affected party deems themselves adversely
affected.
B.   The Zoning Administrator shall set the appeal for hearing before the
Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer within a reasonable time after receipt of
the appeal. Such hearing may be continued by order of the Appeals and Variance
Hearing Officer. The appellant shall be notified of the appeal hearing date at
least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing. After hearing the appeal,
the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer may affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision, determination or requirement appealed and enter any such orders as
are in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this title. The Appeals and
Variance Hearing Officer shall notify the appellant in writing of its ruling.
The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings and actions in furtherance
of the matter appealed, pending a decision of the Appeals and Variance Hearing
Officer.
C.   An adversely affected party may appeal the Appeals and Variance Hearing
Officer's decision to District Court as provided in Utah Code Annotated title
10, chapter 9a.
D.   An applicant may appeal the city's failure to respond within twenty (20)
business days on the fourth or final review described in Section 17-1-080(B)
(6). If the City fails to respond within 20 business days on the fourth and
final review, the City shall, upon request of the property owner, and within 10
business days after the day on which the request is received:
1.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision improvement plans, assemble an
appeal panel, in accordance with Utah Code 10-9a-508(5)(d), to review and
approve or deny the final revised set of plans; or
2.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision ordinance review, advise the
applicant in writing of the deficiency in the application and of the right to
appeal the determination to the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer in
accordance with this section. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-
2019; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-1-130: STAFF AUTHORITY:
Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this title, the Community
Development Director and all other officers and employees of the City act in an
advisory capacity to the Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission and have
no authority to make binding decisions or to make authoritative
representations, approvals or determinations other than in a purely advisory
and recommending capacity. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018)
17-1-140: TEXT AMENDMENTS:
A decision to amend the text of this title is a matter committed to the
legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one
standard. However, in making an amendment, the City Council should consider the
following factors:
A.   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with goals, objectives and
policies of the City's General Plan;
B.   Whether the proposed amendment is appropriate given the context of the
request and there is sufficient justification for a modification to the land
development ordinance;
C.   The proposed amendment will not create a conflict with any other section
or part of this title or the General Plan;
D.   Whether the potential effects of the proposed amendment have been
evaluated and determined not to be detrimental to public health, safety, or
welfare and represents an overall community benefit; and
E.   The extent to which a proposed text amendment implements best current,
professional practices of urban planning, design, and engineering practices.
(Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015)
17-1-150: INACTIVE APPLICATIONS:
All subdivision applications shall be actively pursued to a final decision by
the city. If no activity, such as plan submittals, reviews, or meetings has
occurred on an application for a period of one (1) year from the date of the
last city review, the application will voided and the file closed. Prior to the
expiration of the one (1) year period, the applicant may submit a written
request to maintain the application as active. The zoning administrator may
grant a one-time extension for six (6) months upon the zoning administrator's
finding that there is good cause. If the applicant wishes to pursue an
application after it has been voided due to inactivity, a new application is
required, including fees and conformance to current applicable codes. No fees
shall be refunded for applications that are voided due to inactivity. (Ord.
1408, 10-15-2019)
17-1-160: EXACTIONS:
A.   The city may impose an exaction or exactions on development proposed in a
land use application, if:
1.   An essential link exists between a legitimate governmental interest and
the exaction; and
2.   The exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent, to the
impact of the proposed development.
B.   An applicant may request the Community Development Director or designee
review an exaction or exactions for compliance with the standards listed in
subsection A. The Director or designee will issue a written opinion.
C.   An applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Draper City
Municipal Code
2-4-060. (Ord. 1535, 5-3-2022)
CHAPTER 2
CONCEPT PLAN
SECTION:
17-2-010: Concept Plan
17-2-020: Submission
17-2-030: Distribution Of Plan
17-2-040: Review By City Staff
17-2-050: Repealed (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-2-060: Repealed (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-2-010: CONCEPT PLAN:
A potential subdivider may provide to the community development department as
the Development Review Committee concept plans as part of a pre-application
process prior to submitting a preliminary plat application. This pre-
application process is not required, but provides the potential subdivider with
an opportunity to consult with and receive assistance from city staff and other
agencies regarding the regulations and design requirements applicable to the
subdivision of property. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 1408,
10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1- 16-2024)
17-2-020: SUBMISSION:
The potential subdivider may submit a single electronic copy of the concept
plans to the Draper City community development department together with a
request for a pre-application meeting with the Development Review Committee.
(Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1454, 11-
10-2020; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-2-030: DISTRIBUTION OF PLAN:
The Draper City community development department, upon receipt of the concept
plans, shall distribute copies of the plans to the Development Review Committee
and other agencies or advisors as in the opinion of the department may
contribute to a decision in the best interest of the public. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-
2015; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-2-040: REVIEW BY CITY STAFF:
A.   The city staff shall review the submitted concept plans and check
compliance, insofar as possible, with the city's general plans, zoning
ordinance, this subdivision ordinance, and other appropriate regulations.
B.   A pre-application meeting before the Development Review Committee shall be
scheduled within 15 business days of submittal of the request by the potential
subdivider. Recommendations and comments made by city staff and invited
agencies regarding the concept plans shall not constitute an approval or
disapproval of the proposed subdivision, but rather shall operate in such a
manner as to give the potential subdivider general guidance as to the
requirements and constraints when preparing a preliminary, amended, or minor
subdivision plat application for submittal to the city. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002,
eff. 1-1-2003; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-2-050: REPEALED: (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-2-060: REPEALED: (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT
SECTION:
17-3-010: Purpose Of The Preliminary Plat
17-3-020: Application And Fees
17-3-030: Preliminary Plat Submittal
17-3-035: Distribution
17-3-040: Review
17-3-050: Phasing
17-3-060: Expiration Of Preliminary Plat Approval
17-3-010: PURPOSE OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to require formal preliminary approval
of a subdivision to minimize changes and revisions which might otherwise be
necessary on the final plat. The preliminary plat shall in all respects comply
with the provisions of this title and all other applicable provisions of this
code. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
17-3-020: APPLICATION AND FEES:
A subdivider shall file an application for preliminary plat approval with the
community development department on a form prescribed by the city, together
with an electronic copy of the preliminary plat, and the application fee as set
forth in the consolidated fee schedule. No application shall be scheduled for a
public meeting before the planning commission until all required information
has been received and reviewed by the city staff or after the fourth review,
whichever comes first. A final subdivision plat application may be submitted
and process concurrently wit the application for the preliminary subdivision
plat. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020;
Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-3-030: PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL:
The preliminary plat shall include:
A.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map drawn at a scale of one thousand feet
(1,000') to the inch showing:
1.   All existing and proposed roadways in the vicinity of the development;
2.   A north arrow;
3.   The nearest section corner tie; and
4.   The subdivision name.
B.   Preliminary Plat: A preliminary plat drawn at a scale not smaller than one
hundred feet (100') to the inch and prepared, stamped and signed by a
professional engineer licensed by the state of Utah, showing:
1.   All facilities within one hundred feet (100') of the subdivision
boundaries;
2.   A north arrow;
3.   The subdivision name;
4.   The layout and names and widths of existing and future road rights of way;
5.   A tie to a permanent survey monument at a section corner;
6.   The boundary lines of the subdivision with bearings and distances;
7.   The layout and dimensions of proposed lots with lot areas in square feet;
8.   The location, dimensions and labeling of all other spaces including open
spaces, parks, trails, and public spaces;
9.   The location of manmade features including bridges, railroad tracks, and
buildings;
10.   All recorded easements and existing rights-of-way located within the plat
for:
a.   An underground facility;
b.   A water conveyance facility; or
c.   Any other utility facility; and
d.   Any water conveyance facility located, entirely or partially, within the
plat that is not recorded and of which the owner of the land has actual or
constructive knowledge, including from information made available to the owner
of the land in the state engineer’s inventory of canals or from a surveyor in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-603(6)(c), as amended; and
11.   Ownership of all adjoining tracts of land.
C.   Grading, Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan drawn to a scale not
smaller than one hundred feet (100') to the inch, showing:
1.   The road and lot layout;
2.   Topography at two foot (2') contour intervals;
3.   A north arrow;
4.   The subdivision name;
5.   Areas of substantial earthmoving and including in such cases an erosion
control plan;
6.   The location of existing watercourses, canals, ditches, springs, wells,
culverts, and storm drains;
7.   The location of any 100-year floodplain as designated by the federal
emergency management agency (FEMA);
8.   Any existing wetland; and
9.   All drainage facilities, including water flow directions, side and rear
yard swales, gutter flow capacities, inlets, outlets, catch basins, pipes,
culverts, outlets to off site facilities, stormwater control facilities,
control structures, and orifice plates planned to accommodate, convey and
control the project's storm drainage and detention storage for the 2-year, 10-
year and 100-year storms defined in Draper City drainage design criteria, and
which also comply with the following:
a.   A stormwater controlled release rate of 0.1 cubic foot per second shall be
the maximum permitted discharge in the urban area and no discharge shall exceed
demonstrated historical flows in the Traverse Mountain area, as identified in
Draper City drainage design criteria.
b.   Drainage facilities shall divert surface water away from cut faces and
sloping surfaces of fill areas.
c.   Existing natural drainage systems shall be utilized to the extent possible
in their unimproved state. The concentration of flows discharged from
stormwater quantity control facilities that exceed demonstrated historical flow
rates shall be armored and protected to prevent soil erosion, sediment
deposition and other deleterious impacts to the existing natural drainage
system.
d.   The design and establishment of drainage channels shall consist of wide,
shallow swales lined with appropriate vegetation, rock, or other material to
avoid the erosive cutting of narrow, deep, and unstable ditches.
e.   No detention or retention basin shall be constructed on a known geologic
hazard within the Traverse Mountain area.
D.   Utility Plan: A utility plan drawn to a scale not smaller than one hundred
feet (100') to the inch, showing:
1.   The road and lot layout;
2.   A north arrow;
3.   The subdivision name;
4.   All existing and proposed utilities, including sewer, culinary water,
secondary water, fire hydrants, storm drains, subsurface drains, gas lines,
power lines, and streetlights; and
5.   The location and dimensions of all utility easements.
E.   Geotechnical Report and Geological Hazard Study: Two (2) printed copies
and one (1) electronic copy of a geotechnical report and geologic hazard study
for the site.
F.   Storm Drainage Calculations: Hydraulic and hydrologic storm drainage
calculations.
G.   Traffic Study: A traffic impact study when required by the city engineer
which complies with the Draper City traffic impact study guidelines.
H.   Title Report: A preliminary title report.
I.   Utility Service Agreements: Service agreements from all utility companies.
J.   Storm Drainage Agreements: Any agreements with adjacent property owners
regarding storm drainage or other matters pertinent to subdivision approval.
K.   Subsurface Maintenance Agreements: Maintenance agreements for subsurface
drains serving the subdivision.
L.   Soils Investigation Report: When the subdivision is located within the
sensitive lands overlay district, a comprehensive soils investigation report, a
vegetation report, a geotechnical and geological report and a comprehensive
grading and drainage report in accordance with the Draper City drainage design
criteria.
M.   Evidence Of Compliance: Evidence of compliance with all applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations if requested by the Development
Review Committee.
N.   Covenants: A copy of proposed protective covenants in all cases where
subsurface drains are to serve any portion of the subdivision.
O.   AutoCAD Copies: Electronic copies of preliminary plat drawings in AutoCAD
(DWG) format. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-
2024)
17-3-035: DISTRIBUTION:
The Community Development Department, upon receipt of the complete application
for preliminary plat approval, shall distribute copies of the submittal to the
Development Review Committee and other agencies or advisors as in the opinion
of the department and the Planning Commission may contribute to a decision in
the best interest of the public. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-
2024)
17-3-040: REVIEW:
A.   Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary
plat submittal and determine compliance with the standards and criteria set
forth in this chapter and all other ordinances of Draper City, including, but
not limited to, the land use ordinance, general plan, master street plan, and
City standard specifications and design criteria. Review of the preliminary
plat submittal shall follow the process outlined in section
17-1-080 of this title. After the fourth or final review, the preliminary
subdivision plat application shall be scheduled for a public meeting. The
Planning Commission shall make findings specifying any inadequacy in the
application, noncompliance with City regulations, questionable or undesirable
design or engineering, and the need for any additional information. The
Planning Commission may review all relevant information pertaining to the
proposed development, including fire protection, sufficient supply of culinary
and secondary water to the proposed subdivision, sewer service, traffic
considerations, and the potential for flooding. The Planning Commission shall
hold a public meeting, and shall approve, approve with conditions or if the
preliminary subdivision plat application does not meet City ordinances or
sanitary sewer or culinary water requirements, deny the preliminary subdivision
plat application.
B.   Limitation Of Approval: Granting of preliminary plat approval shall not
constitute a final acceptance of the subdivision by the City. Approval of the
preliminary plat shall not relieve the subdivider of the responsibility to
comply with all required conditions and ordinances, and to provide the
improvements and easements necessary to meet all City standards and
requirements. ((Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-3-050: PHASING:
When a subdivision is proposed to be developed in phases, the subdivider shall,
as a requirement of preliminary plat submittal, identify the location of all
proposed phases along with a proposed time line for the construction of
proposed public improvements. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012)
17-3-060: EXPIRATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
A.   The subdivider may apply for final plat approval concurrently with the
application for the preliminary subdivision plat, or after the preliminary
subdivision plat application has been approved. For phased developments, the
subdivider may apply for final plat approval for each phase separately.
B.   Except as provided in subsection C below, if the subdivider has not
applied for final subdivision plat approval, or for phased developments, the
final subdivision plat approval for the first phase, within one (1) year of the
date of preliminary subdivision plat approval, the preliminary subdivision plat
approval shall be void. For approved phased developments, the preliminary plat
approval shall expire two (2) years from the date of the previous phases’ final
plat recordation. Should the approval of the preliminary subdivision plat
expire, the subdivider can submit a new preliminary subdivision plat
application for approval again in accordance with this chapter.
C.   The preliminary subdivision plat approval and deadline for submitting the
final subdivision plat application may be extended up to twelve (12) months for
good case shown if the subdivider petitions the Planning Commission for an
extension prior to the expiration date. However, only one (1) twelve-month
extension may be granted. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord.
1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 4
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
17-4-010: Final Plat; Purpose
17-4-020: Filing Deadline, Application And Fees
17-4-030: Final Plat; Preparation And Required Information
17-4-035: Distribution
17-4-040: Review
17-4-050: Repealed (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-060: Repealed (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2014)
17-4-070: Improvement Completion
17-4-075: Improvement Completion Assurances
17-4-080: Repealed (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-090: Payment Of Fees
17-4-100: Payment Of Property Tax
17-4-110: Recording Of Final Plat
17-4-120: Expiration Of Final Plat Approval
17-4-010: FINAL PLAT; PURPOSE:
The purpose of the final plat is to require formal approval by the Zoning
Administrator before a subdivision plat is recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-020: FILING DEADLINE, APPLICATION AND FEES:
A.   Applications for final subdivision plat approval shall adhere to the
submittal provisions found in section
17-3-060 of this title.
B.   The final plat, associated construction drawings, title report,
application fees and all required information shall be submitted at the time of
final plat application and shall conform in all respects to those requirements
specified in this title.
C.   The subdivider shall file an application for final plat approval with the
Community Development Department on a form prescribed by the City, together
with a single electronic copy of the proposed final plat, and associated final
construction drawings required in section
17-3-030 of this title. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; Ord.
1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1454, 11-10-2020; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-030: FINAL PLAT; PREPARATION AND REQUIRED INFORMATION:
A.   The final subdivision plat shall be printed on mylar sheets(s), or other
comparable material approved by the City, with the outside or trim line
dimensions not smaller than twenty two inches by thirty four inches (22" x
34"). The printed mylar shall not be submitted to the City until after the
Zoning Administrator has first approved the final subdivision plat. Until that
date, an electronic copy of the final subdivision plat shall be submitted for
review. The border line of the plat shall be drawn in heavy lines leaving a
margin of at least one and one-half inches (1-1/2") on the left side and at
least one-half inch (1/2") margin on the other sides. The plat shall be drawn
with north being either up or to the left when reading the sheet, whichever
accommodates the exhibit best. All lines, dimensions, and markings shall be
with waterproof black ink. The plat shall be drawn to a scale large enough to
clearly show all details but in no case shall the exhibit be depicted at scales
greater than eighty feet (80') to the inch. Workmanship on the finished drawing
shall be neat and legible.
B.   The final plat shall show the subdivision name in a title heading and the
general location of the subdivision in bold letters at the top of the sheet.
C.   The plat shall contain a north arrow and scale of the drawing. The month
and year shall be indicated under the title heading and location designation at
the top of the plat.
D.   Prior to recording, the plat shall be signed by all required and
authorized parties, with appropriate notarial acknowledgments. The final plat
shall contain all information set forth in this section.
E.   An accurate and complete survey to second order accuracy shall be made of
the land being subdivided. A traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract
and of each block when computed from field measurements on the ground shall
close within a tolerance of one foot (1') to twenty thousand feet (20,000').
F.   Plats shall include accurately drawn boundaries showing the bearings and
dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision tied to public survey
monuments. These lines shall be slightly heavier than street and lot lines.
G.   The final plat shall show all survey and mathematical information
necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace all interior and
exterior boundary lines appearing thereon, including bearing and distance of
straight lines, central angle, radius and arc length of curves with associated
chord bearing and distance, and such information as may be necessary to
determine the location of beginning and ending points of curves. All property
corners and monuments shall show the calculated County coordinates. Lot and
boundary closure shall not be greater than 0.003 of a foot.
H.   All lots, blocks, and parcels offered for dedication for any purpose shall
be designated with dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown. The square
footage of each lot shall be shown. Parcels being dedicated, including streets
and easements, shall be clearly designated on the plat. Sufficient linear,
angular and curved data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and
length of the boundary lines of every block, lot and parcel which is a part
thereof. No ditto marks shall be used for lot dimensions.
I.   The plat shall show the right-of-way lines of each street, the width of
any portion being dedicated, and widths of any existing dedications. The widths
and locations of adjacent streets and other public properties within fifty feet
(50') of the subdivision shall be shown with dotted lines. If any street in the
subdivision is a continuation or an approximate continuation of an existing
street, the conformity or the amount of nonconformity of such existing streets
shall be accurately shown.
J.   Lots shall be numbered consecutively under a definite system. Numbering
shall continue throughout the subdivision with no omissions or duplications.
Amendments shall result in a new numbering commencing from the last lot number
of the original subdivision. Lettering of lots is not permitted. Each lot shall
show the street addresses assigned thereto according to the standard addressing
methods approved by the City. In the case of corner lots, an address will be
assigned for each street frontage.
K.   Streets shall be numbered in accordance with and in conformity with the
street numbering system adopted by the City. Named streets shall also be
numbered.
L.   The side lines of all easements shall be shown by fine dashed lines. The
width of all easements and bearing, distances, dimension, ties or other
depictions to definitely locate the same on the ground shall be shown. All
easements shall be clearly labeled and identified.
M.   The plat shall show all stakes, monuments and other evidence indicating
the boundaries of the subdivision as found on the site. Any monument or bench
mark that is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements shall
be replaced by the subdivider under the direction of the City Engineer. The
following monuments shall be shown on the final plat:
1.   The location of all monuments placed in making the survey, including a
statement as to what, if any, points were reset by ties; and
2.   All right-of-way monuments to be set or otherwise installed at angle
points and intersections as approved by the City Engineer.
N.   The final plat shall contain the name, stamp and signature of a registered
surveyor, together with the date of the survey, the scale of the map and number
of sheets. The following certificates, acknowledgments and descriptions shall
appear on the title sheet of the final plat, and such certificates may be
combined where appropriate:
1.   A registered land surveyor's "certificate of survey";
2.   An owner's dedication certificate in the following form or as otherwise
specified by the City Engineer:
OWNERS DEDICATION
Know all men by these presents that I/we, the undersigned owner(s) of the
hereon described tract of land, hereby set apart and subdivide the same into
lots and streets as shown on this plat and name said plat Subdivision Name, and
do hereby dedicate, grant and convey to Draper City, Utah: (1) all those parts
or portions of said tract of land designated as streets, the same to be used as
public thoroughfares forever; (2) those certain public utility and drainage
easements as shown hereon, the same to be used for the installation,
maintenance, and operation of public utility service lines and drainage; and
(3) those parcels designated as public open space, parks, trail or easements,
or of similar designation. In witness whereof, we have hereunto set our hands
this          day of                , 20        .
   
                                             
         (Add appropriate acknowledgments)
3.   A notary public's acknowledgment for each signature on the plat;
4.   A correct metes and bounds description of all property included within the
subdivision;
5.   The signatures of the water provider, sewer provider, natural gas
provider, electric power provider, local telephone service provider, Salt Lake
County Health Department, Zoning Administrator, and City Engineer, and blocks
for signatures of the City Attorney, Draper City Council bearing a signature
line for the Mayor and an attestation by the City Recorder, and a signature
block for the County Recorder in the lower right corner of the final plat; and
6.   Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements and
notarial seals as are required by law, this title, or by the City Attorney.
O.   Prior to recordation of the plat, the subdivider shall submit a title
report prepared and dated not more than sixty (60) days before the proposed
recordation of the final plat, to be reviewed by the City Attorney.
P.   When a subdivision contains lands which are reserved in private ownership
for community use, including common areas, the subdivider shall submit with the
final plat the name, proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of the
owner, or organization empowered to own, maintain and pay taxes on such lands
and common areas and any access easements.
Q.   The subdivider shall submit a street tree plan in accordance with section
17-5-060 of this title.
R.   The final plat shall show all recorded easements and existing rights-of-
way located within the plat for:
1.    An underground facility;
2.    A water conveyance facility;
3.    Any other utility facility; and
4.    Any water conveyance facility located, entirely or partially, within the
plat that is not recorded and of which the owner of the land has actual or
constructive knowledge, including from information made available to the owner
of the land in the state engineer’s inventory of canals or from a surveyor in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-603(6)(c), as amended. (Ord. 1009, 9-
4-2012; amd. Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019;
Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-035:   DISTRIBUTION:
The community development department, upon receipt of the complete application
for final plat approval, shall distribute copies of the submittal to the
Development Review Committee and other agencies or advisors as in the opinion
of the department and the Zoning Administrator may contribute to a decision in
the best interest of the public. (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-040: REVIEW:
A.   Upon receipt fo the final plat, the Development Review Committee,
including the City Engineer, shall review the final plat and construction
drawings and determine whether the final plat conforms to the preliminary plat
and is in compliance with the engineering and surveying standards and criteria
set forth in this chapter and all other applicable standards and ordinances of
the City and the State of Utah. If the final plat complies, the Development
Review Committee shall forward the plat to the Zoning Administrator, through
the Community Development Department. If the final plat does not comply, the
Development Review Committee shall return the plat to the subdivider, through
the Community Development Department, with comment. Review of the final plat
submittal shall follow the process outlined in section 17-1-080 of this title.
B.   After the fourth or final review, the Zoning Administrator shall either
approve the final plat, or deny the final plat if it does not conform with this
title or other applicable ordinances. If the Zoning Administrator denies the
final plat, the Zoning Administrator shall specify the reasons for the denial.
C.   No final plat shall have any force or effect unless the same has been
approved by the Zoning Administrator and signed by the Mayor and the City
Recorder. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-050: REPEALED: (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-060: REPEALED: (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-070: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION:
Unless an application is made and an agreement reached under section
17-4-075, a subdivider must install all public landscaping and infrastructure
improvements required under this title following Zoning Administrator approval
and prior to recording a plat. (Ord. 1132, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 1501, 10-5-
2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-075: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCES:
A.   An applicant may provide the city with an improvement completion assurance
as defined in Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-103 in an amount equal to one hundred
percent (100%) of the estimated completion costs in lieu of an obligation
required by this title. Acceptable forms of an improvement completion assurance
limited by this code are:
1.   A business check from a FDIC insured financial institution within 50 miles
of Draper City hall with funds immediately available to the city;
2.   Cash;
3.   A cash bond;
4.   A cashier's check from a FDIC insured financial institution with offices
within 50 miles of Draper City Hall and funds immediately available to the city
upon default;
5.   An irrevocable letter of credit from a FDIC insured financial institution
with offices within 50 miles of Draper City Hall and funds immediately
available to the city upon default; or
6.   Other method of security as agreed upon by applicant, the City Engineer,
and the City Attorney.
B.   Each person who provides an improvement completion assurance must also
enter into an improvement completion assurance agreement with the city. An
improvement completion assurance agreement may specify additional details for
the completion of work contemplated by the agreement.
C.   Procedures for processing completion assurance bonds, including
improvement completion assurances for public landscaping or infrastructure are
detailed below:
1.   The developer shall be required to provide to the city a bid detailing the
cost to install public landscaping improvement and infrastructure improvements
included in the approved plans that have not been installed and accepted by the
city. Submitted bids must be on company letterhead. For landscaping the bid
must come from a licensed and insured landscape company or landscape
contractor, or for other infrastructure improvements, a licensed and insured
contractor that can complete the work.
2.   Bid amounts for trees shall not be valued at less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per tree.
3.   Funds from an improvement completion assurance will be held by the Draper
City Community Development Department.
4.   After the improvements detailed in the bid are installed, the developer
may request a refund of those portions of the improvement completion assurance
that correlate with the installed improvements per the bid.
5.   Requests for a release of funds held as an improvement completion
assurance shall be processed as per this code and department policies and shall
not be released until the installation is acceptable to the city and in
accordance with approved plans. (Ord. 1501, 10-5-2021; amd. Ord. 1583, 6-20-
2023)
17-4-080: REPEALED: (Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-090: PAYMENT OF FEES:
All required application fees shall be paid by the subdivider prior to
submitting the final plat to the Zoning Administrator. All inspection fees
shall be paid prior to being issued a land disturbance permit and proceeding
with construction of landscape and infrastructure improvements. (Ord. 1332, 7-
10-2018; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-100: PAYMENT OF PROPERTY TAX:
The subdivider shall pay in full of all prior year Property Taxes, any
greenbelt or rollback taxes, and its prorated share of the present year's taxes
for all properties located within the boundaries of the subdivision prior to
recording of the plat. Following approval of the final plat by the Zoning
Administrator and upon verification of payment for all prior year Property
Taxes, the City shall obtain from the County Treasurer's Office an estimated
pro rata Property Tax amount for portion of the subdivision to be dedicated or
otherwise given to the City for right-of-way or other public use. Prior to the
mylar being submitted to the County Recorder for recordation, the subdivider
shall post a cash escrow with the Draper City Finance Department in an amount
not less than one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the County Treasurer's
estimate. Following the recordation of the plat or at the time of receipt of
the tax notice from the County Treasurer, the City shall pay the taxes due for
those areas of the subdivision identified as a part of the estimate from the
cash escrow and any remaining funds of the cash escrow shall be returned to the
subdivider. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-110: RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT:
After Zoning Administrator approval, and upon receipt of all required
signatures on the final mylar copy of the plat, the final plat shall be
presented to the county recorder of the county in which the property is located
for recordation, provided improvements have been completed and accepted or an
improvement guarantee agreement has been executed. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd.
Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-4-120: EXPIRATION OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
If the final plat is not recorded within one (1) year from the date of Zoning
Administrator approval or construction of the required landscaping and
infrastructure has not commenced, such approval shall be null and void. This
time period may be extended by the Zoning Administrator for up to one
additional six (6) month period for good cause shown. The subdivider must
petition in writing for an extension prior to the expiration of the original
one (1) year. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1-
16-2024)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
17-5-010: Subdivision Layout
17-5-020: Lots
17-5-030: Streets
17-5-035: Cross Access And Connectivity
17-5-040: Drainage
17-5-050: Utilities
17-5-055: Subdivision Survey Monuments
17-5-060: Landscaping And Trees
17-5-070: Improvements Required
17-5-080: Warranty Period
17-5-090: Protection Strips
17-5-010: SUBDIVISION LAYOUT:
The subdivision layout shall conform to the City's standards and ordinances.
(Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-5-020: LOTS:
A.   Developable Lots: All subdivisions should result in the creation of lots
which are developable and capable of being built upon. A subdivision shall not
create lots which would make improvement impractical due to size, shape,
steepness of terrain, location of watercourses, problems of sewerage, driveway
grades, or other physical conditions.
B.   Frontage: All lots or parcels created by the subdivision shall have
frontage on a street, improved to standards hereinafter required, equal to at
least fifty percent (50%) of the street's minimum required width. This standard
shall not apply to commercial development given adequate cross access is
provided between any and all affected developments and/or properties. Land
designated as public right-of-way shall be separate and distinct from lots
adjoining such right-of-way and not be included in the area of such lots.
C.   Flag Lot: Any flag lot, if approved by the City, shall comply with all
requirements specified in the zoning ordinance.
D.   Minimum Area, Dimensions: The minimum area and dimensions of all lots
shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance for the district in
which the subdivision is located.
E.   Side Lines: The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at
right angles to the street which the lot faces, or approximately radial to the
center of curves, if such street is curved. Side lines of lots shall be
approximately radial to the center of a cul-de-sac on which the lots face. The
Planning Commission may allow exceptions to this requirement where warranted in
the opinion of the Planning Commission.
F.   Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use should be platted ten feet
(10') wider than interior lots in order to facilitate conformance with the
required street setback requirements of the zoning ordinance.
G.   Lot Divisions: A lot shall not be divided by a City limit line or County
boundary line.
H.   Remnants: Remnants of property shall not be left in the subdivision which
do not conform to lot requirements or are not required or suitable for common
open space, private utility or public purpose.
I.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted unless
approved by the Planning Commission after receiving a recommendation from City
staff. The street frontage adjacent to the rear of any approved double frontage
lots shall be improved by the subdivider in accordance with the standards set
forth in the City's subdivision standards. Unless specifically approved by the
City, no double frontage lot shall have vehicular access from the street
frontage adjacent to the rear of the lot.
J.   Parcels Included In Plat: All portions of all parcels from which a
subdivision is created shall be included within the subdivision plat. (Ord.
480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 770, 6-26-2007; Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018;
Ord. 1437, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1479, 2-16-2021)
17-5-030: STREETS:
A.   Location: Streets shall be located within a subdivision so they connect
with existing streets. If the adjoining land is zoned for residential use,
streets shall be located so that the adjacent land may be most efficiently
subdivided.
B.   Width: All streets shall conform to the width designated by the City's
master traffic and transportation plan.
C.   Half Streets: Where a half street is proposed, such street shall include
no less than sufficient right-of-way to construct a local street section,
except excluding the park strip and sidewalk on the side abutting adjacent
properties, and the subdivider shall install the same; provided it can be
reasonably assumed that additional right-of-way can be obtained from the
adjacent properties at a later time for the future installation of park strip
and sidewalk along the adjacent properties' frontage. If it is determined that
additional right-of-way cannot be obtained, the subdivider shall provide full
right-of-way and install all improvements for the required street cross
section.
D.   Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks: Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be
installed on existing and proposed streets by the subdivider in all
subdivisions. The Planning Commission may, after receiving a recommendation
from City staff, modify or waive the street design requirements.
E.   Local Street Angle: Local streets shall approach an arterial or collector
street at an angle between eighty five degrees (85°) and ninety five degrees
(95°).
F.   Cul-De-Sacs: In order to reduce vehicle trips and facilitate a more
pedestrian friendly subdivision design, the use of cul-de- sacs within
subdivisions shall be permitted only when through road connections are not
feasible due to topography, adjacent or surrounding uses, parcel size or shape
or other physical constraints to development. When cul-de-sacs are approved,
pedestrian pathways shall be provided from the cul-de-sac to other streets,
pathways or trails as deemed appropriate by the City. When cul-de-sacs with
pedestrian pathways are proposed or required, they shall be designed in
compliance with City standards and specifications and shall be designed so that
the length of the pathway is minimized and visibility into the pathway is
maximized. As a minimum development standard for the pedestrian pathway, the
developer shall construct a dedicated, paved surface eight feet (8') in width.
In addition, the developer shall install four foot (4') to six foot (6') high,
as determined by the City, open or see through fencing along both sides of the
pathway in conjunction with the construction of the pathway. The required fence
shall be of maintenance free materials and shall add to the aesthetic quality
of the surrounding development and land use. Required pathway improvements
shall be bonded along with the bonding of right-of- way improvements. When
approved, permanent cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than thirty (30) single-
family lots or units, or one hundred (100) multi-family units, and must be
terminated with a turnaround of not less than one hundred feet (100') of right-
of-way in diameter, or an alternative turnaround design which meets the design
criteria of the Fire Department, City Engineer, and Public Works Director.
Downhill cul-de-sacs shall not be approved unless adequate drainage is
provided.
G.   Subdivision Access And Dead End Streets: Dead end streets or subdivisions
with one access point shall serve no more than thirty (30) single-family units,
two-family units, and townhouse units, or up to one hundred (100) multi-family
units, not including townhouse dwellings. Deviations from the limitations to
the number of single-family and two-family units may be permitted under the
provisions of
17-5-030(H)(15) below. The provision of a stub road which will eliminate the
dead end in the future shall not permit additional units. Additional dwelling
units may be served by a dead end street at such time as its dead end nature is
eliminated. On such temporary dead end streets, a temporary turnaround area and
recordable easement shall be provided at the end of the dead end street and
shall remain and be available for public use so long as the dead end exists.
Improvements shall be installed in temporary turnaround areas subject to
engineering standards and the International Fire Code. Access points and dead
end streets shall comply with all applicable codes.
H.   Fire Apparatus Access Roads: Fire apparatus access is essential to
successful fire-fighting and rescue operations. Fire department vehicles vary
widely in size and operational needs and must be able to maneuver into position
to properly undertake their fire-fighting activities. The needs of the city
will therefore vary with the equipment used include those from mutual-aid
companies that may respond from outside the city. Access roads must be designed
to provide the fire department with the required access to all structures on a
site.
1.   All fire apparatus access roads must meet the requirements of this section
and applicable requirements of international fire code, including appendix D.
2.   Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall
be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus
access road with an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable
of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing up to 75,000 pounds.
3.   Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the
minimum road width shall be twenty-six (26) feet, exclusive of shoulders.
4.   Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed ten (10) percent in grade,
except as specifically modified elsewhere in this title, or as approved by the
fire marshal.
5.   The minimum turning radius for fire apparatus access shall be twenty-eight
(28) feet, unless a different radius is approved by the fire marshal.
6.   Dead end fire apparatus access roads shall meet the following minimum
paved widths and include turnarounds according to the following:
a.   For fire apparatus access roads up to one-hundred fifty (150) feet in
length a minimum paved width of twenty (20) feet is required.
b.   For fire apparatus access roads between one-hundred fifty-one (151) feet
and five-hundred (500) feet in length a minimum paved width of twenty (20) feet
and a minimum one-hundred twenty (120) foot hammerhead, sixty (60) foot “Y”, or
ninety-six (96) foot diameter cul-de-sac are required. See
Figure 17-5-1.
c.   For fire apparatus access roads between five-hundred one (501) feet and
seven-hundred fifty (750) feet in length a minimum paved width of twenty-six
(26) feet and a minimum one-hundred twenty (120) foot hammerhead, sixty (60)
foot “Y”, or ninety-six (96) foot diameter cul-de-sac are required. See
Figure 17-5-1.
d.   For fire apparatus access roads over seven-hundred fifty (750) feet in
length special approval of the fire marshal is required.
7.   If a fire apparatus access road is gated, the road and gate shall comply
with the requirements of subsection
9-27-200 of this title.
8.   Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING-FIRE
LANE signs complying with
Figure 17-5-2. Signs shall have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) inches wide
by eighteen (18) inches high and have red letters on a white reflective
background.
9.   Fire lane signs shall be posted on both sides of fire apparatus access
roads that are twenty (20) to twenty-six (26) feet wide. Fire lane signs shall
be posted on one side of fire apparatus access road more than twenty-six (26)
feet wide and less than thirty-two (32) feet wide.
10.   Buildings or facilities exceeding thirty (30) feet or three (3) stories
in height shall have not fewer than two means of fire apparatus access for each
structure.
11.   Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000
square feet shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus
access roads, except as provided in
17-5-030(H)(11)(a) below.
a.   Projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet that
have a single approved fire apparatus access road where all buildings are
equipped throughout with approved automatic fire sprinkler systems.
12.   Where two fire apparatus access roads are required, they shall be placed
a distance apart equal to not less than on half of the length of the maximum
overall diagonal dimension of the lot, parcel, or area to be served, measured
in a straight line between accesses.
13.   Where the vertical distance between the grade plane and the highest roof
surface exceeds 30 feet, approved aerial fire apparatus access roads shall be
provided. For purposes of this section, the highest roof surface shall be
determined by measurement to the eave of a pitched roof, the intersection of
the roof to the exterior wall, or the top of parapet walls, whichever is
greater.
a.   Aerial fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width
of twenty-six (26) feet, exclusive of shoulders, in the immediate vicinity of
the building or portion thereof.
b.   One or more of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be
located not less than fifteen (15) feet and not greater than thirty (30) feet
from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the
building. The side of the building on which the aerial fire apparatus access
road is positioned shall be approved by the fire marshal.
c.   Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located over the aerial fire
apparatus access road or between the aerial fire apparatus road and the
building. Other obstructions shall be permitted to be placed with the approval
of the fire marshal.
14.   Multi-Family residential projects having more than one-hundred (100)
dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two separate and approved fire
apparatus access roads.
15.   Developments of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling
units exceeds thirty (30) shall be provided with two (2) separate and approved
fire apparatus access roads, except as provided in subsection
17-5-030(H)(15)(a) or (b) below.
a.   With approval of the fire marshal, where there are more than thirty (30)
dwelling units on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and all
dwelling units are equipped throughout with an approved automatic fire
sprinkler system in accordance with international fire code section 903.3.1.1,
903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3, access from two directions shall not be required.
b.   The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall
not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads will connect with future
development, as determined by the fire marshal.
Figure 17-5-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5026.png]
Figure 17-5-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28195f2524012c518b27fd2ef23495bd3e3e7fc1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5028.png]
I.   In instances where fire marshal has discretion to allow a deviation from
the standards for fire apparatus access roads in
17-5-030(H) or the gating requirements of fire apparatus access roads in
9-27-200(F), the fire marshal may authorize a deviation upon finding all of the
following:
1.   The deviation complies with the public safety objectives of the city;
2.   The proposed deviation will not negatively impact traffic safety;
3.   The access width of the roadway is sufficient to provide necessary
emergency vehicle access to the property;
4.   The type of road surfacing will not negatively impact the accessibility to
the property by fire and emergency vehicles; and
5.   The deviation in design will not inhibit the maneuverability or operation
of anticipated emergency response apparatus or fire department vehicles of
Draper City or those of mutual-aid organizations from neighboring communities
or agencies. (Ord. 1009, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; Ord. 1454, 11-10-
2020; Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021)
17-5-035: CROSS ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY:
A.   All subdivisions of land zoned or intended for nonresidential or mixed use
development shall provide vehicular and pedestrian connectivity between lots
within the subdivision and other existing or intended nonresidential or mixed
use development abutting the property. This shall be accomplished through
compliance with the site design standards applicable to plats listed in
subsection
9-22-050(F). Required easements for providing pedestrian and vehicular cross
access and connectivity between properties shall be included on the subdivision
plat and state that it is for the benefit of abutting properties. (Ord. 1535,
5-3-2022)
17-5-040: DRAINAGE:
The subdivider shall construct and install drainage systems conforming to the
City's standards and specifications. The subdivider shall provide easements for
storm drainage, natural watercourses or channels, streams, creeks, irrigation
ditches, or floodplains that center or traverse the subdivision. The subdivider
shall also dedicate easements for any pipe, conduit, channel, and retention or
detention areas as required by the City Engineer. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-
1-2003)
17-5-050: UTILITIES:
A.   Underground: All utilities shall be provided through underground
facilities, as required in title 8 of this Code. All underground utilities
specified in this section shall be installed prior to the installation of road
base, surfacing, curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Underground utilities shall be
installed only after streets have been rough graded to a line and grade
approved by the City Engineer. If underground utilities are not installed prior
to street surfacing, sleeves shall be required.
B.   Culinary Water: A culinary water supply, which must be approved by the
City Engineer, shall be available to each lot in the subdivision and shall be
provided in conformance with the standards and rules and regulations of the
City. Where an approved culinary water supply is available, the City will
require to be installed, at the subdivider's expense, water mains, valves, and
service laterals to each lot within the subdivision.
C.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed at locations determined by
the City Engineer and the Fire Department. Fire hydrants shall be governed by
the requirements of the Fire Code adopted by the City. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002,
eff. 1-1-2003)
D.   Sanitary Sewer: The subdivider must connect with a public sanitary sewer
and provide sewer mains and extend laterals from the sewer main to each lot in
the subdivision, unless waived by the City Engineer.
E.   Subsurface Water Drains: Subsurface water drains may be installed at the
option of the subdivider. All plans for such subsurface drains proposed by the
subdivider shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. All such
subsurface drains shall meet the minimum requirements for design and
construction of such drains, as specified by the City. Upon final inspection
and approval by the City Engineer of such subsurface water drainage system, the
owner shall thereafter maintain the system. The owner may contract with the
City or other persons or entities to provide for maintenance of the system and
may provide for assessment of an annual fee on all property located within the
subdivision. The owner shall cause to be recorded protective covenants
providing for mandatory assessment and payment of fees for each lot or parcel
located within the subdivision, which covenants shall run with the land and be
binding upon all successors in interest and assigns of the owner. The
maintenance assessments shall constitute a lien on each lot or parcel located
within the subdivision and may be enforced in accordance with the terms of any
applicable subdivision subsurface water drain maintenance agreement and the
protective covenants referred to hereinabove.
The City may, based on the findings and recommendations of a soils report and
other relevant analysis, require that no basements are constructed in certain
areas with identified high water tables. If no basements are allowed, a note
shall be placed on the plat reflecting this requirement. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018)
F.   Streetlights: Streetlights shall be provided in all subdivisions as set
forth herein. The subdivider shall bond with the City a streetlight system
development fee in the amount set forth in the City's consolidated fee
schedule, which amount shall be sufficient to cover the City's entire expense
for the design and installation of a street lighting system for said
subdivision. The subdivider shall provide for the design and installation of
the street lighting system, which conforms to Draper City's design standards
and the specifications of PacifiCorp, dba Utah Power and Light Company.
Developer shall get design approval of streetlight system by Utah Power and
Light, prior to final plat approval.
G.   Utility Easements: Utility easements shall be provided within the
subdivision as required for public utility purposes. All lots shall have front
and rear yard easements, and at least one side yard easement, of at least seven
feet (7'). Additional easements, or increased width of easements, may be
required as necessary to provide for adequate utility service and/or drainage
within the subdivision and adjoining parcels. Whenever possible, utilities
shall be installed within dedicated public rights-of-way or other streets.
(Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-5-055: SUBDIVISION SURVEY MONUMENTS:
Prior to the placement or installation of any survey monument within a
subdivision, the subdivider shall obtain approval and verification of the
proposed location of the survey monument from the Salt Lake County surveyor's
office. Standard County precast monuments shall be installed by the
subdivider's engineer or land surveyor and shall be part of the required
improvements. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-5-060: LANDSCAPING AND TREES:
A.   Landscaping: Landscaping and irrigation plans in compliance with Chapter
9-23 of this code shall be required for all subdivisions within the City
detailing the landscaping of all public areas and park strips in the
development and any other area required to be landscaped as a condition of
development approval.
B.   Street Trees:
1.   All developers of subdivisions in Draper City shall provide a street tree
plan in accordance with section
9-23-080 of this code as part of subdivision application and shall provide a
copy of the street tree plan approved with the subdivision to the purchaser of
each lot in the subdivision.
a.   The following note shall be included on each subdivision plat where street
tree installation is required:
Notice to property owners: Individual property owners are required to plant and
maintain street trees adjacent to or on their property in compliance with the
approved street tree plan for the subdivision on file in the Community
Development office of Draper City.
2.   Street trees selected for use within subdivision park strips shall meet
the same diversity standards for trees found in subdivision
9-23-050(H) of this code.
3.   The developer or property owner shall install street trees including
necessary irrigation, as detailed on approved plans, along the street frontage
that abuts the property. Installation may not occur during the winter months of
October through March, and shall be completed no later than May 31st of the
calendar year following the commencement of the use or the first issuance of an
occupancy certificate for the property. After installation, individual property
owners shall irrigate and maintain street trees fronting their property in
accordance with sections
9-23-080 and
9-23-140 of this code. Violations of this section shall be enforced per section
17-1-100.
C.   Improvement Completion: The subdivision developer shall provide an
improvement completion assurance as per section
17-4-075 of this title for all public landscaping improvements and
infrastructure improvements within the subdivision, or install said
improvements prior to commencement of any other development activity on the
property and recording the of the plat. Subdivisions which are required to
contain other landscaping improvements or amenities, with the exception of
street trees, shall enter into a written agreement with the city regarding the
completion of the other landscaping and amenities including provisions for the
posting of improvement completion assurances as necessary, before the plat may
be recorded. (Ord. 661, 1-3-2006; amd. Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1408,
10-15-2019; Ord. 1501, 10-5-2021; Ord. 1583, 6-20-2023)
17-5-070: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to receive a building permit until
utilities, roads, and other basic improvements are provided as stipulated in
section
17-1-070 of this title. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-5-080: WARRANTY PERIOD:
A.   Commencement: The improvement assurance warranty period shall commence
upon the date that all improvements required by the City to be installed within
the subdivision have been completed to the satisfaction of the City and an
inspection approving the same and one hundred percent (100%) release of the
security has been made.
B.   Term: The warranty period shall continue for one year, except for cases of
revegetation on Traverse Ridge, which shall continue for a period of two (2)
years. The City Council specifically finds that one year is inadequate to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare in cases of revegetation on
Traverse Ridge, and that it has substantial evidence of unstable soil
conditions that render impracticable the discovery of substandard or defective
performance of revegetation within a one year period.
C.   Extension: The improvement assurance warranty period may be extended to
two (2) years after final acceptance of the improvement or warranty work in
those cases where the City Engineer determines for good cause that a lesser
period would be inadequate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and has substantial evidence of prior poor performance of the applicant,
unstable soil conditions within the subdivision or development area that would
render impracticable the discovery of substandard or defective performance
within a one year period; a partial release of the improvement assurance, if
appropriate, is provided; and the Land Use Authority establishes objective
inspection standards for final acceptance of the required improvements.
D.   Subdivider Warranty: The subdivider shall warrant that the materials and
workmanship of improvements comport with adopted City standards and will not
fail in any material aspect during the warranty period.
E.   Defects, Deficiencies: If any defects or deficiencies in materials or
workmanship are found by the City during the warranty period or that the
improvements have failed in any material aspect, the subdivider shall promptly
resolve such defects or deficiencies and request the City Engineer to reinspect
the improvements. Thereafter the repairs may, at the discretion of the City
Engineer, be subject to an additional warranty period of up to one year.
F.   Final Inspection: At the end of the warranty period, the subdivider shall
request the City Engineer to make a final inspection of all improvements
pursuant to the City's objective inspection standards. If the City Engineer
verifies that the improvements are acceptable, the City Engineer shall release
the balance of the security posted by the subdivider.
G.   Dates Of Inspections: Any subdivision inspections that include living
plant materials, parks, or park strips will only be performed between April 15
and October 30. Inspection of other City required improvements during cool
climates, inclement weather, or between October 30 and April 15 will be subject
to a finding by the City Engineer that such installation can be satisfactorily
inspected.
H.   Maintenance During Warranty: During the warranty period, the subdivider
shall be responsible for all aspects of landscape maintenance including, but
not limited to: mowing, trimming, watering, fertilizing, and weed control,
including water and electricity costs. The subdivider is also responsible for
hydrant repair, sidewalk repair, storm drain maintenance, road repair, street
signs, meter pit damage, utility settling, curb and gutter repair, and street
sweeping during the warranty period. The City will snowplow roads during the
warranty period. (Ord. 864, 11-18-2008)
17-5-090: PROTECTION STRIPS:
A.   The Planning Commission may approve protection strips subject to the
following regulations:
1.   Approval for protection strips shall be obtained with preliminary or minor
subdivision plat approval. The minor, preliminary and final plats shall
indicate the protection strip as undedicated property and as a protection
strip.
2.   The protection strip shall be at least one foot (1') in width but no more
than five feet (5') in width. It shall be located abutting the dedicated street
and between the street and project boundary. Protection strips shall not be
permitted at the end of or within the boundaries of a public street or proposed
street, or within any area intended for future public use.
3.   A pioneering/reimbursement agreement shall be required with any protection
strip. The agreement shall include the following information:
a.   The subdivider shall contract to deed the strip to the existing or future
owners of the contiguous property for a consideration named in the agreement.
b.   Such consideration shall not be more than the fair cost of the land in the
protection strip, the street improvements properly chargeable to the contiguous
property, plus the value of one-half (1/2) the land in the street at the time
of the agreement, together with interest at a fair rate from the time of
agreement until the time of the subdivision of such contiguous property.
c.   The agreement shall be provided for City review, with the City approved
signed and notarized agreement recorded with the subdivision plat. (Ord. 1332,
7-10-2018)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
17-6-010: Infrastructure Design Standards
17-6-020: Completion
17-6-010: INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS:
A.   Standards for design, construction specifications, inspection of the
street improvements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and standards for design,
construction specifications and inspection of water distribution systems,
sewage disposal facilities, storm drainage and flood control facilities shall
be prepared by the city engineer. Standards for infrastructure improvements
involving roadways shall also comply with Utah Code 10-9a-531 and Utah Code 10-
9a-533, as amended.
B.   Standards for fire hydrants shall meet the requirements of any federal,
state and local governmental entities having jurisdiction over the same. (Ord.
480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 1497, 7-20-2021)
17-6-020: COMPLETION:
A complete set of record drawings ("as built" drawings) shall be filed with the
city engineer upon completion of the public improvements and prior to
commencement of the warranty period. The record drawings shall be on
reproducible mylar copies of the original tracings and certified as to accuracy
and completeness by the subdivider's licensed engineer. Additionally, the
subdivider shall submit electronic copies of the record drawings in AutoCAD
(DWG) format. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT FEES
SECTION:
17-7-010: Development Fees Levied
17-7-010: DEVELOPMENT FEES LEVIED:
A.   Payment Required: No final plat shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator or recorded and no building or other permits required by the
ordinances of Draper City shall be issued, unless the subdivider shall first
pay to the City all applicable fees required under the City consolidated fee
schedule. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018)
B.   Public Improvement Inspection Fees: All public improvements inspection
fees shall be paid to the City prior to the recordation of the plat. (Ord. 480,
12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 8
MINOR SUBDIVISION
SECTION:
17-8-010: Minor Subdivision
17-8-020: Authority
17-8-030: Submission
17-8-040: Distribution
17-8-050: Review
17-8-060: Recordation Of The Minor Subdivision
17-8-070: Expiration Of Minor Subdivision Approval
17-8-010: MINOR SUBDIVISION:
A "minor subdivision" shall be defined as a subdivision of ten (10) or fewer
lots from a parcel which meets the following criteria:
A.   Zoning Designation: The parcel proposed to be subdivided currently has the
zoning designation required for the minimum lot size proposed.
B.   Access: All lots have acceptable access to a public street, either by
direct frontage or through access by an approved private lane or right-of-way.
Private lane and/or public street standards must meet standard City cross
sections.
C.   Area Requirements: Each lot within the proposed subdivision must meet the
frontage, width and area requirements of the zone district in which it is to be
located. Any flag lot(s) within the minor subdivision shall be required to
comply with section
9-27-090 of this Code.
D.   Not Platted Subdivision: The proposed lots are not part of a platted
subdivision. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
17-8-020: AUTHORITY:
The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve or deny a minor
subdivision application in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
Alternatively, when the applicant requests deviations from standards found
within this title or titles 9, 11, or 18 the Planning Commission shall have the
authority to approve or deny a minor subdivision at a public hearing.(Ord.
1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-8-030: SUBMISSION:
The subdivider shall submit a complete application for a minor subdivision to
the Community Development Department, along with a completed application and
application fee. The proposed minor subdivision plan shall include the
information required for a preliminary plat application as outlined in section
17-3-030 and the final plat application as outlined in section
17-4-030 of this title. The fee for minor subdivisions shall be based on the
City's adopted consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003;
amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-8-040: DISTRIBUTION:
Distribution For Review: The Community Development Department, upon receipt of
a complete application for minor subdivision, shall distribute copies of the
plan to the Development Review Committee and other agencies or advisors as may
contribute to a decision in the best interest of the public. (Ord. 1075, 11-19-
2013; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-8-050: REVIEW:
A.   Development Review Committee: Once comment has been received from the
Development Review Committee and all notified government departments, agencies,
and property owners, the Community Development Department shall review the
submitted minor subdivision application and check compliance with the City's
general plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, and other appropriate
regulations.
1.   If the review identifies any inadequacy in the information submitted,
noncompliance with City regulations, questionable or undesirable design or
engineering, the community development department shall forward the review
comments in writing to the applicant. Review of the minor subdivision plan
shall follow the process outlined in section 17-1-080 of this title.
2.   If deviations are requested, notice of the public hearing at which the
Planning Commission reviews the proposed minor subdivision shall be provided in
accordance with section 17-1-085 of this title.
B.   Findings; Considerations: After the fourth or final review, the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, as applicable, shall make findings
regarding the submitted minor subdivision plan, specifying the approval or
denial of the subdivision. The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission
shall forward the findings to the applicant.
C.   Appeal: The applicant may appeal any decision of the Zoning Administrator
or Planning Commission to the Appeals and Variance Hearing Officer as provided
in Section 17-1-120. (Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018;
Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-8-060: RECORDATION OF THE MINOR SUBDIVISION:
Once an approval of a minor subdivision has been granted, the applicant shall
submit to the Community Development Department a mylar which complies with the
requirements for final plat as outlined in section
17-4-030 of this title. The mylar shall also be reviewed and approved by the
City Engineer, as outlined in section
17-4-040 of this title, and City Attorney, as outlined in section
17-4-080 of this title. Any minor subdivision that creates any property to be
dedicated or otherwise given to the City for right-of-way or other public use
shall also comply with the terms of section
17-4-100 of this title regarding the payment of Property Tax. (Ord. 888, 4-7-
2009)
17-8-070: EXPIRATION OF MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
Once the zoning administrator has approved the minor subdivision, the
subdivider shall have one (1) year from the date of approval to record the plat
or begin construction of the required landscaping and infrastructure. If
recordation or construction has not taken place within the specified time
limitation, the approval shall become null and void. This time period may be
extended by the Zoning Administrator for up to an additional six (6) month
period for good cause shown. The subdivider must petition in writing for this
extension prior to the expiration of the original six (6) month period.
(Ord. 480, 12-3-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
CHAPTER 9
PLAT AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
17-9-010: Petition For Amendment
17-9-020: Amendment Procedure
17-9-030: Notice
17-9-040: Grounds For Vacating Or Changing A Plat
17-9-050: Amended Plat Requirements
17-9-060: Property Boundary Adjustments
17-9-070: Expiration Of A Plat Amendment
17-9-010: PETITION FOR AMENDMENT:
A.   Property Owner: Any fee owner of property lying within a recorded
subdivision plat may petition the City requesting to vacate, alter or amend
some or all of the subdivision plat. The petition shall include:
1.   The name and address of all owners of record of the land contained in the
entire plat or on that portion of the plat described in the petition;
2.   The signature of each of the owners identified in subsection A1 of this
section who consent to the petition; and
3.   The fee as set forth in the Draper City consolidated fee schedule.
B.   City: The City on its own initiative may consider the vacation, alteration
or amendment of a subdivision plat. The procedure for such consideration shall
be as set out in this chapter.
C.   Technical Changes: An amendment to a recorded plat shall not be required
for technical changes, such as modifications to grading or utilities, which do
not affect easements, right-of-way widths, lot lines, notes, or other
designations shown on the subdivision plat. These changes shall be approved
through the corresponding approval process, such as land disturbance permit.
(Ord. 1075, 11-19-2013; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-9-020: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
A.   Planning Commission: Upon receipt of a petition to vacate, alter, or amend
a subdivision plat, the matter shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
consideration.
B.   Public Hearing: Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this
section, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
subdivision plat amendment within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
petition. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in section
17-1-085 of this Code.
C.   Waiver Of Public Hearing: Where the subdivision plat amendment process is
initiated by petition, the Planning Commission, in its discretion, may waive
the requirement of a public hearing if:
1.   The proposed subdivision plat change does not include the vacation of some
or all of a public street or municipal utility easement;
2.   No owner within the plat notifies the City of their objection, in writing,
within ten (10) days of the mailed notice provided under section
17-1-085 of this code; and
3.   All owners within the plat have signed the revised plat consenting to the
proposed amendment.
D.   Vacating A Public Street, Right-Of-Way Or Easement: A petition under this
section that proposes to vacate some or all of a public street, right-of-way or
easement shall comply with State Code.
E.   Public Hearing Not Required: Not withstanding sections B and C in this
section, the public hearing requirements do not apply and the planning
commission may consider an owners petition for a subdivision plat amendment at
a public meeting, subject to notice being given to adjoining property owners
per section
17-1-085 of this code, if the petition seeks to:
1.   Join two or more of the petitioner fee owner's contiguous lots as outlined
in
17-9-060 of this chapter;
2.   Subdivide one or more of the petitioning fee owner's lots, if the
subdivision will not result in a violation of a land use ordinance or a
development condition;
3.   Adjust the lot lines of adjoining lots or between a lot and an adjoining
parcel if the fee owners of each of the adjoining properties join in the
petition, regardless of whether the properties are located in the same
subdivision, as outlined in
17-9-060 of this chapter;
4.   On a lot owned by the petitioning fee owner, adjust an internal lot
restriction imposed by ordinance; or
5.   Alter the plat in a manner that does not change the existing boundaries or
other attributes of lots within the subdivision that are not:
a.   Owned by the petitioner; or
b.   Designated as a common area.
F.   The city may not approve a petition for a subdivision amendment unless the
amendment identifies and preserves any easements owned by a culinary water
authority or sanitary sewer authority for existing facilities located within
the subdivision. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord. 1488,
5-4- 2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-9-030: NOTICE:
Notice of any proposed subdivision plat amendment shall be given as specified
in Section
17-1-085 of this code. (Ord. 1075, 11-19-2013; amd. Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019; Ord.
1601, 1-16-2024)
17-9-040: GROUNDS FOR VACATING OR CHANGING A PLAT:
The Planning Commission may approve the vacation or amendment of a plat if the
Planning Commission finds that there is good cause for the vacation or
amendment, and no public street or municipal utility easement has been vacated
or amended. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-9-050: AMENDED PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to the Planning Commission’s approval of a petition or proposal to amend
a subdivision plat, the petitioner or sponsor shall deliver to the City an
amended subdivision plat and supporting information in compliance with the
requirements of section
17-4-030 of this title. Any subdivision plat amendment that creates any
property to be dedicated or otherwise given to the City for right-of-way or
other public use shall also comply with the terms of section
17-4-100 of this title regarding the payment of Property Tax. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-
2018; amd. Ord. 1488, 5-4-2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-9-060: PROPERTY BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS:
A.   Lot Line Adjustments: To make a lot line adjustment between property
owners, or to join a petitioner fee owner’s contiguous lot(s) with a petitioner
fee owner’s contiguous parcel:
   1.   The property owner or owners shall:
      a.   Submit an application for an obtain approval of the lot line
adjustment from the Zoning Administrator;
      b.   Execute a boundary line adjustment through a quitclaim deed or
boundary line agreement; and
      c.   Record the notice of approval from the Zoning Administrator, which
recites the legal descriptions of both the original properties and the
properties resulting from the exchange of title, together with a quitclaim deed
or boundary line agreement in the office of the county recorder.
 
   2.   The joining of a lot or lots to a parcel does not constitute a
subdivision as to the parcel or subject the parcel to other sections of Title
17.
   3.   The Zoning Administrator shall approve the lot line adjustment if the
exchange of title will not result in a violation of any land use ordinance.
   4.   An application for a lot line adjustment between property owners shall
be filed jointly.
B.   Joining Lots: A fee owner may join two (2) or more of the petitioner fee
owner's contiguous lots by following the subdivision plat amendment process in
Title 17.
C.   Parcel Boundary Adjustments: To make a parcel boundary adjustment, a
property owner shall execute a boundary adjustment through a quitclaim deed or
boundary line agreement and record the quitclaim deed or boundary line
agreement with the county recorder.
1.   A Parcel boundary adjustment is not subject to the city's review unless
any of the subject parcels contain a dwelling unit.
2.   Parcel boundary adjustments that require review by the city shall:
a.   Be filed jointly by the owners of both subject properties.
b.   Include a boundary line agreement that complies with the provisions of
Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-524(2), as amended, and includes a statement citing
the file number of the record of survey map in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated 17-23-17, as amended.
3.   Within 14 days from the receipt of a complete application for a parcel
boundary adjustment, the zoning administrator or designee shall review and
approve applications that comply with the following requirements:
a.   No additional parcels will result from the adjustment.
b.   Existing dwelling unit(s) and other structures on the parcel(s) will
maintain compliance with the current setbacks for the zoning district in which
they are located. Where existing dwelling unit(s) or structures are
nonconforming as to current setback requirements, the amount or degree of
nonconformity will not increase as a result of the parcel boundary adjustment.
c.   The proposed parcel boundary adjustment will not create a violation of any
land use ordinance or other city ordinances.
4.   If the zoning administrator or their designee finds that an application is
deficient or if additional information is required to approve the boundary line
agreement, they shall provide written notice to the property owners of the
deficiency or additional information required within the 14-day timeframe from
the date of the initial submittal. Such notice shall include the following:
a.   A description of the specific deficiency or additional information
required.
b.   A statement that the boundary line agreement will be approved upon the
correction of the deficiency or submission of the additional information.
c.   A statement that failure to correct the deficiency or provide the
additional information may result in denial and/or expiration of the
application.
5.   Upon receipt of the information requested in subsection (C)(4) above, the
zoning administrator or designee shall review the complete application
according to the provisions of subsection (C)(3) above.
6.   Upon approval of the application, the zoning administrator or designee
shall provide a notice of approval to the property owners within 14 days of the
receipt of the application.
7.   The property owners that are a party to the application shall record with
the county recorder within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the notice of
approval the notice of approval together with a quitclaim deed or boundary line
agreement that results in the property boundary adjustment described by the
proposed legal descriptions submitted with the parcel boundary adjustment
application.
8.   The zoning administrator or designee shall deny an application that does
not comply with the requirements of subsection (C)(3) above. The written notice
of denial shall be sent to the applicants in the same 14-day timeframe from the
date of the submittal of a complete application.
D.   Boundary Line Agreements: Boundary line agreements are subject to the
requirements of Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-524, as amended.
1.   Boundary line agreements that are not subject to review of the city shall
not be considered as having land use approval.
2.   In accordance with Utah Code Annotated subsections 10-9a-523(5), the city
may withhold approval of any land use application submitted for property that
is the subject of a recorded boundary line agreement or other document used to
adjust a mutual boundary line if the city determines that the lots or parcels,
as adjusted by the boundary line agreement or other document used to adjust the
mutual boundary line, are not in compliance with the city's land use
regulations in effect on the day on which the boundary line agreement or other
document used to adjust the mutual boundary line is recorded.
a.   Land Use applications where approval has been withheld under this
subsection may proceed upon the subsequent recordation of a boundary line
agreement, including an amended subdivision plat when applicable, that brings
the lots or parcels into compliance with city code.
b.   Land use applications will still be subject to otherwise applicable
expiration dates if review and approval of necessary boundary line agreement(s)
is not diligently pursued by the applicant. (Ord. 1332, 7-10-2018; amd. Ord.
1488, 5-4-2021; Ord. 1498, 8-3-2021; Ord. 1601, 1-16-2024)
17-9-070: EXPIRATION OF A PLAT AMENDMENT:
If the plat amendment is not recorded within one (1) year from the date of
approval or construction of the required landscaping and infrastructure has not
commenced, such approval shall be null and void. This time period may be
extended by the Planning Commission for up to one additional six (6) month
period for good cause shown. The subdivider must petition in writing for an
extension prior to the expiration of the original one (1) year.
(Ord. 1408, 10-15-2019)
TITLE 18
LAND DISTURBANCE
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
18-1-010: Short Title
18-1-020: Purpose
18-1-030: Definitions
18-1-040: Administration
18-1-050: Conflict
18-1-010: SHORT TITLE:
This title is to be known as the LAND DISTURBANCE ORDINANCE of the city and may
be so cited. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-1-020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to establish minimum requirements and procedures
for conducting land disturbance activities within the city. It is the intent of
this title to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public against
inadequate, unwarranted, or unsafe land disturbance activities during all
aspects of land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, the
following:
A.   To establish processes, procedures and standards for land disturbance
activities, such as clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, filling, dredging,
and other land disturbance related activities, to minimize hazards to life and
limb, protect against erosion and sedimentation, maintain the natural
environment, protect the safety, use, and stability of public rights of way and
drainage facilities, and provide for restoration of the land through
revegetation and landscaping.
B.   To assure that projects approved under this title, as well as neighboring
and downstream properties, will be free from harmful effects of new land
disturbance activities with regard to runoff, including inundation, flooding,
erosion, air pollution, and sedimentation.
C.   To ensure proper restoration of vegetation and soil systems disturbed by
land disturbance activities, to maintain an attractive and healthy landscape,
and to control against dust and erosion and their consequent effects on soil
structure and air and water quality during and after excavation.
D.   To provide processes and standards in compliance with state and federal
requirements regarding pollution, environmental quality, and stormwater
discharge. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-1-030: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given in this section:
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application for a land disturbance permit
pursuant to this title.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Practices, procedures or designs used as a
standard for a given industry. For purposes of this title, the relevant BMPs
for the erosion control and pollution prevention industry are more particularly
defined in the city's land disturbance design and construction standards.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The area within the lot which will be used to construct the
building, landscaped areas, retaining walls, fences, porches, patios, decks,
swimming pools, driveways, parking areas, or any other permanent feature which
is appurtenant to the building.
BUTTRESS FILL: A designed compacted earth fill used for providing lateral
support to an unstabilized earth or rock mass.
CITY: Draper City, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of Draper City, or his or her authorized
designee.
CIVIL ENGINEER: A professional engineer in the branch of civil engineering
licensed under the laws of Utah.
CLEARING AND GRUBBING: Moving, removing, displacing, and/or stockpiling, by
manual or mechanical means, any healthy trees, vegetation and/or the top
organic layer of a site. The top organic layer shall be that described in the
geotechnical report for the site. In the absence of a geotechnical report, the
organic layer shall not be less than eight inches (8") thick.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The community development director of Draper
City, or his or her authorized designee.
COMPACTION: The densification of fill by mechanical means.
DETENTION: The holding back or delaying of the flow of water, through manmade
or natural means.
DEVELOPER: The person or entity responsible for developing property pursuant to
an approved building permit, site plan, or final plat.
DREDGING: The practice of deepening a waterway by mechanical means by the
removal of sediments.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY: The city engineer, the engineering inspector, the
community development director, or any duly appointed code enforcement officer
or law enforcement official charged with the responsibility for enforcement of
city ordinances.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST: A professional engineering geologist licensed or
registered under the laws of Utah and capable of applying the geological
sciences to engineering practices for the purpose of assuring that the
geological features affecting the location, design, construction, operation,
and maintenance of engineering works are recognized and adequately provided
for.
EROSION: The transport of the ground surface or soil as a result of the
movement of wind or water.
EROSION CONTROL MEASURES: The structural and nonstructural BMP for erosion
control that prevents displacement of soil particles by wind or water. BMP
erosion control measures may include seeding, mulching, vegetative buffer
strips, sod, plastic coverings, riprap, gabions, other channel armoring
methods, burlap coverings, watering, and other BMP measures that control the
movement of the ground surface or soil.
FARMING AND AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS: Any activity or process normally performed
as part of the farming use of the land which would prepare the soil for
planting or harvesting of agriculturally usable products.
FILL: The artificial deposit of soil, rock, or other materials on a site.
FINISHED GRADE: The final grade or elevation of the building site, slope or
terrace (0.1 plus or minus feet).
GRADE: The elevation of the ground surface as measured from a known vertical
control.
GRADING: The act or result of digging, excavating, transporting, spreading,
depositing, filling, compacting, settling, or shaping of land surfaces and
slopes, and other operations or activities involving the physical movement of
rock or soil.
LAND DISTURBANCE: Any disturbance of native soils, plants, or environment,
including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavation,
filling, dredging, construction of earth filled dams, and any other types of
earthwork.
LAND DISTURBANCE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: Draper City land
disturbance design and construction standards as adopted by the city.
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT: The land disturbance permit required by the city in
accordance with provisions of this title.
LANDMARK TREES: Trees that measure over three inches (3") caliper.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A professional landscape architect licensed or registered
under the laws of Utah.
LOT LEVEL: Design, construction and infrastructure related to construction on a
specific lot within an approved subdivision or site plan development.
PLANTING DATE: The date native seed can be applied without temporary
irrigation, generally from October 15 through March 1, or as otherwise
determined by the city's engineering department.
PROJECT: A defined site that has obtained final subdivision plat or site plan
approval from the city.
SEDIMENT: Soil or earth material deposited by water.
SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURES: The BMP for sediment control that contains the
deposited and/or displaced soil particles. BMP sediment control measures may
include dikes, sediment detention traps, sediment detention basins, filters,
fences, barriers, swales, berms, drains, check dams, and other BMP measures
that control the deposition of soil or earth material.
SITE: A parcel or parcels of real property on which activity regulated by this
title is occurring or is proposed to occur.
SLOPE: A portion of ground forming a natural or artificial incline.
SOIL: All earth material, of whatever origin, which overlies bedrock.
SOILS ENGINEER: A professional civil engineer licensed under the laws of Utah
who is experienced in soil mechanics and slope stability analysis.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
SUBDIVISION LEVEL: Design, construction and infrastructure related to
subdivision development and systems, such as drainage, culinary water,
wastewater systems, etc.
SWALES: Shallow grassed or otherwise protected trenches that are wider than
they are deep and which provide a specific pathway for drainage water.
WET WEATHER PLAN: A detailed erosion and sediment control plan and construction
sequence that clearly shows how construction will be processed during
nonplanting date periods; i.e., after October 15 of each year until March 1 of
each year. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-1-040: ADMINISTRATION:
The engineering department is designated as the responsible department, with
the city engineer as the official responsible for the administration of this
title. The city engineer may delegate any or all administrative duties provided
herein as deemed necessary. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-1-050: CONFLICT:
In the event of a conflict between the terms of this title or any other law,
ordinance, rule, regulation or standard, the more restrictive provision shall
apply. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
CHAPTER 2
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT
SECTION:
18-2-010: Land Disturbance Permit Required
18-2-020: Exemptions
18-2-030: Application
18-2-040: Plans And Specifications
18-2-050: Grading Plan
18-2-060: Drainage Plan
18-2-070: Erosion And Sediment Control Plan
18-2-080: Revegetation Plan
18-2-090: Soils Report
18-2-100: Geological Report
18-2-110: Exploratory Work
18-2-120: Application Waiver
18-2-130: Fees
18-2-140: Review And Approval
18-2-150: Issuance
18-2-160: Conditions Of Approval
18-2-170: Denial Of Land Disturbance Permits
18-2-180: Approved Plans
18-2-190: Modification Of Plans
18-2-200: Correction Of Errors
18-2-210: Term Of Land Disturbance Permits
18-2-220: Extension Of Term
18-2-230: Suspended Or Abandoned Work
18-2-240: Renewal Of Expired Land Disturbance Permit
18-2-250: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
18-2-260: No Transfer Or Assignment Of Permit
18-2-270: Validity Of Permit
18-2-280: Additional Permits
18-2-290: Emergencies
18-2-010: LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall
commence or perform any land disturbance, grading, relocation of earth, or any
other land disturbance activity, and no person shall import or export any earth
materials to or from any site, without first obtaining a land disturbance
permit.
B.   Manufacturing, Commercial, Or Institutional Properties:
1.   Except for preliminary geological and geotechnical activities as described
in section
9-19-070 of this code, no land disturbance permit shall be issued for any site
or project in a manufacturing, commercial or institutional zone within the
slope stability study area of the Draper City geologic hazards ordinance plate
A-3 zone or sensitive lands overlay until and unless a final site plan or
subdivision plat has been approved and recorded for the site or project.
2.   Land disturbance permit applications to improve, construct, disturb or
otherwise modify land in manufacturing, commercial or institutional zones not
subject to either the slope stability study area of the Draper City geologic
hazards ordinance plate A-3 or a sensitive lands overlay zoning, where the
modifications do not require site plan or subdivision plat approval, as
determined by the zoning administrator and city engineer, and where the cuts
and fills do not exceed thirteen feet (13'), shall be reviewed and processed in
accordance with the provisions of this title by the city engineer.
C.   Residential And Agricultural Properties:
1.   Except for preliminary geological and geotechnical activities described in
section
9-19-070 of this code, or for city engineer approved placement of excavated
material generated by other city approved applications, no land disturbance
permit shall be issued for any site or project in a residential or agricultural
zone within the slope stability study area of the Draper City geologic hazards
ordinance plate A-3 zone until and unless a final site plan or subdivision plat
has been approved and recorded for the site or project.
2.   Land disturbance permit applications to improve, construct, disturb or
otherwise modify land in residential and agricultural zones not subject to the
slope stability study area of the Draper City geologic hazards ordinance plate
A-3, a sensitive lands overlay zoning, and where the modifications do not
require site plan or subdivision plat approval, as determined by the zoning
administrator and city engineer, shall be reviewed and processed in accordance
with the provisions of this title by the city engineer. In this particular
circumstance, applicants may not submit a subdivision plat or site plan
application for at least three (3) months from the date of approval of the land
disturbance permit.
3.   Land disturbance permit applications to improve, construct, disturb or
otherwise modify land in residential and agricultural zones subject to the
slope stability study area of the Draper City geologic hazards ordinance plate
A-3 where the modifications do not require site plan or subdivision plat
approval, as determined by the zoning administrator and city engineer, shall be
denied unless the disturbance is associated with the completion of a condition
of subdivision plat approval previously rendered by the Draper City council. In
this particular circumstance, applications shall satisfy all provisions of this
code. (Ord. 1014, 5-15-2012)
18-2-020: EXEMPTIONS:
Activities exempted from the land disturbance permit requirements are subject
to and shall be performed in accordance with the land disturbance design and
construction standards, the hillside overlay ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances, rules, regulations and standards of the city. The following
activities do not require a land disturbance permit:
A.   An excavation which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards; or does not
affect an area that is less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area; or
does not create a cut slope greater than five feet (5') in height and steeper
than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1); provided, however, any excavation
which is made in an area of adverse geological conditions or which alters a
drainage course must obtain a permit;
B.   A fill which is less than one foot (1') in depth and placed on natural
terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1);
affects an area that is less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area;
is less than three feet (3') in depth and is not intended to support
structures; provided, any fill over fifty (50) cubic yards or which obstructs a
drainage course must obtain a permit;
C.   Excavations below the finished grade for basements and footings of
buildings, retaining walls, swimming pools, or other structures authorized by a
valid building permit, but this shall not exempt any fill made of materials
from such excavations or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height
greater than five feet (5') after the completion of such structures;
D.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, and the stockpiling of rock,
sand, gravel, aggregate, clay, or topsoil operations conducted under a valid
special use permit issued by the city pursuant to applicable zoning
regulations;
E.   The depositing of rubbish or other materials at any dump or sanitary fill
conducted under a valid permit and/or applicable zoning ordinances, but such
exemption shall not extend to surrounding berms, permanent access roads,
building sites, or protective drainage works;
F.   Farming and agricultural operations conducted under a valid use permit or
applicable zoning ordinances;
G.   Soil and water conservation work under the direct control of the United
States natural resources conservation service, provided the construction of
water impounding structures of earth shall require a permit where the maximum
depth to which water is or may be impounded is five feet (5') or greater; and
H.   Grading operations conducted by the city for approved capital improvement
projects. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-030: APPLICATION:
Application for a land disturbance permit shall be filed with the city engineer
on forms furnished by the city for such purpose. Applications shall include all
the plans, specifications, reports, documentation and information required
herein. Three (3) sets of all required plans, specifications and reports shall
be submitted with each application. All such plans, specifications and reports
shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer, soils engineer, engineering
geologist and/or landscape architect, where applicable. Additional experts in
applicable fields should be utilized for preparation of such documents and
reports as appropriate. No application shall be processed until all required
plans, specifications, reports, documentation and information have been
received by the city in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this
title. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-040: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include the following
plans, specifications, reports, documentation and information:
A.   Vicinity Sketch: A vicinity sketch or other data adequately indicating the
site location;
B.   Lines, Dimensions, Bearings: The property lines and dimensions and
bearings of the property on which the work is to be performed;
C.   Existing Buildings, Structures: The location of any existing buildings or
structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location
of any buildings or structures on the land of adjacent property owners, which
buildings or structures are within fifty feet (50') of the property boundary;
D.   Landmark Trees: The location of landmark trees as indicated by the
designation of the location of the center of the trunk;
E.   Topography: Accurate topography showing suitable contours of the existing
and proposed ground elevations, with the contours extending past the boundary
lines of any project for a minimum of one hundred feet (100'), and which may be
required by the engineer be extended to include watershed areas and all other
areas influencing the proposed development;
F.   Proposed Activities: The elevations, dimensions, locations, extent, and
slopes of all proposed land disturbance activities shown by contours or other
means;
G.   Material Certification: A certification of the quantity and type of
material of any proposed excavation and fill;
H.   Starting, Completion Dates: The estimated starting and completion dates
for the proposed land disturbance activities and proposed land disturbance
activities schedule and permit term;
I.   Drainage Plans: Detailed plans of all drainage devices, walls, cribbing,
dams, or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a
part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and
estimated runoff of the area served by the drains, with all hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations signed by a civil engineer;
J.   Entrance, Exit Plan: Temporary construction entrance and exit plan;
K.   Structures Constructed: An indication as to the type of structure or
structures to be constructed or the proposed use of the site, such as single-
family residence, multiple-family development, commercial, or industrial;
L.   Property Owner Authorization: Signed, written authorization from the
property owner giving the applicant permission to access the property and
perform the proposed land disturbance; and
M.   Additional Required Information: Any additional plans, drawings, or
calculations required by the city engineer. (Ord. 964, 3-1-2011)
18-2-050: GRADING PLAN:
Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include a grading plan for
the proposed land disturbance activity and site. The grading plan shall be
prepared by a civil engineer and shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements and standards for such plans as set forth in the land disturbance
design and construction standards. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-060: DRAINAGE PLAN:
Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include a drainage plan
for the proposed land disturbance activity and site. The drainage plan shall be
prepared by a civil engineer and shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements and standards for such plans as set forth in the land disturbance
design and construction standards. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-070: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN:
Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include an erosion and
sediment control plan for the proposed land disturbance activity and site. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a civil engineer and
shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements and standards for such
plans as set forth in the land disturbance design and construction standards.
(Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-080: REVEGETATION PLAN:
Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include a revegetation
plan for the proposed land disturbance activity and site. The revegetation plan
shall be prepared by an erosion control specialist or professional of
comparable expertise and shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements
and standards for such plans as set forth in the land disturbance design and
construction standards. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-090: SOILS REPORT:
Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include a soils report for
the site. The soils report shall be prepared and signed by a soils engineer and
shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements and standards for such
reports as set forth in the land disturbance design and construction standards.
(Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-100: GEOLOGICAL REPORT:
When deemed necessary by the city engineer due to the circumstances and
conditions of the site, an application for a land disturbance permit shall
include a geological report for the site. The geological report, when required,
shall be prepared and signed by a engineering geologist and shall be prepared
in accordance with the requirements and standards for such reports as set forth
in the land disturbance design and construction standards. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-110: EXPLORATORY WORK:
Surface and subsurface exploratory work and reports may be required when deemed
necessary by the city engineer due to site conditions and/or hazards on the
site. When required, such exploratory work and reports shall be performed and
prepared by a soils engineer and/or engineering geologist. Exploratory work and
reports shall be conducted and prepared in accordance with the requirements and
standards for exploratory work and reports as set forth in the land disturbance
design and construction standards. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-120: APPLICATION WAIVER:
The city engineer may waive any application requirement, plan, specification or
report when deemed unnecessary for the proposed application and for good cause
showing. A request for an application waiver shall be submitted by the
applicant in writing setting forth the grounds and reasons for the waiver. An
application shall not be deemed complete for purposes of the filing of a
completed application until the city engineer has approved the application
waiver request. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-130: FEES:
All applicable fees shall be paid by applicant with the filing of an
application for a land disturbance permit in accordance with the consolidated
fee schedule. An application will not be deemed complete until the required
fees have been received by the city. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-140: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The city engineer shall review the application, plans, and specifications filed
by an applicant for a land disturbance permit. If the city engineer determines
that the application is incomplete, or that additional information is needed
from the applicant regarding the proposed land disturbance activities, the city
engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of such deficiencies or the need
for additional information. The city engineer may also request review of the
application, plans and specifications by other departments of the city for
compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. Once
satisfied that the work described in an application for land disturbance permit
and the plans and specifications filed with the application conform to the
requirements of this title and other pertinent laws and ordinances, all
applicable fees have been paid, and all required bonds have been provided in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of this title, the city engineer
may issue a land disturbance permit to the applicant. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-150: ISSUANCE:
The city engineer shall provide the applicant with a written decision regarding
the approval or denial of the application for land disturbance permit and
related plans and shall provide the applicant with a copy of such decision. If
the application is approved, a copy of the land disturbance permit will be
provided to the applicant. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-160: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
In granting any land disturbance permit pursuant to the provisions of this
title, the city engineer or his or her authorized representative may attach
such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect public health and
safety. Such conditions may include, but will not be limited to:
A.   Site Improvement: The improvement of any existing site condition to bring
it up to the standards of this title; and
B.   Fencing: Requirements for fencing excavations or fills which would
otherwise be hazardous. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-170: DENIAL OF LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
A.   Hazardous Conditions: A land disturbance permit shall not be issued in any
case where it is found that the work proposed by the applicant is hazardous, as
determined by the city engineer, or is likely to endanger any private property,
result in the deposit of debris on any public way, or interfere with any
existing drainage course.
B.   Geological Or Flood Hazards: A land disturbance permit shall not be issued
if the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological or
flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can
eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property as
determined by the city engineer.
C.   Noncompliance: A land disturbance permit shall not be issued if the
proposed land disturbance activity would not comply with the requirements of an
applicable site plan, subdivision plat, or any provisions of law, including the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-180: APPROVED PLANS:
Prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit, the applicant shall provide
the city with four (4) sets of the final plans, specifications and computations
(full size) and two (2) sets of eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17")
plans. Upon issuance of the land disturbance permit, the city engineer shall
endorse in writing, or stamp "Approved" on all required sets of plans and
specifications. The city engineer shall retain two (2) sets of the plans and
specifications during the period of construction and as thereafter required by
the government records access and management act. The city engineer shall
return one set of the approved plans and specifications to the applicant. The
applicant shall retain the approved set of plans and specifications at the site
covered by the land disturbance permit at all times during which the work
authorized thereby is in progress. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-190: MODIFICATION OF PLANS:
No approved plans or specifications shall be changed, modified, altered or
amended, without approval of the city engineer in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth herein for original approval of such
plans and specifications. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-200: CORRECTION OF ERRORS:
The issuance of a land disturbance permit based upon submitted plans,
specifications and documents shall not prevent or preclude the right of the
city from thereafter requiring the correction of errors which may be later
discovered in such plans, specifications and documents. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-210: TERM OF LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
Each land disturbance permit shall contain a specified term as determined by
the city. The date the land disturbance permit expires shall be noted on the
land disturbance permit. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-220: EXTENSION OF TERM:
Prior to expiration of the land disturbance permit, the land disturbance permit
holder may apply for an extension of time in which to complete the work in a
reasonable and expeditious manner. The city engineer may grant an extension of
time, upon a showing of good cause, for a period or periods not exceeding a
total of one year. Denial of an extension of time does not preclude the right
of the land disturbance permit holder to apply for a new land disturbance
permit for the remaining balance of the work. Adequate security or written
consent from the surety must be provided for any extension of time before
approval of the extension is granted or becomes effective. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-230: SUSPENDED OR ABANDONED WORK:
Every land disturbance permit issued by the city engineer under the provisions
of this title expires by limitation and becomes null and void if the land
disturbance permit holder suspends or abandons the construction or work
authorized by such land disturbance permit, at any time after the work is
commenced, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or longer. After
construction or work under a land disturbance permit has been suspended or
abandoned for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or longer, a new or
renewed permit must be obtained prior to recommencing work. (Ord. 832, 5-6-
2008)
18-2-240: RENEWAL OF EXPIRED LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT:
If a land disturbance permit has expired, a new land disturbance permit shall
be obtained before any work can be recommenced. If no changes have been made or
will be made to the original plans and specifications for such work, and any
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year, the fee for the new land
disturbance permit will be one-half (1/2) the amount ordinarily required for a
new land disturbance permit. If changes have been made or will be made in the
original plans or specifications for the land disturbance activity, or the
suspension or abandonment has exceeded one year, the fee for a new permit shall
be required for a new permit for the proposed land disturbance activity. (Ord.
832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-250: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit when the permit is issued
in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when work
conducted thereunder is in violation of the terms of the permit or the
provisions of this title or other applicable city ordinances, rules,
regulations, standards and specifications, or pertinent laws. (Ord. 832, 5-6-
2008)
18-2-260: NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT:
Land disturbance permits shall not be transferable or assignable and work shall
not be performed under a land disturbance permit in any place other than that
specified in the permit. Nothing herein shall prevent a permit holder from
subcontracting the work to be performed under a land disturbance permit;
provided, however, the permit holder shall be and remain responsible and liable
for the performance of the work and land disturbance activities under the
permit and for all bonding and other requirements of this title and the
applicable permit. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-270: VALIDITY OF PERMIT:
The issuance of a land disturbance permit shall not be construed to be a permit
for violation of any of the provisions of this title or any other city
ordinances, rules, regulations, standards or specifications or other pertinent
laws. Permits presuming to give such authority shall be deemed invalid. (Ord.
832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-280: ADDITIONAL PERMITS:
The issuance of a land disturbance permit shall not relieve the owner,
applicant, permit holder, or developer from obtaining any and all other permits
or approvals required by the city or any other applicable agency having
jurisdiction over the work or property affected by the proposed land
disturbance activity. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
18-2-290: EMERGENCIES:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to any land disturbance activity
which is conducted during a period of emergency or disaster, as declared and
defined by the city, and which is directly connected with or related to the
relief of conditions caused by such emergency or disaster. (Ord. 832, 5-6-2008)
CHAPTER 3
LAND DISTURBANCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
18-3-010: Compliance With Permit
18-3-020: Protective Devices
18-3-030: Maintenance Of Site
18-3-040: Access And Haul Routes
18-3-050: Consent Of Adjacent Property Owners
18-3-060: Cuts And Fills
18-3-070: Erosion Control And Drainage Devices
18-3-080: Areas Subject To Slides And Unstable Soil
18-3-090: Planting And Irrigation Of Cut And Fill Slopes
18-3-100: Identification Of Building Envelope
18-3-110: Property Line And Corner Markers
18-3-120: Slope Protection Easements
18-3-130: Lots Graded Toward Street For Drainage
18-3-140: Lots Which Cannot Be Graded Toward The Street
18-3-150: Materials For Side And Rear Yard Drainage
18-3-160: Flow Of Water From One Lot To Another; Limited Use
18-3-170: Landscaping Of Certain Lots For Erosion Control
18-3-180: Erosion Control And Revegetation
18-3-190: Wet Weather Plan
18-3-200: Land Disturbance Design And Construction Standards
18-3-210: Lot Impervious Surface Area Drainage
18-3-010: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
The land disturbance permit holder and contractor and their agents shall carry
out the proposed land disturbance activities in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications, the conditions of the land disturbance permit, and
the requirements of this title and all other applicable ordinances, rules,
regulations and standards of the city. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-020: PROTECTIVE DEVICES:
The land disturbance permit holder and contractor and their agents shall
maintain all required protective devices and temporary drainage during the
progress of the land disturbance activities and shall be responsible for the
observance of the hours of work, dust control, methods of hauling, and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-030: MAINTENANCE OF SITE:
The land disturbance permit holder and contractor and their agents shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the site and the removal of all debris
during the term of the permit. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-040: ACCESS AND HAUL ROUTES:
Temporary construction entrance and exit routes shall be provided by the permit
holder in accordance with the approved plans and permit at key access points to
the site or project to eliminate the problem of tracking mud and debris from
the construction site onto private or public streets. The city engineer may
impose conditions to the land disturbance permit with respect to access or haul
routes to and from land disturbance activity sites, the hours of work, methods
of controlling dust, and safety precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular
traffic as determined required in the interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-050: CONSENT OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS:
Whenever any land disturbance activity requires entry onto adjacent property
for any reason, the land disturbance permit applicant shall obtain the written
consent of the adjacent property owner or their authorized representative and
shall file a copy of such consent with the city engineer before a land
disturbance permit may be issued. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-060: CUTS AND FILLS:
A.   Height: Except as otherwise provided herein, no finished fill slope shall
exceed a vertical height of twenty five feet (25'). The city engineer may
approve a fill slope in excess of twenty five feet (25') as deemed appropriate
in his or her sole discretion based upon the circumstances and conditions of
the proposed site and fill. Any fill slope proposed in excess of twenty five
feet (25') shall be supported by documentation and a report prepared and signed
by a professional engineering geologist and soils engineer attesting to the
appropriateness, safety and stability of the proposed fill slope. Such
documentation and report shall be prepared at the applicant's expense and shall
address the need for and design of intervening terraces or other necessary
measures to provide for the safety and stability of the proposed slope.
B.   Slope: Except as otherwise provided herein, no cut or fill shall exceed a
slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). The city engineer may approve a
cut or fill slope in excess of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) as deemed
appropriate in his or her sole discretion based upon the circumstances and
conditions of the proposed site and the cut or fill. Any cut or fill slope
proposed in excess of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) shall be supported
by documentation and a report prepared and signed by a professional engineering
geologist and soils engineer attesting to the appropriateness, safety and
stability of the proposed cut or fill slope. Such documentation and report
shall be prepared at the applicant's expense and shall address the need for and
design of necessary measures to provide for the safety and stability of the
proposed cut or fill slope.
C.   Slope Length: All applications for land disturbance activities involving
or proposing cut and/or fill slopes shall include a report prepared and signed
by an erosion control specialist or professional of comparable expertise
addressing the design, safety, and stability of the proposed slope lengths.
Such report shall indicate how the applicant will address the issue of length
of slope using the revised uniform soils loss equation (RUSLE). The report
shall indicate the method and/or materials to be used.
D.   Unstable Material: The city engineer may require any cut or fill to be
constructed with an exposed surface flatter than two horizontal to one vertical
(2:1) when, in the city engineer's opinion, under the particular conditions,
such flatter surface is deemed necessary for stability or safety.
E.   Fill Slope Limits: Toes of fill slopes shall not be made nearer to a
property boundary line than one-half (1/2) of the height of the fill, or twenty
feet (20'), whichever is less. Fill slopes shall not be divided horizontally by
property lines. Fill slopes occurring on a side or rear lot line shall be made
a part of the downhill lot.
F.   Intervening Terraces: When intervening terraces are used, terraces shall
be paved using materials as approved by the city and shall have a minimum width
of six feet (6'). Terraces shall be extensively landscaped in accordance with
an approved landscaping plan. Terraces shall be spaced at vertical intervals of
twenty five feet (25'); provided, however, for slopes less than forty feet
(40') in vertical height, terraces shall be approximately at mid height. For
slopes flatter than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), or where soil
conditions require, additional intervening terraces may be required.
G.   Compaction: All fills shall be placed, compacted, inspected, and tested in
accordance with the provisions of this title and the land disturbance design
and construction standards. If the strict enforcement of the compaction
provisions of this section is determined by the city engineer to be unnecessary
because of the proposed or probable use of the land, the city engineer may
waive the requirements. The requirements of this section shall not be waived
when structures are to be supported by the fill, the fills are being placed in
areas to be designated as hillside, or where the fills are necessary as a
safety measure to aid in preventing the saturation, settling, slipping, or
erosion of the fill.
H.   Fills Toeing Out On Natural Slopes: Except as otherwise provided herein,
no fills toeing out on natural slopes which are steeper than two horizontal to
one vertical (2:1) shall be permitted. The city engineer may approve such fills
toeing out on natural slopes which are steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1) as deemed appropriate in his or her sole discretion based upon
the circumstances and conditions of the proposed site and fill. Any fill slope
proposed to toe out on natural slopes which are steeper than two horizontal to
one vertical (2:1) shall be supported by documentation and a report prepared
and signed by a professional engineering geologist and soils engineer attesting
to the appropriateness, safety and stability of the proposed fill. Such
documentation and report shall be prepared at the applicant's expense and shall
address the need for and design of necessary measures to provide for the safety
and stability of the proposed fill.
I.   Combined Cut And Fill Slopes: Combined cut and fill slopes shall meet the
requirements of this section insofar as steepness, height, and benching are
concerned except that, where the slope exceeds twenty five feet (25') in
height, the required drainage bench shall be placed at the top of the cut
slope.
J.   Setback: Fill placed on or above the top of an existing or proposed cut or
natural slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) shall be set
back from the top of the slope a minimum distance as required by the uniform
building code, as adopted by the city, or as approved by the city engineer
based upon submitted reports and documentation for the project.
K.   Existing Fills: All existing manmade fills on any and all sites shall be
properly evaluated by a soils engineer. If deficiencies exist, recommendations
and design criteria for corrective measures shall be included within the soils
engineering report.
L.   Measure Of Settlement: The city engineer or the building official may
require the determination of the settlement characteristics of any fills to
establish that any movements have substantially ceased. In such cases, a system
of bench marks shall be installed by a civil engineer or land surveyor at
critical points on the fill, and accurate measurements of both horizontal and
vertical movements shall be taken and evaluated by the soils engineer for a
period of time sufficient to define the settlement behavior. The evaluation
period shall be monitored in accordance with the approved geotechnical report
for the project.
M.   Buttress Fills: All buttress fills shall be designed in accordance with
the land disturbance design and construction standards and the recommendations
and design criteria, including the subdrain system, submitted by the soils
engineer or engineering geologist with the approval of the city engineer. (Ord.
419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-070: EROSION CONTROL AND DRAINAGE DEVICES:
BMPs, such as, but not limited to, intervening terraces, diverter terraces, vee
channels, runoff computations, drainage dispersal walls, subdrains and site
drainage, are to be provided and designed as indicated in the land disturbance
design and construction standards. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-080: AREAS SUBJECT TO SLIDES AND UNSTABLE SOIL:
A detailed evaluation shall be completed for all areas subject to slides or
unstable soils by a soils engineer and/or engineering geologist, including
design criteria for corrective measures. Exploratory work and/or reports may be
required by the city engineer for such conditions in accordance with permit
requirements set forth in chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-090: PLANTING AND IRRIGATION OF CUT AND FILL SLOPES:
All manufactured cut and fill slopes shall be planted and maintained until
established. Temporary irrigation may be required in accordance with the
provisions of this title and the land disturbance design and construction
standards. The developer is responsible for operating and maintaining the
irrigation system. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-100: IDENTIFICATION OF BUILDING ENVELOPE:
The developer shall indicate on the site plan or subdivision plat required for
the site or project, the maximum building envelope, or area of ultimate land/
vegetation disturbance, including designation of the building envelope's
distance from the lot or site boundary lines, which will be caused by the
proposed structure and its appurtenances. Prior to the beginning of any type of
land disturbance or construction on a given lot, the contractor performing the
work is responsible for identifying the building envelope in the field by
marking of the building envelope perimeter. The building official may require
markers to be surveyed when deemed necessary or appropriate. Marking of the
building envelope shall be inspected by the city's community development
department and/or building division prior to commencement of any land
disturbance activity on the lot. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-110: PROPERTY LINE AND CORNER MARKERS:
The developer shall ensure that property lines and corner survey markers are
installed for the site or project. These markers are to include rebar placed at
the back corners of each lot and markers placed on the curb for locating the
side property lines. If curb and gutter do not exist, the front markers are to
be placed in the road pavement. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-120: SLOPE PROTECTION EASEMENTS:
The developer shall provide slope protection easements for all slopes
constructed as part of the project. Slope protection easements shall be
provided either through indicating them on the final plat or by separate
recordable easement acceptable to the city. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-130: LOTS GRADED TOWARD STREET FOR DRAINAGE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, stormwater runoff from individual lots
shall be directed toward the streets at a minimum slope of two percent (2%).
Exceptions may be granted by the city engineer, when deemed appropriate and
necessary, in accordance with the provisions of this section. Aesthetic reasons
such as the creation of view lots shall not constitute sufficient reason for
granting an exception. If the developer finds that draining stormwater toward
the street is unobtainable for a portion or all of the lot, the developer shall
demonstrate to the engineering department that there are no other avenues for
drainage of the stormwater. In such cases, the developer shall prepare a
drainage plan which indicates how the stormwater will be disposed of from the
lot, to either a city owned storm drain, a natural stream or channel, a manmade
channel, other city approved facility or retained on site. The developer is
responsible for obtaining the necessary approvals and permits for the discharge
or retention of stormwater flows. The city engineer will determine if such
alternate drainage is both necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-140: LOTS WHICH CANNOT BE GRADED TOWARD THE STREET:
A.   Approval Required: Lots that cannot be drained toward the street, may be
allowed to drain a portion of their stormwater runoff toward the rear of the
yard, after review and approval by the engineering department. Prior to
obtaining this approval, the developer shall prepare a drainage plan, which
indicates how the stormwater will be disposed of from the lot, to either a city
owned storm drain, a natural stream or channel, or manmade channel, or other
city approved facility or retained on site. Such disposal is to be protected by
a drainage easement dedicated for this purpose and the facilities are to be
bonded for.
B.   Swales: Swales located in rear and side yards shall be of materials as
approved by the city that will prevent erosion, and shall be a permanent
feature of the lot and shall be shown in a drainage easement on the site plan
or final plat for the project. An actual design drawing of the swale system
shall be prepared and be included as part of the grading and drainage plan for
the project. If slopes exist between lots, sufficient space shall be allowed to
include a swale at the top of the slope and one at the bottom, all within
dedicated storm drainage easements. Where stormwater is transferred from a lot
of higher elevation, to a lower lot in elevation, sufficient energy dissipation
shall be constructed to reduce the water velocity to an acceptable level.
Engineering calculations are to be submitted to the engineering department
certifying the proposed design of the energy dissipation facilities.
C.   Notice: Swales shall be constructed and in place before building permits
are issued on subdivision lots. The developer shall notify the homebuilders and
homeowners of these drainage swale easements and the need to maintain them both
during and after construction. Homeowners are to be notified by the developer
of the installation of these side and rear yard swales through an acceptable
instrument to the city. A notice of these drainage swale easements shall also
be recorded on the subdivision plat for the project. After completion of the
swales, the homeowners shall be responsible for maintenance of swales.
D.   Bonding: In the event these types of swales are used for the project, the
developer shall provide sufficient bonding of these swales as part of the
city's regular public improvement bonding, to ensure these facilities will be
constructed.
E.   Underground Facilities: The developer may select the option of designing
and constructing underground drainage facilities to replace aboveground
drainage swales if these facilities meet certain city requirements. These
requirements include the design being approved by the engineering department,
inclusion of these facilities within city approved drainage easements,
maintenance of the system by a homeowners' association, and other requirements
as may be deemed necessary by the city. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-150: MATERIALS FOR SIDE AND REAR YARD DRAINAGE:
Side and rear yard swales and drainage facilities shall be designed into
projects as an integral component of the stormwater system of the project which
needs to transfer stormwater runoff from the rear and side yards to the street,
or to other rear yard stormwater facilities. These swales or drain facilities
shall be designed and constructed in such a way that they become a permanent
feature of the side and/or rear yard and shall be constructed of a material as
approved by the city which prevents erosion. Inspections of these swales or
drain facilities shall be conducted by the engineering department during the
subdivision construction phase of the project. Once the subdivision has entered
the warranty period, and building permits are issued, the building division of
the city shall inspect the maintenance and functioning of these lot level
stormwater facilities during lot level development. Developers are to provide
recorded drainage easements wide enough to provide for the possible slight
field relocation of rear and side yard drainage swales, or other drainage
facilities. At a minimum, the drainage easement shall be for the width of the
swale plus two feet (2'). (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-160: FLOW OF WATER FROM ONE LOT TO ANOTHER; LIMITED USE:
In the case where stormwater flow is allowed to flow from a higher lot to a
lower lot, in elevation, sufficient energy dissipation shall be designed and
constructed to reduce the water velocity to an acceptable level to prevent
erosion. The design and construction of these energy dissipation structures
shall be approved by the engineering department in conjunction with the review
and approval of the drainage plan for the project. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-170: LANDSCAPING OF CERTAIN LOTS FOR EROSION CONTROL:
The city reserves the right to require that the lots be revegetated or
stabilized prior to issuance of building permits or that lots be fully
landscaped prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as part of the
requirements of the project. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that,
for certain areas in the city which have soils susceptible to severe erosion,
erosion is controlled. The criteria to be used by the city are the size of the
lot and sizes of adjacent lots, elevation differences between lots, and the
type of soils in the project, along with other factors. A landscaping plan
shall be submitted to the engineering department for approval prior to
commencement of landscaping improvements required hereunder. (Ord. 419, 6-5-
2001)
18-3-180: EROSION CONTROL AND REVEGETATION:
The developer is to indicate erosion control and revegetation BMPs to be used
for the project on the project drawings and as part of the project descriptions
included with the application in accordance with the city's land disturbance
design and construction standards. Erosion and sedimentation control measures
will be inspected upon completion, during construction of the subdivision, and
once the subdivision construction is complete. The engineering department will
be responsible for these inspections. Once the subdivision level construction
is complete and improvement work begins on individual lots, erosion and
sedimentation control BMPs will be inspected prior to any disturbance, during
construction and once lot level construction is complete. The building division
will be responsible for these inspections. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-190: WET WEATHER PLAN:
The city engineer may require that land disturbance activities and erosion
control or revegetation plans be modified, if unforeseen delays occur due to
weather generated problems not considered at the time the land disturbance
permit was issued, including submission and approval of a wet weather plan.
(Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-200: LAND DISTURBANCE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All land disturbance activities shall be conducted in accordance with the land
disturbance design and construction standards, the hillside overlay district
ordinance, the "Development Processing Manual", "Road And Bridge Design And
Construction Standards", "Storm Drainage And Flood Control Design And
Construction Standards", "Culinary Water Design And Construction Standards" and
all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, standards and
specifications of the city. Revegetation shall also be conducted in accordance
with resolution 97-73, as adopted by the city. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-3-210: LOT IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA DRAINAGE:
All impervious surface areas on lots, including roofs and their drains,
driveway pads and other such areas, are to be drained toward the street unless
otherwise approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
CHAPTER 4
LAND DISTURBANCE RESTORATION AND REVEGETATION GUARANTEE AGREEMENT
SECTION:
18-4-010: Improvement Completion Assurances for Land Disturbance Permits
18-4-010: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCES FOR LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
Following city engineer approval but prior to holding a preconstruction
conference and commencing construction, an applicant for a land disturbance
permit shall enter into an improvement completion assurance agreement and
provide an improvement completion assurance as defined by section
17-4-075 to ensure proper restoration and revegetation of the land disturbed by
activities and construction pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord.
1047, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord. 1501, 10-5-2021)
CHAPTER 5
INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
18-5-010: Permit Holder Supervision And Inspection
18-5-020: City Inspections
18-5-030: Additional Inspections Or Testing
18-5-040: Inspection Requests
18-5-050: Duty To Keep Work Accessible And Exposed
18-5-060: Entry Onto Premises
18-5-070: Certification Or Approval
18-5-080: Transfer Of Responsibility For Certification
18-5-090: Final Inspection
18-5-100: Building Permits
18-5-110: Validity Of Inspection
18-5-010: PERMIT HOLDER SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
The land disturbance permit holder shall provide, at the permit holder's sole
cost and expense, all required supervision, inspection and safety precautions
before, during and after all land disturbance activities in accordance with the
land disturbance design and construction standards and other applicable city
ordinances, rules, regulations, standards and specifications regarding such
activities. The land disturbance permit holder shall be required, at the permit
holder's sole cost and expense, to design, inspect and certify all land
disturbance activities at such intervals and in accordance with such design,
inspection and certification standards and requirements provided in the land
disturbance design and construction standards and other applicable city
ordinances, rules, regulations, standards and specifications. Certain land
disturbance activities may require continuous or constant inspection and
supervision by a civil engineer or other authorized inspector, as a condition
of the land disturbance permit or when deemed necessary by the city engineer,
in accordance with the terms and conditions of this title and the land
disturbance design and construction standards. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-020: CITY INSPECTIONS:
In addition to permit holder inspections and certifications, all land
disturbance activities shall be subject to city inspection as specified and
required in the land disturbance design and construction standards, the
hillside overlay ordinance, and other applicable city ordinances, rules,
regulations, standards and specifications. The city may also make or require
other inspections of land disturbance activities to ascertain compliance of
such work with the land disturbance permit and applicable city ordinances,
rules, regulations, standards and specifications, when deemed necessary by the
city engineer, in accordance with the terms and conditions of this title and
the land disturbance design and construction standards. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-030: ADDITIONAL INSPECTIONS OR TESTING:
The city engineer may require additional inspections and/or testing of land
disturbance activities by an approved testing agency when deemed necessary by
the city engineer in accordance with the terms and conditions of this title and
the land disturbance design and construction standards. Any such additional
inspections and/or testing shall be at the permit holder's expense. (Ord. 419,
6-5-2001)
18-5-040: INSPECTION REQUESTS:
When inspections are required to be conducted by the city, the permit holder,
or authorized agent of the permit holder, shall notify the city engineer in
writing or by telephone that such work is ready for inspection at least one
business day before the inspection is desired. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-050: DUTY TO KEEP WORK ACCESSIBLE AND EXPOSED:
The permit holder shall cause the land disturbance activities and work to be
accessible and exposed for inspection by the applicable required inspector
until such inspection has been conducted and approved or certified, as
applicable. The city, its officers, agents and employees, shall not be liable
for any expense incurred by the permit holder in removing or replacing any
materials or improvements required to allow inspection. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-060: ENTRY ONTO PREMISES:
The city, and its authorized representatives, shall have access to the premises
described in the land disturbance permit for the purpose of inspecting the
progress of the work. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-070: CERTIFICATION OR APPROVAL:
Inspections and certifications required to be made by the permit holder's
engineer shall be conducted and certification of the same submitted to the city
prior to further construction or land disturbance activities. Inspections
required to be made by the city shall be conducted and approved by the city
prior to further construction or land disturbance activities. (Ord. 419, 6-5-
2001)
18-5-080: TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR CERTIFICATION:
If the land disturbance permit holder changes the civil engineer, the soils
engineer, the engineering geologist, the contractor, or the testing agency of
record during the course of permitted work, the land disturbance permit holder
shall file an assignment and assumption agreement of the new engineer,
contractor or testing agency responsible for certification of the site or
project. Such assignment and assumption agreement shall be filed with and
approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-090: FINAL INSPECTION:
Final inspection of the permitted land disturbance activities shall be
conducted by the city. No final inspection of permitted land disturbance
activities shall be approved until and unless all work has been completed in
accordance with the land disturbance permit, the final approved plans and
specifications, and all applicable city ordinances, rules, regulations,
standards and specifications, including, but not limited to, installation of
all drainage facilities and protection devices, all required revegetation, and
all required erosion and sediment control measures. No final inspection shall
be approved until the permit holder has submitted, and the city has approved, a
postconstruction maintenance schedule for the revegetation, erosion control and
other required improvements. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-100: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit or other development approval shall be given for any
property, parcel, site or project for which a land disturbance permit has been
issued until final inspection and approval has been given under the land
disturbance permit. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-5-110: VALIDITY OF INSPECTION:
Any inspection approval or certification shall not be construed to be an
approval of a violation of any of the provisions of this title or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule, regulation, standard or specification.
Inspections presuming to give such authority shall be deemed invalid. (Ord.
419, 6-5-2001)
CHAPTER 6
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
18-6-010: Enforcement
18-6-020: Penalties
18-6-030: Notices Of Noncompliance/Notice To Correct
18-6-040: Notice Of Violation
18-6-050: Suspension Or Revocation Of Land Disturbance Permit
18-6-060: Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation
18-6-070: Cessation Of Work
18-6-080: Decision Of Suspension Or Revocation
18-6-090: Right Of Entry
18-6-100: Violations
18-6-110: Appeals
18-6-120: Liability
18-6-130: Right To Stop Work
18-6-010: ENFORCEMENT:
This title is to be enforced pursuant to the provisions set forth herein as
applicable. The city engineer and other enforcement authorities are responsible
for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-020: PENALTIES:
A.   Scope: Nothing herein is intended to limit or prohibit the enforcement of
this code or other applicable laws through civil or criminal process where the
city has determined that enforcement of the procedures outlined in these
sections will not result in effective redress, where there have been repeated
violations of the provisions of this title, or where the severity of the
violation warrants redress through civil or criminal action.
B.   Sanctions: Any one of the following sanctions shall be available to
redress violations of the provisions of this title:
1.   Issuance of a notice of noncompliance/notice to correct setting forth
corrective action;
2.   Revocation or suspension of licenses or land disturbance permits,
conditional use land disturbance permits, or other entitlements issued by
Draper City;
3.   The placement of requirements for corrective action on land disturbance
permits, licenses, or entitlements issued by Draper City as a condition to
avoid revocation of the land disturbance permit, license, or entitlement;
4.   Requiring the responsible permit holder to post a bond, irrevocable letter
of credit, or other adequate security to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this title or other applicable laws.
C.   Level Of Sanction; Notice: At the time of issuance of a notice of
violation, the enforcement authority will determine the appropriate level of
sanction and will provide written notice to the responsible person of the
proposed level of sanction and the reasons therefor as outlined herein.
D.   Multiple Violations: Where multiple violations have occurred or are
occurring, each violation of the provisions of this title or other applicable
laws is subject to a separate sanction. The city may take into account the
number and severity of violations in determining the type of action to take
against the offending party. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-030: NOTICES OF NONCOMPLIANCE/NOTICE TO CORRECT:
Whenever a violation is discovered that can be corrected and the responsible
permit holder has not been issued a previous notice of noncompliance/notice to
correct or notice of violation for the same violation within the past twelve
(12) months, the enforcement authority shall issue a notice of noncompliance/
notice to correct in order to notify the responsible person of the violation
and to order that the violation be corrected within a reasonable time. The
notice may include a stop work order that orders the responsible person to
immediately cease all work. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-040: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A.   Circumstances: A notice of violation may be issued under any of the
following circumstances:
1.   When the violation cannot be corrected;
2.   A notice of noncompliance/notice to correct has been served, and the
specified time has passed without adequate correction of the violation;
3.   When a stop work order has been issued and has not been complied with by
the responsible person; or
4.   When the same violation has been committed by the same responsible permit
holder within the past twelve (12) months for which a notice to correct or
notice of violation has been served on the responsible person within that same
twelve (12) month period.
B.   Content Of Notice: The notice of violation shall be in writing and set
forth the facts constituting the violation, the specific provisions of the law
which have been violated, the proposed sanctions for the violation, and the
rights that the responsible person has to appeal the notice of violation. (Ord.
419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-050: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT:
The city engineer may suspend or revoke a land disturbance permit and/or
suspend any land disturbance activity if:
A.   Conditions at the site vary from those shown on the approved plans;
B.   Construction does not conform to the approved plans, time schedules, or
conditions of the land disturbance permit;
C.   The work does not comply with applicable ordinances, rules, regulations
and standards;
D.   The site is left in a condition hazardous to the public or to the adjacent
properties, and the land disturbance permit holder does not comply with
reasonable requirements to correct said conditions;
E.   The land disturbance permit holder does not comply with reasonable
requirements to safeguard the workers, the public, or other persons acting in a
lawful manner;
F.   The land disturbance permit holder, in connection with the operations for
which the land disturbance permit was issued, fails to operate equipment
properly on public roads; allows material to encroach into, obstruct, or be
deposited within a public road right of way or within a drainage channel in a
manner not authorized by said land disturbance permit; or causes unauthorized
obstruction or diversion of drainage channels;
G.   The land disturbance permit holder fails to have a qualified, city
approved inspector working under the supervision of a civil engineer on the
site during operations, when so required by the land disturbance permit, or
fails to have the work under proper supervision; or
H.   Emergency conditions exist on the site, which constitute a threat to
health, safety or public welfare, whether or not caused by the actions of the
land disturbance permit holder. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-060: NOTICE OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A.   Notice Required: Prior to the suspension or revocation of a land
disturbance permit, the city engineer shall give the land disturbance permit
holder written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the land disturbance
permit. The notice shall specify the grounds for such intended action and the
time and place for the holding of a conference between the city engineer and
the land disturbance permit holder, or its authorized representatives, to
review the grounds for the proposed action. Notice of the proposed action shall
be given to the land disturbance permit holder at least forty eight (48) hours
before the time set for the conference, if given by personal service, and at
least ninety six (96) hours before the time set for the conference, if given by
first class mail. Weekends and holidays are not counted in determining the time
for the giving of notice and the holding of the conference. With the consent of
the land disturbance permit holder, the time periods provided for herein may be
shortened or extended.
B.   Emergency: In the case of an emergency, and only where an unacceptable
level of risk to public health, safety and welfare would incur from any delay,
the notification deadlines may be disregarded and the city engineer may act
decisively to reduce or eliminate the hazard. In such a situation, the city
engineer will then make every reasonable effort to confer with the land
disturbance permit holder in a timely manner to resolve the concerns which
resulted in the suspension. Costs, including additional city staff time and
equipment, shall be borne by the land disturbance permit holder. (Ord. 419, 6-
5-2001)
18-6-070: CESSATION OF WORK:
Upon receipt of the notice of intended suspension or revocation, the land
disturbance permit holder is to cease all work in connection with the land
disturbance permit, with the exception of work necessary to correct any
condition or perform any work cited in the notice of proposed action as a
ground for suspension or revocation, and work of an emergency nature. The time
necessary for completion of these emergency corrections will be determined by
the city engineer. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-080: DECISION OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A.   Written Decision; Service: Within twenty four (24) hours following the
conclusion of the conference, the city engineer is to render a written
decision, either revoking the land disturbance permit, suspending the land
disturbance permit, or authorizing the land disturbance permit holder to
proceed with the work. Such action may be with or without conditions. The
decision is to be served upon the land disturbance permit holder by personal
service or by first class mail, postage prepaid, within twenty four (24) hours
after the rendition of the decision.
B.   Failure To Correct: If the land disturbance permit holder fails to correct
the objectionable or emergency conditions causing the revocation or suspension,
the city may cause the work necessary to correct said conditions to be done,
and the city may take action against the land disturbance permit holder's
security to cover the cost of performing the work.
C.   Reinstate; Revoke: The city engineer may either reinstate or revoke any
land disturbance permit that has been suspended. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-090: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
In the administration and enforcement of this title, any duly authorized
official or employee of the city shall have authority to enter upon the
premises of the permitted site for the purposes of investigation and
inspection; provided, however, that such right of entry shall be exercised at
reasonable times. No land disturbance permit holder shall refuse to allow such
inspection. In the case where the responsible person is not a land disturbance
permit holder, the enforcement authority is to provide twenty four (24) hours'
written notice of the intent to inspect, except in emergency situations or when
consent has been obtained of the owner and/or occupant of the site to be
inspected. The notice shall state that the property owner has the right to
refuse entry and that, in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be
made only upon issuance of a search warrant as allowed by law. (Ord. 419, 6-5-
2001)
18-6-100: VIOLATIONS:
A.   Violations Enumerated: No person shall fail, refuse, or neglect to comply
with the following provisions:
1.   All orders issued by the city engineer or the building official pursuant
to the provisions of this title;
2.   All conditions imposed on land disturbance permits pursuant to the
provisions of this title; and
3.   All rules and regulations of the office of the city engineer with respect
to grading, which were in effect at the time the land disturbance permit was
issued.
B.   Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code
pursuant to the provisions of this code, and each such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed,
continued, or land disturbance permitted.
C.   Letters Of Noncompliance: Whenever any construction or work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this title or any other law, the city engineer or
his/her duly authorized representative may issue a letter of noncompliance. The
letter of noncompliance shall be issued to the developer, the civil engineer,
and the contractor immediately on that portion of the work on which the
noncompliance has occurred. If the portion of the work on which the
noncompliance has occurred is not remedied, a stop work order shall be issued;
or if the portion of the work on which the noncompliance has occurred is
corrected, a letter shall be issued stating that the noncompliance has been
rectified, and such letter shall be distributed to the developer, the civil
engineer, and the contractor. The issuance of a letter of noncompliance shall
not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a stop work order by the city. (Ord.
419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-110: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved of a final determination of the city engineer in the
issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of a land disturbance permit may
appeal such decision of the city engineer to the city council by filing a
written appeal with the city recorder within thirty (30) days from the date of
the city engineer's decision. The city council will give written notice to the
city engineer, the appellant, and all other persons requesting the same,
specifying the place, date, and time of hearing the appeal. (Ord. 419, 6-5-
2001)
18-6-120: LIABILITY:
Neither issuance of grading approval under the provisions of this title, nor
compliance with the provisions of this title, or with any conditions imposed in
a land disturbance permit issued under the provisions of this title, is to
relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or property or
impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property. (Ord.
419, 6-5-2001)
18-6-130: RIGHT TO STOP WORK:
Nothing herein is to be construed as indicating that the city cannot
immediately stop the work being performed if, in the opinion of the city
engineer, the damage being done is of such a nature that it requires immediate
cessation of the work. This could result in the bypassing of the normal
processes of notices and increasing levels of enforcement which will typically
be followed. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2001)
TITLE 19
ETHICS
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ETHICS FOR OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES;
RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS
SECTION:
19-1-010: Goals
19-1-020: Definitions
19-1-030: Fair And Equal Treatment
19-1-040: Agents Of Public Purpose
19-1-050: Gifts; Use Of Office For Personal Benefit Prohibited
19-1-060: Use Of Public Property
19-1-070: City Allegiance And Proper Conduct
19-1-080: Avoidance Of Impressions Of Corruptibility
19-1-090: Political Activity Of City Officer Or Employee
19-1-100: Future Employment
19-1-110: Employment Of Relatives Prohibited
19-1-010: GOALS:
A.   Application: Ethics is more than the avoidance of criminal behavior. It is
a commitment for public servants to take individual responsibility in creating
a government that has the trust and respect of its citizens. There needs to be
a proactive approach in strengthening the emphasis on ethics and in guiding
city elected officials and employees in upholding them. To preserve and
maintain the integrity of responsible government and its decision making
process, Draper City believes it is necessary that the identity, activities and
expenditures of certain persons who engage in efforts to influence elected
officials and employees of the city on matters within their official
cognizance, either by direct communication or by solicitation of others to
engage in such efforts, be publicly and regularly disclosed. The provisions and
requirements of this ethics code shall apply to every person who attempts to
influence governmental action, unless such person is clearly exempt by an
express provision hereof.
B.   Goals Specified: With subsection A of this section in mind, Draper City
hereby adopts the following goals for the city's ethics program:
1.   To promulgate and implement a comprehensive approach to ethics and
integrity in Draper City government;
2.   To promote public confidence in elected officials, appointed officials and
employees by fostering the ethical operation of government;
3.   To promote and ensure compliance with local, state, and federal ethics
law;
4.   To centralize laws and regulations on the ethical conduct of city elected
officials, appointed officials and employees;
5.   To heighten knowledge and understanding of the laws and ethical principles
which are the inherent obligations of city elected officials and employees;
6.   To establish a system to train city elected officials, appointed officials
and employees to encourage compliance with these standards and to also provide
for periodic review, and education on ethics;
7.   To enact an ethics officer system that will continue to evolve and update
our city's ethics program and to provide guidance and education to all city
departments; and
8.   To educate city officials and employees to avoid the appearance of
impropriety.
C.   Level Of Ethics: Through this comprehensive ethics code and the related
goals, the city will strive to elevate the level of ethics in local government,
to provide honest and responsible service to the citizens of Draper City, and
to maintain the confidence and trust of the public that this government serves.
(Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
APPOINTED OFFICER: Any person appointed to any statutory office or position of
employment with the city. Appointed officers include, but are not limited to,
persons serving on special, regular, or full time committees, agencies, or
boards, whether or not such persons are compensated for their services.
ASSIST: To act, offer, or agree to act in such a way as to help, represent,
aid, advise, furnish information to, or otherwise provide assistance to a
person or business entity, believing that such action is of help, aid, advice,
or assistance to such person or business entity and with the intent to assist
such person or business entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY: A sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint
venture, corporation, firm, trust, foundation, or other organization or entity
used in carrying on a business.
CITY: Draper City.
CITY BODY: Any public board, commission, committee, or other public group
organized or appointed by the city council to make public policy decisions or
to advise persons who make public policy decisions.
CITY EMPLOYEE: A person who is not an elected or appointed officer, who is
employed on a full or part time basis by the city.
CITY OFFICER: Any appointed or elected officer. The term shall include the
mayor, city council, all appointed city officials, and the members of the
city's agencies, boards, committees, and commissions.
COMPENSATION: Anything of economic value, however designated, which is paid,
loaned, granted, given, donated, or transferred to any person or business
entity by anyone other than the city for or in consideration of personal
services, materials, property, or any other thing whatsoever.
ELECTED OFFICER: Any person elected or appointed to the office of mayor or city
council.
GOVERNMENTAL ACTION: Any action on the part of the city, including any
decision, determination, finding, ruling or order; any grant, payment, award,
license, contract, subcontract, transaction, decision, sanction or approval, or
the denial thereof, or the failure to act in respect thereto; and any
legislative, administrative, or discretionary act of any city official or
employee.
IMPROPER DISCLOSURE: Disclosure of private, controlled, or protected
information to any person who does not have the right to receive the
information.
INTEREST: Direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a city
officer or employee as a result of an official act or action by or with the
city, except for such contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the
substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the
accrual of similar benefits to all other persons or property similarly
situated. For the purposes of this title, a city officer or employee shall be
deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:
A.   Any person related to such person by blood or marriage in a degree closer
than the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity, determined by the civil
law method, and a divorce or separation between spouses shall not be deemed to
terminate any such relationship;
B.   Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship exists
with the city officer or employee;
C.   Any business entity in which the city officer or employee is an officer,
director, or member having a financial interest in, or by which the city
officer or employee is employed;
D.   Any business entity in which the stock, or legal or beneficial ownership,
in excess of five percent (5%) of the total stock or total legal and beneficial
ownership, is controlled or owned directly or indirectly by the City officer or
employee.
OFFICIAL ACT OR OFFICIAL ACTION: Any legislative, administrative, appointive,
or discretionary act of any City officer.
POLITICAL PURPOSE: An act done with intent or in such a way as to influence or
tend to influence, directly or indirectly, the election of a candidate or the
disposition of any issue on the ballot at a City election.
PRIVATE, CONTROLLED, OR PROTECTED INFORMATION: Information classified as
private, controlled, or protected under Utah Code Annotated title 63G, chapter
2, Government Records Access and Management Act or other applicable provision
of law.
QUASI-JUDICIAL MATTER: The hearing and ruling upon various permits, licenses
and land use applications, excepting zoning amendments, the appeal of any
discipline imposed on any City employee, the appeal of any grievance filed by a
City employee, or a proceeding to revoke any license, permit, or approval
granted by any City body or employee and which is pending, or is reasonably
expected to come, before any City body. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-030: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
A.   Canvassing members of the City Council, directly or indirectly, in order
to obtain preferential consideration in connection with any appointment to City
service shall disqualify the candidate for appointment, except with reference
to positions filled by appointment by the City Council or the Mayor with the
consultation of the City Council.
B.   No person shall be appointed to, removed from, or in any way favored or
discriminated against with respect to any appointive public office because of
such person's race, color, age, religion, sex, national origin, or functional
limitation as defined by applicable State or Federal laws, if otherwise
qualified for the position or office.
C.   No City officer or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every
other citizen. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-040: AGENTS OF PUBLIC PURPOSE:
City officers and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for
the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold and impartially carry out
Federal, State and City laws. They are bound to observe, in their official
acts, the highest standards of performance and to discharge faithfully the
duties of their office, regardless of personal considerations. Recognizing that
the public interests must be their primary concern, their conduct in both their
official and private affairs should be above reproach. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007,
eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-050: GIFTS; USE OF OFFICE FOR PERSONAL BENEFIT PROHIBITED:
Statutory provisions governing gifts and the use of office for personal benefit
are outlined in Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 1273, 12-5-2017)
19-1-060: USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A.   No City officer or employee shall request or permit the use of City owned
vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit,
except when such properties are available to the public generally or are
provided per City policy for the use of such official or employee in the
conduct of official City business.
B.   No City Council person shall be permitted to bid on or purchase property
offered for sale by the City. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-070: CITY ALLEGIANCE AND PROPER CONDUCT:
A.   No City officer or employee shall engage in private employment, or render
services for a private interest, when such employment or service is
incompatible with proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair
that officer's or employee's independence or judgment or action in the
performance of those duties, unless otherwise permitted by law.
B.   No City officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person,
other than himself, his spouse or minor children, before any City body.
However, a member of the City Council may appear before City bodies on behalf
of a constituent in the course of official duties as a representative of the
electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations.
C.   Any outside employment for employees shall comply with section 5070 of the
"Draper Personnel Manual". (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-080: AVOIDANCE OF IMPRESSIONS OF CORRUPTIBILITY:
City officers and employees, whether appointed or elected, full time or part
time, paid or unpaid, should conduct their official and private affairs so as
not to give a reasonable basis for the impression that any such officer or
employee can be improperly influenced in the performance of public duties. Such
officers or employees should so conduct themselves as to maintain public
confidence in their performance of the public trust in the government they
represent. All City officials and employees should avoid even the appearance of
conflict between their public duties and private interests. (Ord. 785, 7-31-
2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-090: POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF CITY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
A.   For purposes of this section, "hours of employment" means occurring at a
time when a City officer or employee is acting within the course and scope of
employment, but excludes a lunch break afforded to the officer or employee.
B.   Except as otherwise provided by law:
1.   The partisan political activity, political opinion, or political
affiliation of an applicant for a position with the city may not provide a
basis for denying employment to the applicant.
2.   A city officer's or employee's partisan political activity, political
opinion, or political affiliation may not provide the basis for the officer or
employee's employment, promotion, disciplinary action, demotion, or dismissal.
3.   A city employee may not engage in political campaigning or solicit
political contributions during hours of employment.
4.   A city officer or employee may not use city equipment while engaged in
campaigning or other political activity.
5.   A city officer or employee may not directly or indirectly coerce, command,
or advise another city officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute part of
the officer's or employee's salary or compensation, or anything else of value
to a political party, committee, organization, agency, or person for political
purposes.
6.   A city officer or employee may not attempt to make another officer or
employee's personnel status dependent on the officer's or employee's support or
lack of support of a political party, affiliation, opinion, committee,
organization, agency, or person engaged in political activity.
C.   A city employee who has filed a declaration of candidacy may:
1.   Be given a leave of absence for the period between the primary election
and the general election; and
2.   Use any vacation or other leave available to engage in campaign
activities.
D.   Neither the filing of a declaration of candidacy nor a leave of absence
under this section may be used as the basis for an adverse employment action,
including discipline and termination, against the employee.
E.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
1.   Prohibit a city officer or employee's voluntary contribution to a party or
candidate of the officer or employee's choice; or
2.   Permit city officer or employee partisan political activity that is
prohibited under federal law.
F.   No city officer or employee shall solicit or participate in soliciting any
assessment, subscription, or contribution to any political party during working
hours on the premises of any city property.
G.   No city officer or employee shall promise any appointment to any position
with the city as a reward for any political activity.
H.   A city employee who is elected as a city officer shall terminate the city
employment prior to being sworn into the elected office. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007,
eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-100: FUTURE EMPLOYMENT:
City elected officials are prohibited from accepting employment with the city
for a period of two (2) years following the termination of their term of
office. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-1-110: EMPLOYMENT OF RELATIVES PROHIBITED:
A.   As used in this section, "relative" means a father, mother, husband, wife,
son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin,
mother-in- law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, life partner, ward, fiancé, grandfather, grandmother,
grandson, granddaughter, stepparent, or stepchild.
B.   No relative of a city officer or a relative's spouse shall be employed by
the city, except when the city manager determines that the employment serves
the best interests of the city and does not create a conflict of interest or
the appearance of impropriety.
C.   No relative of an elected city officer or the relative's spouse employed
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be affected hereby. (Ord.
785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007; amd. Ord. 1669, 8-19-2025)
CHAPTER 2
DISCLOSURE; CONFLICTS OF FINANCIAL INTEREST
SECTION:
19-2-010: Conflict Of Interest Disclosure In Legislative Action
19-2-020: Preacquisition Of Interest; Interest In Contract Or Transaction
19-2-030: Disclosure Of Confidential Information
19-2-010: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE IN LEGISLATIVE ACTION:
Every city officer who has an "interest", as defined in section
19-1-020 of this title, in any proposed legislation before the city body shall
disclose on the record of the city body the nature and extent of such interest.
Such officer shall leave the room during the discussion concerning the
legislation and not participate in the discussion or vote upon the matter.
(Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-2-020: PREACQUISITION OF INTEREST; INTEREST IN CONTRACT OR TRANSACTION:
A.   No city officer or employee with respect to any contract or transaction,
which is or may be subject to an official act of the city shall acquire an
interest in such contract or transaction at a time when the city officer or
employee believes or has reason to believe that it will directly or indirectly
be affected by an official act of the city.
B.   Unless a person has abstained from participating in the city decision to
award or enter into a contract, no city officer or employee having the power or
duty to perform an official act or action related to a contract or transaction,
shall:
1.   Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or transaction;
2.   Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or
appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such
contract or transaction;
3.   Have solicited present or future employment with a person or business
entity involved in such contract or transaction by voting on the contract or
transaction in question; or
4.   Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor,
service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract or
transaction.
C.   This section shall not impede a city officer or employee from applying for
and/or receiving a business license, building permit or conditional use permit.
(Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-2-030: DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
No city officer or employee with respect to any contract or transaction which
is or may be the subject of an official act of the city shall, without proper
legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government, or affairs of the city, or use such information to advance the
financial or other interests of such officer or employee or others. (Ord. 785,
7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
CHAPTER 3
CITY ATTORNEY RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
19-3-010: Written Advisory Opinion
19-3-020: Mission And Duties In Relation To The Ethics Ordinance
19-3-010: WRITTEN ADVISORY OPINION:
A.   Where any city officer or employee has a doubt as to the applicability of
any provision of this title to a particular situation, or as to the definition
of terms used herein, such person may apply to the city attorney for a written
advisory opinion. The city officer or employee shall have the opportunity to
present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of
provisions of the title before such advisory opinion is made. Such opinion,
until amended or revoked, shall be binding on the city, the city council, and
the city attorney in any subsequent actions concerning the city officer or
employee who sought the opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material
facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion.
B.   Any written opinion prepared by the city attorney shall be made public.
However, the name of the person requesting the opinion and the names of all
persons or business entities mentioned in the opinion shall be deemed
confidential information and shall not be disclosed unless the city officer or
employee waives such confidentiality or where the city attorney deems the city
officer or employee to have failed to act in good faith in requesting the
opinion or in conforming with the opinion or to have failed to act in
conformance with the opinion. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-3-020: MISSION AND DUTIES IN RELATION TO THE ETHICS ORDINANCE:
The mission of the city attorney as it relates to this chapter is to encourage
each city officer and employee to act ethically at all times. This mission
requires the city attorney to not only encourage compliance with various laws
but, more importantly, encourage each officer and employee to adhere to the
high standards of ethical behavior as set forth in this title. In pursuing that
broad mission, the duties of the city attorney in conjunction with the human
resources department include:
A.   Developing policies, programs and strategies to deal with all ethics
related matters;
B.   Developing training and education programs;
C.   Providing training and education to city officers and employees;
D.   Conducting meetings with city officers and employees to discuss or provide
advice on ethics issues;
E.   Obtaining copies of all reports filed and disclosures made pursuant to
this title;
F.   Maintaining a directory of all reports and disclosures filed pursuant to
this title;
G.   Encouraging compliance with the spirit and letter of ethics laws;
H.   Periodically reviewing this title and other applicable laws and
regulations and recommending amendments hereto;
I.   Acting as the ethics liaison between the elected officials and employees
of the city; and
J.   Fulfilling other duties as requested by the city council. (Ord. 785, 7-31-
2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
CHAPTER 4
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES
SECTION:
19-4-010: Enforcement
19-4-020: Penalties
19-4-010: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this title has
occurred may file a sworn written complaint with the city attorney.
B.   The city attorney shall have the initial responsibility for the
enforcement of this title. The city attorney shall have the power to
investigate any complaint, to initiate any suit, and to prosecute any criminal
or civil action on behalf of the city where such action is appropriate.
C.   The city attorney shall give the person complained of an opportunity to be
heard. A written report of findings and a recommendation of the city attorney
shall be filed with the city manager. If the city manager finds, after a
hearing, that a city employee has violated this title, the city manager may
suspend or take such other appropriate action with respect to employee. If the
alleged violation involves a city official, the city attorney shall refer the
matter to the city council for hearing and the possible imposition of sanctions
or removal from office, as provided by law.
D.   The city council or city manager may direct the city attorney to
investigate or prosecute any apparent violation of this title or it may employ
or appoint any qualified attorney to investigate or prosecute any violation or
series of violations by one or more persons of this title.
E.   The city attorney shall have the power, where a violation of the
provisions of this title is threatened or has occurred, to bring an action or
proceeding at law or in equity for a judgment enjoining a violation of the
provisions of this title or requiring a relinquishment of any prohibited
interest or the voiding of any contract or transaction, taking into account the
interests of the parties and any third persons who may be injured thereby.
(Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
19-4-020: PENALTIES:
A.   In addition to any other penalties or remedies provided by law, any city
official or employee who knowingly and intentionally violates the provisions of
this title is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and may be dismissed from
employment or removed from office, as provided by law.
B.   Any contract or transaction which was the subject of governmental action
by the city and which involved the violation of a provision of this title is
voidable, at the option of the city.
C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of
any provision of this title or who provides false information shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 785, 7-31-2007, eff. 8-15-2007)
