CITY CODE
of
FARR WEST CITY, UTAH
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-09, passed 10-2-2025 and Res. 2023-01, passed 1-19-2023
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This City Code of Farr West City, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 2025-09, passed October 2, 2025 and resolution
2023-01, passed January 19, 2023. Ordinances of the City adopted after said
ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that they are in
conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to
ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-08
 
AN ORDINANCE OF FARR WEST CITY, UTAH AMENDING TITLE 17 OF THE
FARR WEST CITY MUNICPAL CODE
 
 
WHEREAS, Title 17 Section 17.44.190 “Site Development Standards for all
Residential Zones” of the Farr West City Code of Ordinances establishes certain
standards and specifications for various construction activity within Farr West
City; and
 
WHEREAS, the Farr West City Planning Commission has recommended updating and
amending Title 17 Section 17.44.190 “Site Development Standards for all
Residential Zones” to the Farr West City Council; and
 
WHEREAS, the Farr West City Council desires to update certain provisions of
Title 17 Section 17.44.190 “Site Development Standards for all Residential
Zones” to reflect changes the Farr West City Council has determined necessary
and appropriate; and
 
   NOW THEREFORE, the Farr West City Council ordains that Title 17 Section
17.44.190 “Site Development Standards for all Residential Zones” shall be
amended in part to include updates as provided in the attached Exhibit A.
 
This Ordinance supersedes all prior ordinances and policies of Farr West City,
Utah to the extent that such may be in conflict with the specific provisions
contained herein. In all other respects, such prior ordinances, resolutions,
actions and policies shall remain in full force and effect.
 
 
This ordinance shall take effect 15 days after publication or posting by the
City Council of Farr West City, Utah.
 
Dated this 5th day of September, 2025.
 
 
MAYOR OF FARR WEST CITY, UTAH
 
By ___________________________________
Ken Phippen
 
 
                         Vote of City Council
ATTEST:                   
                        Yes No
________________________ ___ ___ Council Member Ferrin
Recorder                 ___ ___ Council Member Williams
Farr West City, Utah     ___ ___ Council Member Blind
                        ___ ___ Council Member Shupe
                         ___ ___ Council Member Jay
                          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3000_9547x12355.jpg][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/IMAGES/0-0-0-3003_9302x12196.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3006_9302x12196.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-01
 
AN ORDINANCE OF FARR WEST CITY, UTAH AMENDING SECTION 2.12.020 OF THE FARR WEST
CITY MUNICPAL CODE
 
 
   WHEREAS, Title 2 Section 2.12.020 “Appointment, Term, and Vacancy”
establishes the methods for which vacancies on the Farr West City Planning
Commission are filled; and
 
WHEREAS, Section 2.12.020(B) designates a “selection panel” to interview
applicants for the Planning Commission; and
 
WHEREAS, Farr West City desires to include the entire city council in the
interview process for applicants to the Planning Commission; and
 
WHEREAS, the Farr West City Council now desires to update Title 2 Section
2.12.020(B) to reflect these changes; and
 
   NOW THEREFORE, the Farr West City Council ordains that Title 2 Section
2.12.020(B) “” shall be amended to read as follows:
 
 
2.12.020: APPOINTMENT, TERM, AND VACANCY
 
B.    A selection panel consisting of the Mayor, the City Council, the Planning
Commission chair (or his/her designee from the Planning Commission), the
Planning Commission vice chair, and one other member of the Planning Commission
shall interview all applicants who want to be considered for appointment to the
Planning Commission. The interviews shall be conducted in a closed meeting
specifically for the purpose of interviewing candidates. The meeting shall be
conducted by the Mayor or his designee. Standard interview questions prepared
by the panel will be asked to each applicant. After each interview is
completed, the panel shall rank the candidate in accordance with a ranking
system agreed to by the panel and announced and explained before the interviews
are conducted. In an open meeting the panel may discuss the rankings, their
rationale for their rankings and any other factors affecting their decision. In
the open meeting, the panel shall rank the candidates and determine which
candidates shall be referred to the City Council for ratification.
 
This Ordinance supersedes all prior ordinances and policies of Farr West City,
Utah to the extent that such may be in conflict with the specific provisions
contained herein. In all other respects, such prior ordinances, resolutions,
actions and policies shall remain in full force and effect.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This ordinance shall take effect upon its adoption and publication or posting
by the City Council
 
of Farr West City, Utah this __8th ____ day of
_______January___________________, 2026.
 
 
 
 
MAYOR OF FARR WEST CITY, UTAH
 
By ___________________________________
Dave Bolos
 
 
 
ATTEST:
 
________________________________________
Recorder
Farr West City, Utah
 
 
 
Vote of City Council
 
Yes No
___ ___ Council Member Anderson
___ ___ Council Member Williams
___ ___ Council Member Shupe
___ ___ Council Member Blind
___ ___ Council Member Jay
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-02
 
AN ORDINANCE OF FARR WEST CITY, UTAH AMENDING TITLE 3 OF THE
FARR WEST CITY MUNICPAL CODE
 
WHEREAS, Title 3 Section 3.30.010 “Fee Schedule Enumerated” of the Farr West
City Code of Ordinances establishes certain fees for various municipal services
within Farr West City; and
 
WHEREAS, the Farr West City Council desires to update certain provisions of
Title 3 Section 3.30.010 “Fee Schedule Enumerated” to reflect the adoption of
the Transportation Utility Fee; and
 
   NOW THEREFORE, the Farr West City Council ordains that Title 3 Section
3.30.010 “Fee Schedule Enumerated” shall be amended in part to add the
following fee/language (amended/updated language contained in red lettering):
 
3.30.010 FEE SCHEDULE ENUMERATED
 
 
Code Section Item                       Fee                  Effective Date
3.40.040     Transportation Utility Fee Base rate: $7.00/ERU Jan 01, 2026
 
This Ordinance supersedes all prior ordinances and policies of Farr West City,
Utah to the extent that such may be in conflict with the specific provisions
contained herein. In all other respects, such prior ordinances, resolutions,
actions and policies shall remain in full force and effect.
 
 
This ordinance shall take effect 15 days after publication or posting by the
City Council of Farr West City, Utah.
 
Dated this 5th day of February, 2026.
 
 
 
 
FARR WEST CITY MAYOR         Vote of City Council      Yes No
                             
____________________________ Council Member Anderson   ___ ___
David P. Bolos               Council Member Williams   ___ ___
                            Council Member Shupe   ___ ___
ATTEST: ___________________  Council Member Blind   ___ ___
Farr West City Recorder      Council Member Jay       ___ ___
                              
 
 
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
SECTION:
1.01.010: Adoption
1.01.020: Title; Citation; Reference
1.01.030: Reference Applies To All Amendments
1.01.040: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1.01.050: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1.01.060: Ordinances Passed Prior To Adoption Of This Code
1.01.070: Effect On Past Actions
1.01.080: Constitutionality
1.01.090: References In Prior Works
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
There is adopted the Farr West City municipal code, as compiled, edited and
published by the Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 98-08 § 1)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the FARR WEST CITY MUNICIPAL CODE in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision of this code or in any
proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding
to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of this code
as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Farr West
municipal code". References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the "Farr West municipal code" and such references shall apply
to those chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord.
98-08 § 2)
1.01.030: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Farr West City municipal
code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of Farr West City,
codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and
additions heretofore, now or hereafter, made. (Ord. 98-08 § 3)
1.01.040: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this code. (Ord. 98-08 §
4)
1.01.050: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 98-08 § 5)
1.01.060: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THIS CODE:
Ordinances which were passed after ordinance number 97-19 but subsequent to the
adoption of this code, are adopted and made part of this code. (Ord. 98-08 § 6)
1.01.070: EFFECT ON PAST ACTIONS:
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations
committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or
penalty due and unpaid as of the effective date of this code, and does not
affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited
pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 98-08 § 7)
1.01.080: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 98-08 § 8)
1.01.090: REFERENCES IN PRIOR WORKS:
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the ordinances in effect
prior to the adoption of this code, shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained with this code. (Ord. 98-08 § 9)
CHAPTER 1.04
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1.04.010: Violation; Penalty
1.04.010: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be guilty
of an infraction unless the violation is made a misdemeanor by ordinance.
   B.   Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any
ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction is
punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both in accordance with the fines and
imprisonments for misdemeanors and infractions as prescribed in chapter 3,
title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated.
   C.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the
ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person.
(Ord. 10-04)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 2.04
MEETINGS
SECTION:
2.04.010: Regular Meetings
2.04.020: Electronic Meetings
2.04.030: Anchor Location
2.04.040: Quorum Required
2.04.050: Vote Required
2.04.060: Limitations
2.04.070: Notice Required
2.04.080: Facilities Required
2.04.090: Declared Emergency
2.04.010: REGULAR MEETINGS:
   A.    Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and
third Thursdays of each month. The meetings shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. The meetings shall be held at the Farr West City Municipal Offices at 1896
North 1800 West, Farr West, Utah 84404.
   B.    Regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held on the
second Thursday of each month. Planning commission work sessions shall be held
on the fourth Thursday of each month. These meetings shall begin at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. The meetings shall be held at the Farr West City Municipal
Offices at 1896 North 1800 West, Farr West, Utah 84404. (Ord. 20-03)
2.04.020: ELECTRONIC MEETINGS:
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Ann. §52-4-207, the purpose of this
chapter is to allow for an elected city council member or an appointed planning
commission member to participate, make motions, and vote while participating in
a properly noticed open meeting either telephonically or via video tele-
conference from another location by satisfying the requirements of this
chapter. This chapter also allows for the monitoring of, and limited
participation in, open meetings by members of the public electronically. (Ord.
20-03)
2.04.030: ANCHOR LOCATION:
The Farr West Municipal Offices located at 1896 North 1800 West, Farr West,
Utah 84404 will be the anchor location from which all electronic meetings
allowed by this chapter shall originate. Alternate anchor locations may be
designated by the city in accordance with Utah Code Ann. §52-4-207(3)(c). (Ord.
20-03)
2.04.040: QUORUM REQUIRED:
A quorum of the public body holding the meeting must be present at the anchor
location. For the purposes of the city council, three (3) city council members
(excluding the Mayor) and four (4) planning commission members are required.
The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem or any other person who is designated to chair the
meeting must be present at the anchor location. (Ord. 20-03)
2.04.050: VOTE REQUIRED:
The public body must vote to approve establishment of an electronic meeting in
order to include other members of the public body through an electronic
connection. A request for an electronic meeting made by a member of a public
body must be made three (3) days prior to the meeting to allow for arrangements
to be made for the electronic meeting. (Ord. 20-03)
2.04.060: LIMITATIONS:
The public body may restrict the number of separate connections for members of
the public body that are allowed for an electronic meeting based on available
equipment capability and may establish by resolution or ordinance other
procedures, limitations, or conditions governing electronic meetings that are
not in conflict with this chapter or Utah Code Ann. §52-4-207. (Ord. 20-03)
2.04.070: NOTICE REQUIRED:
   A.    A public body that convenes or conducts an electronic meeting shall
give public notice of the meeting in accordance with UCA Section 52-4-202 and
post written notice at the anchor location.
   B.   In addition to giving the notice required in paragraph A above, the
public body shall provide:
      1.   Notice of the electronic meeting to the members of the public body
at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting so that they may participate
in and be counted as present for all purposes, including the determination that
a quorum is present; and
      2.   A description of how the members will be connected to the electronic
meeting. (Ord. 20-03)
2.04.080: FACILITIES REQUIRED:
The public body shall provide space and facilities at the anchor location so
that interested persons and the public may attend and monitor the open portions
of the meeting. If comments from the public will be accepted during the
electronic meeting, provide space and facilities at the anchor location so that
interested persons and the public may attend, monitor, and participate in the
open portions of the meeting. (Ord. 20-03)
2.04.090: DECLARED EMERGENCY:
Whenever a state of emergency is formally declared at the federal, state or
local level which substantially prevents or hinders the ability of the city to
conform with the requirements of this chapter, the city council may suspend the
requirements of this chapter consistent with the terms of the emergency
declaration in order to conduct the necessary functions of city government.
(Ord. 20-03)
CHAPTER 2.06
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
2.06.010: Utah Government Records And Management Act Adopted
2.06.020: Records Officer
2.06.030: Retention Schedule
2.06.040: Records Requests
2.06.050: Fees
2.06.060: Fee Waiver
2.06.070: Processing A Request
2.06.080: Appeals To The Mayor
2.06.090: Appeal To Records Committee Or District Court
2.06.100: The Act Governs
2.06.010: UTAH GOVERNMENT RECORDS AND MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED:
All of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah government records access and management act (the act), as
amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in this code. All
government records of Farr West City shall be maintained, classified and
accessed in accordance with the act set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
63G-2-101 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.020: RECORDS OFFICER:
The city recorder is hereby appointed as records officer of Farr West City to
work with the Utah division of archives and records service in the care,
maintenance, scheduling, designation, classification, disposal, and
preservation of city records. Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-
108, as amended, the records officer shall, on an annual basis, successfully
complete online training and certification from the state archives regarding
government records access and management. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.030: RETENTION SCHEDULE:
All government records of Farr West City shall be retained in accordance with
the Utah municipal general records retention schedule, as created and retained
by the Utah division of archives and records service, which retention schedule
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein as Farr West City's
records retention schedule. The city may classify or reclassify a particular
record, records series or information in a record at any time, in accordance
with applicable provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-307, as
amended. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.040: RECORDS REQUESTS:
Any person requesting a record shall file a written government records access
and management act (GRAMA) request form as provided by Farr West City. Such
request shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the Utah government
records access and management act, as adopted by the city. All government
records requests shall contain the requester's name, mailing address, and
daytime phone number, if available, and shall provide a description of the
record requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity. (Ord.
2016-02)
2.06.050: FEES:
Farr West City may charge a reasonable fee to cover the city's actual cost of
duplicating a record. Fees for GRAMA requests shall be adopted and set forth in
the Farr West City fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time, and is
adopted and incorporated herein by reference. The city may require payment of
past fees and future estimated fees before beginning to process a request if
the requester has not paid fees from previous requests and/or the fees for the
current request are expected to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). Any prepaid
amount in excess of fees due shall be returned to the requester. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.060: FEE WAIVER:
In accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-203, as amended, the city
may fulfill a record request without charge when it determines that:
   A.   Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a
person;
   B.   The individual requesting the record is the subject of the record, or
an individual specified in Utah Code Annotated subsections 63G-2-202(1) or (2);
or
   C.   The requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the information
in the record and the requester is impecunious. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.070: PROCESSING A REQUEST:
As soon as reasonably possible, but no later than ten (10) business days after
receiving a written request, or five (5) business days after receiving a
written request if the requester demonstrates that expedited response to the
record request benefits the public rather than the person, the city shall
respond to the request by doing one of the following:
   A.   Approving the request and providing the record.
   B.   Denying the request 1 . If the city denies a request, it shall give
notice of denial that includes a description of the denied records, the reasons
for the denial, including citations to the law relied on in making the
determination to deny, and a statement indicating that the requester may appeal
the decision and how to do so.
   C.   Notifying the requester that the city does not maintain the record and
providing, if known, the name and address of the governmental entity that does
maintain the record.
   D.   Notifying the requester that because of one of the extraordinary
circumstances allowed by law, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-
401, as amended, the city cannot immediately approve or deny the request nor
give the details why and when the city will be able to provide the record.
(Ord. 2016-02)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 63G-2-205.
2.06.080: APPEALS TO THE MAYOR:
Any person aggrieved by the city's access determination made or fees imposed
under this chapter may appeal the determination within thirty (30) days to the
mayor by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with the provisions
set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-401, as amended. The notice of
appeal shall contain the petitioner's name, mailing address, daytime phone
number, and the relief sought. The notice of appeal should also contain a brief
statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the appeal. The
mayor shall make a determination on the appeal within the time periods set
forth in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-401, as amended. The mayor shall
send written notice of his or her determination to all participants, including
notice of any right to appeal in accordance with section
 2.06.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.090: APPEAL TO RECORDS COMMITTEE OR DISTRICT COURT:
If the mayor denies a records request under section
2.06.080 of this chapter, the requester may appeal the denial to the state
records committee as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-403, as
amended, or petition for judicial review in district court as provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 63G-2-404, as amended. Any person aggrieved by a
determination of the mayor, including persons who did not participate in the
appeal proceedings before the mayor, may appeal the determination to the state
records committee as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-402, as
amended. (Ord. 2016-02)
2.06.100: THE ACT GOVERNS:
In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between the act and this chapter,
the act shall govern. (Ord. 2016-02)
CHAPTER 2.08
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
(Rep. by Ord. 2023-13, 12-7-2023)
CHAPTER 2.12
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.12.010: Planning Commission Established
2.12.020: Appointment, Term And Vacancy
2.12.030: Organization
2.12.040: Duties And Powers
2.12.050: Payment Of Per Diem
2.12.010: PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
There is established a Planning Commission of Farr West City. The commission
shall be composed of six (6) members and two (2) alternate members. Members and
alternate members must be residents of the City while on the commission, and
must be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of their appointment to
the commission. Planning Commission members and alternate members may not be an
elected official or employee of Farr West City while they are serving on the
commission. (Ord. 19-01)
2.12.020: APPOINTMENT, TERM AND VACANCY:
   A.   In order to fill vacancies on the Planning Commission, the City shall
solicit applications from residents who are interested in serving on the
Planning Commission. All interested applicants must submit an application in
order to be considered for possible appointment to the commission.
   B.   A selection panel consisting of the Mayor or his designee from the City
Council and one member of the City Council, and three (3) members of the
Planning Commission shall interview all applicants who want to be considered
for appointment to the commission. The interviews shall be conducted in a
closed meeting specifically for the purpose of interviewing candidates. The
meeting shall be conducted by the Mayor or his designee. Standard interview
questions prepared by the panel will be asked to each applicant. After each
interview is completed, the panel shall rank the candidate in accordance with a
ranking system agreed to by the panel and announced and explained before the
interviews are conducted. In an open meeting the panel may discuss the
rankings, their rationale for their rankings and any other factors affecting
their decision. In the open meeting, the panel shall rank the candidates and
determine which candidates shall be recommended to the City Council. The City
Council in an open meeting shall select the new member(s) of the commission
with due consideration of the recommendations from the interview panel.
   C.   The term of each member and alternate member shall be three (3) years.
Terms of commission members and alternate members shall begin on or before the
second Thursday of February of each year. A minimum of two (2) members shall be
reappointed or replaced each year at the expiration of their term. When
vacancies arise, the City Council may, upon the recommendation of the
commission, appoint an alternate member to be a member of the commission
without going through the interview process, or select a new member in
accordance with this chapter.
   D.   Members may be removed from the commission upon the recommendation of
the Mayor, the City Council or Planning Commission, and upon a vote of a
majority of the City Council. Vacancies shall be promptly filled in the same
manner as the original appointment. Members who are appointed to fill an
unscheduled vacancy on the commission shall complete the remainder of the
unexpired term of the original member.
   E.   The procedure for interviewing and appointment of alternate members is
the same as that of members. Alternate members participate in all matters
pertaining to the Planning Commission except that they may vote only when
substituting for a member who is absent from the commission meeting. (Ord. 19-
01)
2.12.030: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   On or before the second Thursday of February of each year the Planning
Commission shall elect one member of the commission to be the Chairperson and
one member to be the Vice Chairperson. The names of the Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson so elected shall be presented to the Mayor and City Council for
their approval. If approved by both the City Council and the Mayor, the City
Council shall appoint these individuals as Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of
the Planning Commission. The appointment shall be for a period of one year. The
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be reappointed or replaced each year.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall meet on the second and fourth Thursdays
of each month for official business. The commission Chairperson may call
additional meetings at such other times as the Planning Commission may deem
necessary and in accordance with notice requirements for public meetings. The
regularly scheduled meetings shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. at Farr
West City Hall, 1896 N. 1800 W., Farr West, Utah. The Planning Commission may
adopt policies and procedures for the conduct of its meetings, the processing
of applications and for any other purposes considered necessary for the
functioning of the commission. All policies and procedures shall be approved by
the City Council before taking effect.
   C.   Four (4) members of the commission constitute a quorum and a quorum
must be present at commission meetings in order to conduct any commission
business. Official acts of the Planning Commission require a majority vote of
the Planning Commission. The Chairperson, or in the Chairperson's absence the
Vice Chairperson, shall conduct all proceedings of the commission.
   D.   Reports of official acts and recommendations of the Planning Commission
shall be made by the Chairperson in writing to the City Council or in a verbal
report given at a regularly scheduled Council meeting and shall indicate how
the commission voted with respect to such actions or recommendations. Any
commission member may also make a concurring or dissenting report or
recommendation to the City Council.
   E.   The Chairperson is a nonvoting member of the Planning Commission. The
Chairperson may vote if any vote taken by the commission results in a tie, or
if only four (4) members of the Planning Commission are present at a Planning
Commission meeting. (Ord. 19-01)
2.12.040: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To prepare or cause to be prepared and recommend a general plan, plan
elements or amendments to the general plan to the City Council;
   B.   To prepare or cause to be prepared all Zoning Ordinances and maps and
amendments to Zoning Ordinances and maps and recommend such to the City
Council;
   C.   To administer provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, where specifically
provided for in the Zoning Ordinances of the City;
   D.   To review and recommend approval or denial of all applications for
amendments to the general plan or amendments to Land Use Ordinances;
   E.   To recommend subdivision regulations and amendments to those
regulations to the City Council;
   F.   To recommend approval or denial of subdivision applications as provided
under State law and the ordinances of the City;
   G.   To advise the City Council on matters as the City Council directs;
   H.   To hear or decide any matters the City Council directs, including
recommending approval or denial of site plans and signs, and recommendations to
approve or deny conditional use permits;
   I.   To adopt bylaws, policies and procedures for the conduct of the duties
and meetings of the commission, for the consideration of applications and for
any other purposes deemed necessary by the commission; provided, that such
bylaws, policies and procedures are approved by the City Council before taking
effect; and
   J.   To exercise any other powers authorized by State law and delegated by
the City Council. (Ord. 19-01)
2.12.050: PAYMENT OF PER DIEM:
Per diem for members of the Planning Commission shall be set by resolution by
the City Council. (Ord. 19-01)
CHAPTER 2.16
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
2.16.010: Procedure
2.16.010: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Election for mayor and council members shall be conducted according to
the municipal election section of the Utah Code Annotated, 20A-9-404(1) and
(2).
   B.   This section provides for the candidates for mayor and council members
to be nominated at a primary election if required. A primary election will be
held only when the number of candidates filing for an office exceeds twice the
number to be elected. The candidates nominated at the primary election plus
candidates that were not required to run in the primary are to be placed on the
November ballot. (Ord. 95-02 §§ 1, 2)
CHAPTER 2.20
REVIEW OF TAKINGS ISSUE
SECTION:
2.20.010: Policy Considerations
2.20.020: Constitutional Taking Defined
2.20.030: Guidelines Advisory
2.20.040: Review Of Decision
2.20.050: Reviewing Guidelines
2.20.060: Results Of Review
2.20.010: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
There is an underlying policy in the city, strongly favoring the careful
consideration of matters involving constitutional taking claims, in fairness to
the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the uncertainty
and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same
time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real property
must be preserved and the public's right to require the dedication or exaction
of property consistent with the constitution. Consistent with this policy, it
is delivered that a procedure be established for the review of actions that may
involve the issue of a constitutional taking. These provisions are to assist
governments in considering decisions that may involve constitutional takings.
It is intended that a procedure for such a review be provided, as well as
guidelines for such considerations. This chapter is further intended and shall
be construed to objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a
specific government action should require payment of just compensation, yet
preserve the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill
its other duties and functions. (Ord. 95-01 § 1)
2.20.020: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING DEFINED:
"Constitutional taking" means:
   A.   Actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property that might require compensation to a private real
property owner because of:
      1.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment to the constitution of the United
States,
      2.   Article I, section 22, of the Utah constitution,
      3.   Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by a government entity;
   B.   Actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property is not a constitutional taking if the physical taking or
exaction:
      1.   Bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest, and
      2.   Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an
individualized property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the
proposed development on the legitimate government interest. (Ord. 95-01 § 2)
2.20.030: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking. The reviewing body
or person, shall not be required to make any determination under this chapter
except pursuant to section
 2.20.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-01 § 3)
2.20.040: REVIEW OF DECISION:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of their private real property shall request a review of a final
decision of any officer, employee, board, commission or council. The following
are specific procedures established for such a review:
   A.   The person requesting a review must have obtained a final and
authoritative determination, internally, within the city, relative to the
decision from which they are requesting review.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision that gave
rise to the concern that a constitutional taking has occurred, the person
requesting the review shall file in writing, in the office of the city
recorder, a request for review of that decision. A copy shall also be filed
with the city attorney.
   C.   The city council, or an individual, or body designated by the city
council shall immediately set a time to review the decision that gave rise to
the constitutional takings claim.
   D.   In addition to the written request for review, the applicant must
submit, prior to the date of the review, the following:
      1.   Name of the applicant requesting review;
      2.   Name and business address of current owner of the property, form of
ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit
corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a
corporation, partnership or joint venture, name and address of all principal
shareholders or partners;
      3.   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has
been a constitutional taking;
      4.   A detailed description of the property taken;
      5.   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken,
including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired. This should
include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the
alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom purchased,
including the relationship, if any, between the person requesting a review and
the party from whom the property was acquired;
      6.   Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as,
but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest;
      7.   Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a
full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the
date of application;
      8.   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3)
years prior to the date of application;
      9.   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the
previous three (3) years;
      10.   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured
by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest
rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant
provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to assume the
loan;
      11.   All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years;
      12.   All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property;
      13.   For income producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
      14.   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
      15.   The city council or their designee may request additional
information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a conclusion
concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
   E.   An application shall not be deemed to be "complete" or "submitted"
until the reviewing body or official certifies to the applicant, that all the
materials and information required above, have been received by the city. The
reviewing body or official shall promptly notify the applicant of any
incomplete application.
   F.   The city council or an individual or body designated by them, shall
hear all the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant, city or other
interested party.
   G.   A final decision on the review shall be rendered within fourteen (14)
days from the date the complete application for review has been received by the
city recorder. The decision of the city council regarding the results of the
review shall be given in writing to the applicant and the officer, employee,
board, commission or council that rendered the final decision that gave rise to
the constitutional takings claim.
   H.   If the city council fails to hear and decide the review within fourteen
(14) days, the decision appealed from shall be presumed to be approved. (Ord.
95-01 § 4)
2.20.050: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The city council shall review the facts and information presented by the
applicant to determine whether or not the action by the city constitutes a
"constitutional taking" as defined in this chapter. In doing so, they shall
consider:
   A.   Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property
bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest;
   B.   Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken
by the city;
   C.   Is the property and exaction taken, roughly proportionate and
reasonably related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent,
to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision
being reviewed. (Ord. 95-01 § 5)
2.20.060: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the reviewing person shall make a determination
regarding the above issues and where determined to be necessary and
appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board,
commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the
constitutional takings claim. (Ord. 95-01 § 6)
CHAPTER 2.24
COMPENSATION OF ELECTED AND STATUTORY OFFICERS
SECTION:
2.24.010: Compensation For Elected Officials
2.24.020: Compensation For Statutory Officers
2.24.030: Compensation Payment And Adjustments
2.24.010: COMPENSATION FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS:
   A.   Compensation for all elected officials of the city shall be fixed as
follows:
 
Mayor           $1,000.00 per month
Council members 350.00 per month
 
   B.   The mayor and the city council may accept compensation or remuneration
from other boards, councils, committees or commissions on which they serve as
part of their official duties as a Farr West council member.
   C.   An amount equal to the current federal requirements for social security
and medicare will be deducted.
   D.   The position of mayor shall be given a vehicle, fuel and cellphone
allowance in the form and amount as set by the Farr West City council.
   E.   The salaries and benefits set by this chapter shall be effective July
1, 2016. (Ord. 2016-03: Ord. 2022-09)
2.24.020: COMPENSATION FOR STATUTORY OFFICERS:
   A.   Compensation for the statutory officers of Farr West City shall be
established by the procedures of U.C.A. 1953, § 10-3-818 as amended.
   B.   Compensation adjustment for statutory municipal offers shall be as
follows:
 
Attorney - civil      Monthly amount + adjustments set by the established
                      payroll schedule of the city
Attorney - prosecutor Monthly amount + adjustments set by the established
                      payroll schedule of the city
Justice Court Judge   Monthly amount + adjustments pursuant to U.C.A. 78A-7-206
                      (1)
Recorder              Compensation paid according to the established payroll
                      schedule of the city
Treasurer             Monthly amount + adjustments set by the established
                      payroll schedule of the city
 
   C.   This chapter shall take effect July 1, 2025. (Ord. 2025-05: Ord. 2025-
01: Ord. 2024-16: Ord. 2024-04: Ord. 2023-08: Ord. 2023-05: Ord. 2022-09: Ord.
2019-07: Ord. 2016-03)
2.24.030: COMPENSATION PAYMENT AND ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Payment: The treasurer shall pay each elected and statutory officer on
the last regular business day of each month by delivery of a check drawn on the
municipal checking account to the elected or statutory officer personally or by
mailing the check to the elected or statutory officer at his or her home,
postage prepaid.
   B.   Per Diem: Each member of the governing body shall receive mileage per
diem for all trips approved by the government body according to the schedules
adopted by the Utah department of finance. (Ord. 2016-03)
CHAPTER 2.28
APPEAL AUTHORITY
SECTION:
2.28.010: Purpose
2.28.020: Administration
2.28.030: Appeal Authority Established
2.28.040: Appeal Procedure
2.28.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure to settle civil
disputes and civil grievances that arise in the execution of municipal
ordinances where a procedure is not otherwise provided by law or this code. The
procedure is designed to promote settlement and resolve concerns in an orderly
manner. (Ord. 13-05)
2.28.020: ADMINISTRATION:
All appeals conducted under this chapter shall be presided over by an appeal
authority or administrative hearing officer, both referred to as appeal
authority, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. At any appeal hearing or subsequent inquiry, the city attorney, or his
designee, shall present the position of the city. All references to the board
of adjustment are hereby amended to read the "appeal authority". (Ord. 13-05)
2.28.030: APPEAL AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED:
In accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-701, Farr West City hereby
establishes an appeal authority as follows:
   A.   Designation: The city council shall designate an individual as an
appeal authority or hearing officer. The appeal authority shall be an
independent contractor and not an employee of the city. The city council may
contract with an individual for providing appeal authority services under terms
acceptable to the city council.
   B.   Term: Any appeal authority shall serve until replaced by the city
council.
   C.   Authority: The appeal authority shall:
      1.   Hear and decide variances and appeals of land use decisions in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated sections 10-9a-702 and 703.
      2.   Act in a quasi-judicial manner and serve as the final arbiter of
issues involving the interpretation or application of land use ordinances.
      3.   Hear and decide appeals of other matters where an appeal is provided
in this code and no other hearing officer is designated to hear the appeal.
      4.   Exercise other powers and duties prescribed by law or assignment.
   D.   Organization And Procedures: The following apply:
      1.   The appeal authority shall comply with this chapter.
      2.   Except for variances, the appeal authority is hereby authorized to
approve settlement agreement(s) as agreed by the parties which do not
substantially deviate from this code, and/or may fashion other appropriate
remedies relating to an appeal that substantially comply with this code.
      3.   The appeal authority shall not be a member of the planning
commission or serve in any capacity as a land use authority while serving as
the appeal authority.
      4.   Title 10, chapter 9a, part 7 of the Utah Code Annotated shall govern
all appeal deadlines, burden of proof, due process, standard of review, and
matters of finality.
   E.   District Court: No person may challenge in district court any land use
decision of the municipality in accordance with state law, or under a
regulation made under authority of state law, until that person has complied
with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801, and otherwise exhausted all
administrative remedies. In accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-
701:
      1.   No adversely affected parties shall present a theory of relief in
district court that was not first presented to the appeal authority.
      2.   Adversely affected parties are precluded from pursuing duplicate or
successive appeals before the same or separate appeal authorities as a
condition of the adversely affected party's duty to exhaust administrative
remedies.
      3.   The city council may provide by ordinance that specified types of
land use decisions may be appealed directly to the district court. (Ord. 13-05)
2.28.040: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Exhaust Administrative Remedies Required: No case shall be heard before
the district court until an aggrieved person has exhausted their administrative
remedies provided in this section.
   B.   Applicability: In all cases where an appeal is provided by municipal
ordinance, or from a final decision of a city official regarding a particular
case, an aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal such to the appeal
authority. No appeal is provided for legislative actions or administrative
decisions of the city council.
   C.   Filing And Time Limit: The appeal shall be taken by filing written
notice of the appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) business days after
the grievance occurred or forever be barred. Upon the filing of the written
appeal, the city recorder shall forthwith refer a copy of the same to the
appeal authority and set a hearing for the same.
   D.   Hearing: Upon receipt of the referral from the city recorder, the
appeal authority shall commence its investigation of the record by taking
evidence at a hearing regarding the final decision that was made by the city
that gave rise to the grievance.
   E.   Rights: The aggrieved party shall be entitled to appear in person, to
be represented by counsel, to confront the witness whose testimony is to be
considered, and to examine the evidence to be considered.
   F.   Decision: The appeal authority may uphold, overturn, or remand for
another re-review of the city officer's final decision.
   G.   Finality Of Decision: In the event the appeal authority upholds the
actions of the city, the case shall be closed and no further proceedings shall
be had, except where appealed to another court of jurisdiction. The decision of
the appeal authority shall be filed with the city recorder within fifteen (15)
business days from the date the matter was heard.
   H.   Considerations: The appeal authority may, in its decision, conduct
further inquiry, decide on the relevant municipal law, consider special
circumstances which create a hardship, or otherwise direct appropriate
settlement.
   I.   Appeal: The city or any person aggrieved may have and maintain a
plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, petition for such relief is presented to the court within thirty (30)
days after the filing of such decision with the city recorder. (Ord. 13-05)
CHAPTER 2.30
EXCESS CITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
2.30.010: Definitions
2.30.020: Surplus Property Criteria
2.30.030: Disposal Or Sale Of Personal Property
2.30.040: Disposal Or Sale Of Real Property
2.30.050: Leasing Of City Property
2.30.010: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY PROPERTY OR MUNICIPAL PROPERTY OR PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any property or
equity interest in real or personal property held or owned by the City except
for mortgages taken or released to secure the installation of subdivision
improvements.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE: The value of a parcel of property as determined by at
least one professional certified real estate appraiser retained by the City.
   REASONABLE NOTICE: Public notice made in the same manner as required for
land use ordinance changes given at least fourteen (14) days before the
opportunity for public comment.
   SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: A parcel of property having a fair
market value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or which because of
its location has significant value to the City. (Ord. 13-08)
2.30.020: SURPLUS PROPERTY CRITERIA:
In determining whether any real or personal City property shall be deemed
surplus, obsolete or excess, the City Council shall find at least one of the
following:
   A.   The City has or soon will have no use for the property, nor will it
have such a use for the property in the near future.
   B.   Disposal or sale of the property is in the best interests of the City.
   C.   The property is damaged, worn out or otherwise inoperable and the cost
of repairing the same is unwise or impractical. (Ord. 13-08)
2.30.030: DISPOSAL OR SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   If the City Council determines that an item of personal property has
become surplus, obsolete or excess, the City Council may then authorize the
sale of such item and then proceed to sell the same by public auction, public
advertisement, or any other method deemed appropriate by the City Council on
terms and conditions deemed to be in the best interests of the City.
   B.   Surplus, obsolete, or excess personal property which is unsalable
because of obsolescence, wear and tear, or other reasons may be dismantled, if
necessary, and sold as scrap or disposed of in an appropriate manner.
   C.   If the property is deemed to not have any resale value, it shall be
disposed of by the City in a manner deemed to be in the best interest of the
public and approved by the City Council.
   D.   For items offered for sale by public auction, public advertisement, or
any other method, the City may refuse any or all bids. (Ord. 13-08)
2.30.040: DISPOSAL OR SALE OF REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   If the City Council determines that a significant parcel of real
property has become surplus or excess, the City Council may then authorize the
sale of such parcel by any method deemed appropriate by the City Council on
terms and conditions deemed to be in the best interests of the City and in
accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Before any sale or disposition of a significant parcel of real
property, the City shall provide an opportunity for public comment on the
proposed sale or disposition and provide notice of the opportunity for public
comment at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting.
   C.   If, after public comment has been received, the City Council makes a
determination to proceed with the sale or disposition, the property may be sold
by any method deemed appropriate by the City Council on terms and conditions
deemed to be in the best interests of the City and in accordance with this
chapter.
   D.   All real property deemed to be surplus may be traded for other real
property or in-kind consideration only if the property received is of
equivalent value as determined by a professional certified appraiser unless
there is an express authorization by the City Council for trading for property
of a lesser value.
   E.   A parcel of property which is deemed surplus or excess by the City
Council but is not a significant parcel of real property, may be disposed of by
any method deemed appropriate by the City Council on terms and conditions
deemed to be in the best interests of the City and in accordance with this
chapter.
   F.   Any real property deemed to be surplus shall not be sold for less than
fair market value unless specifically approved by the City Council. (Ord. 13-
08)
2.30.050: LEASING OF CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   If the City Council determines that a parcel of City-owned real
property is at the time not needed for public use, the City Council may
authorize the lease of such property under any terms and conditions considered
appropriate by the Council and deemed to be in the best interests of the City
and in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Before any lease of real property, the City shall:
      1.   Provide reasonable notice of the proposed lease at least seven (7)
days before a scheduled meeting at which the City will hear public comment; and
      2.   Hold a meeting at which the City Council accepts public comment on
the proposed lease.
   C.   If, after public comment has been received, the City Council makes a
determination to proceed with the lease, the property may be leased by any
method deemed appropriate by the City Council on terms and conditions deemed to
be in the best interests of the City and in accordance with this chapter and
Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2.
   D.   Leases of real property shall not be granted for a period of over five
(5) years unless expressly authorized by the City Council.
   E.   Any lease of property shall not be for less than fair market value
unless specifically approved by the City Council. (Ord. 18-07)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 3.04
PURCHASING POLICY
SECTION:
3.04.010: Purpose
3.04.015: Compliance; Exemptions From Policy
3.04.020: Definitions
3.04.030: Procurement Officer
3.04.035: Contracts For New Improvements And Class C Roads
3.04.040: Building Improvements And Public Works Projects
3.04.050: Small Purchases
3.04.055: Bidding
3.04.060: Specifications
3.04.070: Appeals
3.04.080: Ethics In Public Contracting
3.04.010: PURPOSE:
The underlying purposes of this policy are:
   A.   To ensure transparency in the public procurement process;
   B.   To ensure fair and equitable treatment of all persons who participate
in the Farr West City procurement process;
   C.   To provide for the greatest possible economy in City procurement
activities;
   D.   To foster effective broad based competition within the free enterprise
system to ensure that the City will receive the best possible service or
product at the lowest possible price;
   E.   To conform to Utah Code Annotated, title 10, chapter 7, part 6,
miscellaneous powers of cities and towns, contracts for public improvements;
and
   F.   To conform to Utah Code Annotated, title 72, chapter 6, part 1, the
Construction, Maintenance and Operations Act (for Class B and C roads). (Ord.
18-06)
3.04.015: COMPLIANCE; EXEMPTIONS FROM POLICY:
   A.   This policy shall not prevent the City from complying with the terms
and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with
law.
   B.   When a procurement involves the expenditure of Federal assistance
funds, the City shall comply with applicable Federal law and regulations.
   C.   Whenever the City contemplates making any new improvement to be paid
for out of the general funds of the City, the City shall comply with the
requirements and exceptions of Utah Code Annotated, title 63G, chapter 6a, Utah
Procurement Code and other applicable Utah laws.
   D.   Whenever the City contemplates any improvement project involving a
Class C road, the City shall comply with the requirements and exceptions of
Utah Code Annotated, title 72, chapter 6, part 1, sections 108 through 110 and
other applicable Utah laws. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   BID LIMIT: Means:
   A.   For a building improvement:
1. For the year 2003, forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); and
2. For each year after 2003, the amount of the bid limit for the previous year,
plus an amount calculated by multiplying the amount of the bid limit for the
previous year by the lesser of three percent (3%) or the actual percent change
in the Consumer Price Index during the previous calendar year; and
   B.   For a public works project:
      1.   For the year 2003, one hundred twenty five thousand dollars
($125,000.00); and
      2.   For each year after 2003, the amount of the bid limit for the
previous year, plus an amount calculated by multiplying the amount of the bid
limit for the previous year by the lesser of three percent (3%) or the actual
percent change in the Consumer Price Index during the previous calendar year.
   BUILDING IMPROVEMENT: The construction or repair of a public building or
structure.
   BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship,
joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity.
   CHANGE ORDER: A written order signed by the Procurement Officer, directing
the contractor to suspend work or make changes, which the appropriate clauses
of the contract authorize the Procurement Officer to order without the consent
of the contractor or any written alteration in specifications, delivery point,
rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity or other provisions of
any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.
   CONTRACT: Any City agreement for the procurement or disposal of supplies,
services or other items not related to new improvements as used in Utah Code
Annotated title 63G, chapter 6a, or to the construction or improvement of any
Class C road.
   EMERGENCY REPAIRS: A building improvement or public works project undertaken
on an expedited basis to:
   A.   Eliminate an imminent risk of damage to or loss of public or private
property;
   B.   Remedy a condition that poses an immediate physical danger; or
   C.   Reduce a substantial, imminent risk of interruption of an essential
public service.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting bids.
   PERSON: Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other
organization, or group of individuals.
   PROCUREMENT: Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an option to
purchase, or otherwise acquiring any supplies or services.
   PROCUREMENT OFFICER: The person duly authorized by the Governing Body of the
City to enter into and administer contracts and make written determinations
with respect thereto.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT:
   A.   Means the construction of a park or recreational facility or a
pipeline, culvert, dam, canal, or other system for water, sewage, stormwater,
or flood control; and
   B.   Does not include the replacement or repair of existing infrastructure
on private property.
   PURCHASE DESCRIPTION: The words used in a solicitation to describe the
supplies or services to be purchased, and includes specifications attached to
or made a part of the solicitation.
   REQUEST FOR BIDS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting proposals.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting proposals. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.030: PROCUREMENT OFFICER:
The City Council shall appoint a Procurement Officer. The Procurement Officer
shall be responsible to make procurements, solicit bids and proposals, enter
into and administer contracts, and make written determinations for the City.
(Ord. 18-06)
3.04.035: CONTRACTS FOR NEW IMPROVEMENTS AND CLASS C ROADS:
   A.   Contracts for new improvements to be paid for out of the general funds
of the City shall be let in accordance with the solicitation and bidding
requirements of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 39 and other applicable
Utah law, which laws are incorporated herein by reference.
   B.   Contracts for the construction or improvement of any Class C road,
shall be let in accordance with the solicitation and bidding requirements of
Utah Code Annotated sections 72-6-108 and 109 or other applicable Utah law
governing Class C roads, which laws are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord.
18-06)
3.04.040: BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS AND PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
   A.   Before undertaking a building improvement or public works project paid
for by the City, the City shall cause plans and specifications to be made for
the building improvement or public works project; and make an estimate of the
cost of the building improvement or public works project.
   B.   If the estimated cost of the building improvement or public works
project exceeds the bid limit, the City shall, if it determines to proceed with
the building improvement or public works project, request bids for completion
of the building improvement or public works project by complying with the
bidding procedures in section
3.04.055 of this chapter and shall award the contract to the lowest responsible
bidder.
   C.   Bidding is not required for emergency repairs or if the building
improvement or public works project if the estimated cost is less than the bid
limit.
   D.   Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the City may divide
the cost of a building improvement or public works project that would, without
dividing, exceed the bid limit if the City complies with the requirements of
this section with respect to each part of the building improvement or public
works project that results from dividing the cost. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.050: SMALL PURCHASES:
   A.   Small Purchase Threshold:
      1.   An individual procurement costing less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) in total, may be made by direct award and shall not require
competitive bids or quotes.
      2.   The single procurement aggregate threshold is a maximum amount of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for multiple procurement items purchased from
one source at one time.
      3.   The annual cumulative threshold from the same source is a maximum
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   B.   Small Purchase Threshold For Construction Projects:
      1.   The small construction project threshold per individual project is a
maximum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for direct construction
costs, including design and allowable furniture or equipment costs.
      2.   The Procurement Officer shall include minimum specifications when
using the small purchase threshold for construction projects.
      3.   The City Council may approve individual small construction projects
up to a maximum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) by direct award
without seeking competitive bids or quotes after documenting that all Building
Code approvals, licensing requirements, permitting and other construction
related requirements are met. The awarded contractor must certify that it is
capable of meeting the minimum specifications of the project.
      4.   The City Council may procure individual small construction projects
costing more than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) up to a maximum of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) by obtaining a minimum of two (2)
competitive quotes that include minimum specifications and shall award to the
contractor with the lowest quote that meets the specifications after
documenting that all applicable Building Code approvals, licensing
requirements, permitting and other construction related requirements are met.
      5.   The City Council shall ensure that the following procurement laws
and regulations are complied with when using the small purchase threshold for
construction projects in this section:
         a.   Utah Code 63G-6a-506(8) - Prohibition against dividing a
procurement into one or more smaller procurements;
         b.   Utah Code 63G-6a, part 24 - Unlawful Conduct and Penalties;
         c.   R33-24-104 - Socialization with Vendors and Contractors;
         d.   R33-24-105 - Financial Conflict of Interests Prohibited;
         e.   R33-24-106 - Personal Relationship, Favoritism, or Bias
Participation Prohibitions;
         f.   All other applicable laws and rules.
   C.   Small Purchases From One Thousand Dollars To Fifty Thousand Dollars:
      1.   For procurement items where the cost is greater than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) but up to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), a
procurement unit shall obtain a minimum of two (2) competitive quotes that
include minimum specifications and shall purchase the procurement item from the
responsible vendor offering the lowest quote that meets the specifications.
      2.   For procurement items where the cost is greater than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) up to a maximum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the
Procurement Officer shall obtain a minimum of two competitive quotes that
include minimum specifications and shall purchase the procurement item from the
responsible vendor offering the lowest quote that meets the specifications.
      3.   For procurement items costing over fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), the Procurement Officer shall conduct an invitation for bids or
other procurement process outlined in the Utah Procurement Code.
      4.   The names of the vendors offering quotations and bids and the date
and amount of each quotation or bid shall be recorded and maintained as a
governmental record.
      5.   The City Council shall ensure that the following procurement laws
and regulations are complied with:
         a.   Utah Code 63G-6a-506(8) - Prohibition against dividing a
procurement into one or more smaller procurements;
         b.   Utah Code 63G-6a, part 24 - Unlawful Conduct and Penalties;
         c.   R33-24-104 - Socialization with Vendors and Contractors;
         d.   R33-24-105 - Financial Conflict of Interests Prohibited;
         e.   R33-24-106 - Personal Relationship, Favoritism, or Bias
Participation Prohibitions;
         f.   All other applicable laws and rules.
   D.   Small Purchases Of Professional Service Providers And Consultants:
      1.   The small purchase threshold for professional service providers and
consultants is a maximum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
      2.   Professional service providers and consultants may be procured up to
a maximum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), by direct negotiation
after reviewing the qualifications of a minimum of three (3) firms or
individuals.
      3.   The City Council shall ensure that the following procurement laws
and regulations are complied with:
         a.   Utah Code 63G-6a-506(8) - Prohibition against dividing a
procurement into one or more smaller procurements;
         b.   Utah Code 63G-6a, part 24 - Unlawful Conduct and Penalties;
         c.   R33-24-104 - Socialization with Vendors and Contractors;
         d.   R33-24-105 - Financial Conflict of Interests Prohibited;
         e.   R33-24-106 - Personal Relationship, Favoritism, or Bias
Participation Prohibitions;
         f.   All other applicable laws and rules. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.055: BIDDING:
   A.   Requests For Bids:
      1.   The bidding procurement process is appropriate to use when cost is
the major factor in determining the award of a procurement.
      2.   Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as
otherwise provided by this policy.
      3.   Any procurement in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
which is not a building improvement or public works project shall require
bidding.
      4.   A request for bids shall be published at least twice in a newspaper
published or of general circulation in the local entity at least five (5) days
before opening the bids; or if there is no newspaper published or of general
circulation in the local entity then posting notice at least five (5) days
before opening the bids in at least five (5) public places in the local entity
and leaving the notice posted for at least three (3) days; and publishing
notice in accordance with section 45-1-101, at least five (5) days before
opening the bids.
      5.   Each notice of a request for bids shall indicate that the City may
reject any or all bids submitted.
      6.   Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more
witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid and any other relevant information, together with the name
of each bidder, shall be recorded. The record and each bid shall be open to
public inspection.
      7.   Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or
correction, except as authorized in this policy. Bids shall be evaluated based
on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.
      8.   Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or
after award, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes,
shall be permitted. After bid opening no changes in bid prices or other
provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the City or fair competition
shall be permitted. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of
bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes shall be supported
by a written determination made by the Procurement Officer.
      9.   The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness, by written
notice, to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and
criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
      10.   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other
solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected,
in whole or in part, as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the
best interests of the City. The reasons shall be made part of the contract
file.
      11.   The City may reject any or all bids submitted. If the City rejects
all bids submitted but still intends to undertake the building improvement or
public works project, the City shall again request bids by following the
procedure in this section. If, after twice requesting bids by following the
bidding procedure, the City determines that no satisfactory bid has been
submitted, the City Council may undertake the building improvement or public
works project as it considers appropriate.
      12.   A determination of non-responsibility of a bidder or offeror shall
be made in writing. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly
supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility
may be grounds for a determination of non-responsibility with respect to the
bidder or offeror. Information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to
this section shall not be disclosed without prior written consent by the bidder
or offeror.
   B.   Requests For Proposals:
      1.   When the Procurement Officer determines in writing that the use of
competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the
City, a contract may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals.
Competitive sealed proposals are most appropriately used for professional
service type contracts.
      2.   Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. Public
notice of the request for proposals shall be given at least twenty (20) days
prior to the advertised date of the opening of the proposals.
      3.   Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of contents to
competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals
shall be prepared and shall be open for public inspection after contract award.
      4.   The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluating factors.
      5.   Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to
any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and revisions may be
permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining
best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure
of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
      6.   Award shall be made to the person whose proposal is determined, in
writing, to be the most advantageous to the City, taking into consideration
price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No
other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file
shall contain the basis on which the award is made.
      7.   Architect-engineer services are qualification based procurements.
Requests for such services should be publicly announced. Contracts should be
negotiated by the City based on demonstrated competence at fair and reasonable
prices.
      8.   Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract
which will promote the best interests of the City may be used, provided that
the use of a cost plus a percentage of cost contract is prohibited. A cost
reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing
that such a contract is likely to be less costly to the City than any other
type or that is impracticable to obtain the supplies, services or construction
required except under such a contract.
      9.   Required Contract Clauses:
         a.   The unilateral right of the City to order, in writing, changes in
the work within the scope of the contract and changes in the time of
performance of the contract that do not alter the scope of the contract work;
         b.   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a
contract and actual quantities;
         c.   Suspension of work ordered by the City. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.060: SPECIFICATIONS:
All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy and best use for the
purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the City's needs, and
shall not be unduly restrictive. Where practical and reasonable, and within the
scope of this chapter, Utah products shall be given preference. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.070: APPEALS:
   A.   Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor who is
aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may appeal
to the Procurement Officer. An appeal shall be submitted in writing within five
(5) working days after the aggrieved person knows or should have known of the
facts.
   B.   The Procurement Officer shall promptly issue a written decision
regarding any appeal, if it is not settled by a mutual agreement. The decision
shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the protester,
contractor, or prospective contractor of the right to appeal to the Governing
Body.
   C.   The City Council shall be the final appeal on the City level.
   D.   All further appeals shall be handled as provided in Utah Code Annotated
sections 63G-6a-1801 et seq., through 63G-6a-1901 et seq. (Ord. 18-06)
3.04.080: ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING:
   A.   No person involved in making procurement decisions may have personal
investments in any business entity which will create a substantial conflict
between their private interests and the public duties.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person involved in making procurement decisions
to ask, receive or offer to receive any emolument, gratuity, contribution, loan
or reward, or any promise thereof, either for the person's own use or the use
or benefit of any other person or organization from any person or organization
interested in selling to the City. (Ord. 18-06)
CHAPTER 3.08
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.08.010: Short Title
3.08.020: Purpose
3.08.030: Imposed
3.08.040: Violations; Penalties
3.08.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
FARR WEST. (Ord. 90-02 § 1)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The 48th session of the Utah legislature of Utah has authorized the counties
and municipalities of the state of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinances
imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the sales and use tax of the
municipality to the requirements of the sales and use tax act, chapter 12 of
title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as currently amended. (Ord. 90-02 § 2)
3.08.030: IMPOSED:
   A.   1. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every
retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the
municipality at the rate of one percent (1%).
      2.   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after
the operative date of said ordinance at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
sales price of the property.
      3.   For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his or her agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for
delivery to an out of state destination. In the event a retailer has no
permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are
consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed
by and adopted by the state tax commission. Public utilities as defined by
title 54, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, shall not be obligated to determine the
place or places within any county or municipality where public utilities
services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising
from such service allocable to the city shall be as determined by the state tax
commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations
to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   B.   1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the
provisions of chapter 12, title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and
in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to
sales taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in chapter 12 of title 59, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the
municipality for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title
of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor
shall the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the state in any
section when the result of that substitution would require action to the taken
by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or against
the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
      3.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under section 59-
12-106 of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, an additional license shall not be
required by reason of this section.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or changed by
which the tax is measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah
upon a retailer or consumer,
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the state of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance
enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax
act. (Ord. 90-02 § 4)
3.08.040: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine (see
fee schedule) or imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2012-02)
CHAPTER 3.10
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3.10.010: Short Title
3.10.020: Purpose
3.10.030: Definitions
3.10.040: Tax Levied
3.10.050: Collection Of Tax
3.10.060: Penalties And Interest
3.10.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TRANSIENT ROOM TAX ORDINANCE of Farr West
City. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)
3.10.020: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of Farr West City to adopt a transient room tax pursuant to
and in accordance with Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-352 through 59-12-
355. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)
3.10.030: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to terms
used herein:
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to
the public and includes:
   A.   A motel;
   B.   A hotel;
   C.   A motor court;
   D.   An inn;
   E.   A bed and breakfast establishment;
   F.   A condominium; and
   G.   A resort home.
   RENTS: Include:
   A.   Rents (any compensation received in exchange for providing the public
accommodation); and
   B.   Timeshare condominium fees or dues.
   TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30)
consecutive days or less. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)
3.10.040: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied a transient room tax equal to one percent (1%) of the
rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations within Farr West
City. This tax shall be known as the transient room tax.
   A.   Subject to the limitations of Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-352(1),
Farr West City may increase or decrease the tax at any time by adopting an
ordinance to the effect.
   B.   Revenues generated by the tax shall be used for general fund purposes.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, gross receipts shall be computed upon the
base room rental rate. There shall be excluded from the gross revenue, by which
this tax is measured:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state or by any
other governmental agency upon a retailer or consumer;
      2.   The amount of any transient room tax levied under authority of
chapter 31 of title 17, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, or its
successor;
      3.   Receipts from the sale or service charge for any food, beverage or
room service charges in conjunction with the occupancy of the suite, room or
rooms, not included in the base room rate; and
      4.   Charges made for supplying telephone service, gas or electrical
energy service, not included in the base room rate. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)
3.10.050: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The tax shall be levied at the same time and collected in the same
manner as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-201 et seq., otherwise
known as the local sales and use tax act.
   B.   The tax imposed by this section shall be due and payable to the city
treasurer quarterly on or before the last day of the month next succeeding each
calendar quarterly period, the first of such quarterly periods being the period
commencing with October 1, 2008. Every person or business taxed hereunder
shall, on or before the last day of the month next succeeding each calendar
quarterly period, file with the license office a report of its gross revenue
for the preceding quarterly tax period. The report shall be accompanied by a
remittance of the amount of tax due for the period covered by the report.
   C.   The city may contract with the state tax commission to perform all
functions incident to the collection of this tax and the administration and
operation of this chapter. The mayor, on behalf of the city council is hereby
authorized to enter into such agreements with the state tax commission as may
be necessary for the continued administration and operation of the transient
room tax ordinance enacted by this chapter. If Farr West City elects to
contract with the state tax commission for the collection of the transient room
tax, Farr West City shall:
      1.   Authorize the state tax commission to collect the tax on the first
day of the effective calendar quarter; and
      2.   Notify the state tax commission at least thirty (30) days before the
day on which the commission is required to collect the tax. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)
3.10.060: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by Utah Code Annotated
sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
   A.   Is required to pay the tax under this chapter; and
   B.   Does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time
prescribed by law. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 3.12
IMPACT FEE FACILITIES PLAN, ANALYSIS AND FEE CALCULATION AND ADOPTION
SECTION:
3.12.010: Definitions
3.12.020: Adoption Of IFFP And IFA
3.12.030: Impact Fee Calculations
3.12.040: Appeals
3.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
Except as provided below, words and phrases that are defined in the impact fees
act shall have the same meaning in this chapter:
   PROJECT IMPROVEMENT: Does not mean system improvement and includes, but is
not limited to, those projects identified in the plans for the benefit of
growth.
   SERVICE AREA: That geographic area designated within the city's boundaries
as exhibited in the appendix of the impact fee analyses.
   UTAH STATE IMPACT FEES ACT: Title 11, chapter 36a, Utah Code Annotated or
its successor state statute if that title and chapter is renumbered,
recodified, or amended. (Ord. 13-09)
3.12.020: ADOPTION OF IFFP AND IFA:
The council hereby approves and adopts the impact fee facilities plan and the
impact fee analyses (dated November 2013) attached and the analyses reflected
therein. The impact fee facilities plan and the impact fee analyses are
incorporated herein by reference and adopted as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 13-09)
3.12.030: IMPACT FEE CALCULATIONS:
   A.   Impact Fees: The impact fees imposed by this chapter shall have two (2)
components: a future facilities impact fee as well as a buy in fee for excess
capacity in existing facilities. The impact fees shall be calculated as set
forth below.
   B.   Sanitary Sewer Fee: Every developer, builder or individual who
develops, improves, or constructs a structure or structures which require a
connection to the sanitary sewer system shall pay to the city a connection fee
as published in the fee schedule (see chapter 3.30 of this title), per
equivalent residential unit.
   C.   Residential Stormwater, Drainage And Flood Control; Parks And Open
Space Fees: Every individual or developer who develops, builds or constructs
structures which increase the number of residential units within the service
area shall pay to the city a fee as published in the fee schedule (see chapter
3.30 of this title) for each residential unit proposed.
   D.   Nonresidential Stormwater, Drainage And Flood Control Fee: Fees shall
be calculated and assessed according to the following formula, except as
provided in this section. The fee required for any improvement shall be equal
to the sum of the area in square feet of any alteration of the natural land
surface by the addition or construction of buildings, sidewalks, driveways,
parking areas, or other improvements having surfaces impervious to water,
multiplied by the fee amount published in the fee schedule (see chapter 3.30 of
this title). Fees shall be calculated and assessed based on the maximum
projected area of the impervious surface.
   E.   Developer Credits/Developer Reimbursements: A developer, including a
school district or charter school, may be allowed a credit against or
proportionate reimbursement of impact fees if the developer dedicates land for
a system improvement, builds and dedicates some or all of a system improvement,
or dedicates a public facility that Farr West City and the developer agree will
reduce the need for a system improvement. A credit against impact fees shall be
granted for any dedication of land for, improvement to, or new construction of,
any system improvements provided by the developer if the facilities are system
improvements to the respective utilities, or are dedicated to the public and
offset the need for an identified future improvement.
   F.   Adjustment Of Fees: The council may adjust either up (but not above the
maximum allowable fee) or down the standard impact fees at the time the fee is
charged in order to respond to an unusual circumstance in specific cases and to
ensure that the fees are imposed fairly. The council may adjust the amount of
the fees to be imposed if the fee payer submits studies and data clearly
showing that the payment of an adjusted impact fee is more consistent with the
true impact being placed on the system.
   G.   Impact Fee Accounting: Farr West City shall establish a separate
interest bearing ledger account for the cash impact fees collected pursuant to
this chapter. Interest earned on such account shall be allocated to that
account.
      1.   Reporting: At the end of each fiscal year, Farr West City shall
prepare a report generally showing the source and amount of all monies
collected, earned and received by the fund or account and of each expenditure
from the fund or account. The report shall also identify impact fee funds by
the year in which they were received, the project from which the funds were
collected, the capital projects from which the funds were budgeted, and the
projected schedule for expenditure and be provided to the state auditor on the
appropriate form found on the state auditor's website.
      2.   Impact Fee Expenditures: Funds collected pursuant to the impact fees
shall be deposited in such account and only be used by the city to construct
and upgrade the respective facilities to adequately service development
activity or used as otherwise approved by law.
   H.   Refunds: The city shall refund any impact fee paid when:
      1.   The fee payer has not proceeded with the development activity and
has filed a written request with the council for a refund within one year after
the impact fee was paid;
      2.   The fees have not been spent or encumbered within six (6) years of
the payment date; and
      3.   No impact has resulted. (Ord. 2014-06)
3.12.040: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person required to pay an impact fee who believes the fee does not
meet the requirements of the law may file a written request for information
with the city council.
   B.   Within two (2) weeks of the receipt of the request for information the
city shall provide the person or entity with a copy of the reports and with any
other relevant information relating to the impact fee.
   C.   Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee imposed under this
chapter, who believes the fee does not meet the requirements of law, may
request and be granted a full administrative appeal of that grievance. An
appeal shall be made to the council within thirty (30) calendar days of the
date of the action complained of, or the date when the complaining person
reasonably should have become aware of the action.
   D.   The notice of the administrative appeal to the council shall be filed
and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The person's name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number;
      2.   A copy of the written request for information and a brief summary of
the grounds for appeal;
      3.   The relief sought.
   E.   The city shall schedule the appeal before the council no sooner than
five (5) days and no later than fifteen (15) days from the date of the filing
of the appeal. The written decision of the council shall be made no later than
thirty (30) days after the date the challenge to the fee is filed with the city
and shall, when necessary, be forwarded to the appropriate officials for
action. (Ord. 13-09)
CHAPTER 3.15
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3.15.010: Adoption Of Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act
3.15.020: Definitions
3.15.030: Levy Of Tax
3.15.040: Rate
3.15.050: Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
3.15.060: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3.15.070: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
3.15.080: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
3.15.090: Procedures For Taxes Erroneously Recovered From Customers
3.15.100: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3.15.010: ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX ACT:
The Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act, Section 10-1-401, et seq.,
Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by
this reference in its entirety as if set forth in full herein. If there are any
inconsistencies between the Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act,
Section 10-1-401, et seq., Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended and the terms
of this chapter, then the terms of the Telecommunications License Tax Act,
Section 10-1-401, et seq., Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended shall be
controlling. (Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.020: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to them
in the Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act, Section 10-1-401, et seq.,
Utah Code Annotated 1953. In addition, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meaning, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:
 
                                 Those gross receipts from a transaction for
                                 telecommunications services that is located
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE within the municipality for the purposes of
MUNICIPALITY:                    sales and use taxes under Title 59, Chapter
                                 12, Utah Code Annotated 1953, Sales and Use
                                 Tax Act, and determined in accordance with
                                 Section 59-12-207, Utah Code Annotated 1953.
MUNICIPALITY:                    Farr West City, Utah. (Ord. 2021-05)
 
3.15.030: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunication license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to the city. (Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.040: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (3.50%) of the
telecommunications provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that are attributed to the city. If the location of a transaction is determined
to be a place other than the city, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts
for telecommunications services shall be as determined pursuant to the
provisions of Section 10-1-407, Utah Code Annotated 1953. (Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.050: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION THEREFROM:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent of the telecommunications
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to the
municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters
in the city that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election.(Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.060: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning October 1, 2021.(Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.070: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF THE TAX:
This chapter is subject to the requirements of Section 10-1-403, Utah Code
Annotated 1953. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the
appropriate notice shall be given as provided in Section 10-1-403, Utah Code
Annotated 1953. (Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.080: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date of this ordinance, Farr West City shall enter
into the uniform interlocal agreement with the Utah State Tax Commission as
described in Section 10-1-405, Utah Code Annotated 1953, for the collection,
enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license
tax. (Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.090: PROCEDURES FOR TAXES ERRONEOUSLY RECOVERED FROM CUSTOMERS:
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Section 10-1-408, a customer may not
bring a cause of action against a telecommunications provider on the basis that
the telecommunications provider erroneously recovered from the customer the
municipal telecommunication license tax except as provided in Utah Code Section
10-1-408. (Ord. 2021-05)
3.15.100: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by the city under authority of Section 10-1-
203, Utah Code Annotated 1953, or Title 11, Chapter 26, Utah Code Annotated
1953, Local Taxation of Utilities Limitation, is hereby repealed.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal or prohibit any
municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover
from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality
caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights-of-
way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Section 72-7-
102, Utah Code Annotated 1953, and is not related to the municipality's loss of
use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications
provider in a right-of-way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result
of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of-way, nor
does this chapter limit the municipality's right to charge fees or taxes on
persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax
under this chapter and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in
Section 72-7-108, Utah Code Annotated 1953, in the city. (Ord. 2021-05)
CHAPTER 3.16
SANITARY SEWER IMPACT FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 13-09)
CHAPTER 3.17
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.17.010: Definitions
3.17.020: Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax Levied
3.17.030: Effective Date
3.17.040: Exemptions From The Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.17.050: No Effect Upon Existing Franchises - Credit For Franchise Fees
3.17.060: Tax Collection Contract With State Tax Commission
3.17.070: Monthly Payments By Supplier And Deduction Of Franchise Fees:
3.17.080: Incorporation Of Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, Utah Code Annotated
1953, Including Amendments
3.17.090: No Additional License To Collect The Municipal Energy Sales And Use
Tax Required - No Additional License Or Reporting Requirements
3.17.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall apply to this chapter as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:
CONSUMER:   A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the municipal
            energy sales and use tax.
            A.   A fee:
CONTRACTUAL    1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
FRANCHISE      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
FEE:        B.   1.   A fee similar to subsection A.1. of this definition; or
               2.   Any combination of subsections A.1. or A.2. of this definition.
            A.   The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the
            municipality and includes:
               1.   The value of the energy itself; and
DELIVERED      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges, or
VALUE:      other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to each
            class of customer in the municipality.
            B.   "Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under Title 59,
            Chapter 12, Part 1, Tax Collection, Part 2, Local Sales and Use Tax Act, Utah Code
            Annotated 1953, or this chapter.
            An amount of taxable energy that does not exceed the greater of:
DE MINIMIS  A.   Five percent (5%) of the energy supplier's estimated total Utah gross receipts
AMOUNT:     from sales of property or services; or
            B.   Ten thousand dollars ($10,000).
ENERGY      A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimis amount
SUPPLIER or of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rule promulgated by the State Tax
SUPPLIER:   Commission.
FRANCHISE   A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement granting a franchise.
AGREEMENT:
FRANCHISE   A.   A franchise tax;
TAX:        B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
            C.   Any combination of subsection A. or B. of this definition.
PERSON,
SALE,       The same as defined in Section 59-12-102, Utah Code Annotated 1953.
STORAGE AND
USE:
RENEWABLE
ENERGY      The same as defined in Section 54-17-502, Utah Code Annotated 1953.
SOURCE:
TAXABLE     Gas and electricity. (Ord. 2021-06)
ENERGY:
 
3.17.020: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent
(6.0%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax. (Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.030: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The municipal energy sales and use tax shall become effective on and after
October 1, 2021.
   A.   The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable
energy to the consumer.
   B.   The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy
imposed by the city authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Utah Code, Sales and
Use Tax Act. (Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.040: EXEMPTIONS FROM THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax
except as expressly provided in Section 10-1-305(2)(b), Utah Code Annotated
1953, notwithstanding an exemption granted by Section 59-1-104, Utah Code
Annotated 1953.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Section 10-1-305(2)(b), Utah Code Annotated 1953:
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels
subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13, Utah Code Annotated 1953;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
federal law, the United States Constitution, or the Utah Constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13, Utah Code Annotated 1953;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
city.
   C.   The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is
exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter,
provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax under an ordinance enacted in accordance with
UCA 10-1-301 et seq, by another municipality within the state authorized by
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3, Utah Code Annotated 1953; and
      2.   The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the
tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.050: NO EFFECT UPON EXISTING FRANCHISES - CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE FEES:
   A.   This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between
the city and energy suppliers.
   B.   There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount
of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.060: TAX COLLECTION CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
On or before the effective date of this chapter, the city shall contract with
the Utah State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax, in
accordance with this chapter, except for functions relating to taxes collected
by the city as the energy supplier as provided in Section 10-1-307(3), Utah
Code Annotated 1953, as amended. The mayor, with the approval of the city
council and the city attorney, is hereby authorized to enter into agreements
with the State Tax Commission that may be necessary to the continued
administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax
ordinance enacted by this chapter. (Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.070: MONTHLY PAYMENTS BY SUPPLIER AND DEDUCTION OF FRANCHISE FEES:
   A.   An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax
revenues collected from consumers directly to the city monthly if:
      1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
      2.   
         a.   The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   B.   An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax
directly to the city may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the
energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount
the energy supplier retains as authorized by Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-
307(4). (Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.080: INCORPORATION OF TITLE 59, CHAPTER 12, PART 1, UTAH CODE ANNOTATED
1953, INCLUDING AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act, as well as
this chapter, all of the provisions of Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, Utah Code
Annotated 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of
this ordinance, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting
Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-1119, Utah Code Annotated 1953, and excepting the
amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
   B.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, and
Title 10, Part 3, Utah Code Annotated 1953, the state of Utah is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency," the name of the city shall be substituted,
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part. Nothing in this
subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name "Farr West City"
for the word "State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of Farr West
City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of
such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against Farr West
City or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission
in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
   C.   Any amendments to the provisions of Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, Tax
Collection, Utah Code Annotated 1953, that relate to levying or collecting a
municipal energy sales and use tax and that would be applicable to Farr West
City for the purposes of carrying out this chapter are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date that they
are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 2021-06)
3.17.090: NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE TO COLLECT THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE
TAX REQUIRED - NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under Section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated 1953.
(Ord. 2021-06)
CHAPTER 3.20
PARKS AND OPEN SPACE IMPACT FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 13-09)
CHAPTER 3.30
FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
3.30.010: Fee Schedule Enumerated
3.30.010: FEE SCHEDULE ENUMERATED:
This schedule is a consolidation of fees as prescribed by this Code. These fees
and fines will be reviewed and revised as necessary every January or as
prescribed by the City Council.
Code Section Item Fee Effective Date
Code Section  Item                     Fee                       Effective Date
              Sales and Use Tax        Less than $300.00 and/or
3.08.040      violations               not more than 6 months'   Sept-11
                                       imprisonment
              Stormwater, drainage and $2,490.65 per ERU
3.12.030 C    flood control impact fee (equivalent residential   Sept-24
              for residential units    unit)
3.12.030 C    Parks and open space     $1,694.00 per residential Oct-14
              impact fee               dwelling (residence)
              Stormwater, drainage and
3.12.030 D    flood control impact fee $0.57 per square foot of  Sept-24
              for nonresidential land  impervious surface
              uses
              Business license fee:
              Commercial:
              Small (under 10,000 sq.  $100.00
              ft.)
              Medium (10,000 to 50,000 $200.00
5.04.080      sq. ft.)                                           Sept-08
              Large (over 50,000 sq.   $300.00
              ft.)
              Manufacturing/warehouse:
              Small (under 10,000 sq.  $100.00
              ft.)
              Medium (10,000 to 50,000 $150.00
              sq. ft.)
              Large (over 50,000 sq.   $200.00
              ft.)
              Contractor               $100.00
              Professional             $50.00
                                       $30.00 - (if conducted in
                                      any accessory building)
              Residential business     No charge - (if conducted
                                       wholly in the primary
                                       residence)
              Interstate commerce      $50.00
              Temporary:               $100.00
              Temporary business       $50.00
              refundable deposit
5.04.80 &     Agricultural business    $50.00                    Sept-24
5.30.030
5.04.090      Business license fee for $25.00                    Oct-14
              late payment
5.04.100      Business license fee for Highest applicable        Sept-08
              multiple businesses      license fee
5.10.180      Sexually oriented        See section               Sept-08
              businesses               5.04.080  of this Code
5.12.050      Alcoholic beverage       $200.00
              license                                            Sept-08
5.20.020      Solicitor surety bond    $5,000.00 minimum bond
5.20.030      Solicitor license fee    $100.00/business $10.00/  Oct-14
                                       person
              Residential garbage      Actual cost of can plus   Jan-23
              container rates:         $25.00
              First or additional      Cost of can plus $12.06/  Jun-25
8.04.080      container(s)             month
              Replacement container    $25.00 each replacement   Apr-21
              Residential bi-weekly                               
              blue container rates:
              Each container           $7.68/month               Jun-25
              Excavation bonding and   $10,000.00 minimum bond/
12.04.050     permit fee               $400.00 minimum permit    Jan-24
                                       fee
              Senior Center 4 hours
              maximum rental. Only one
              event per day allowed.
              Auditorium               Resident - $250.00
12.16.010                              Non-resident: $500.00     Jul-22
              Kitchen                  Resident - $50.00
                                       Non-resident: $100.00
              Cleaning/security        $100.00 (Resident and
              deposit                  non-resident)
              Penalty for failure to
13.04.050 C 1 connect to sewer as      $50.00/day                April-12
              required
              Residential sewer rate
              per ERU (includes multi-
              family dwelling units    $31.00/month              Jul-25
              and agricultural
13.04.050 C 4 livestock operations)
              Commercial sewer rate:                              
              ≤10,000 gallons of wate$31.00/month              Jul-25
              >10,000 gallons of water $2.50/month for each      Jul-23
                                       additional 1,000 gallons
              Late fee for monthly
13.04.050 L   accounts over 60 days    $5.00/month               April-12
              past due
              Contiguous nonresident   100% of the normal
13.04.050 N   sanitary sewer           connection fee            April-12
              connection surcharge
13.04.050 D   Stormwater utility fee   $6.00 per ERU/month       Jul-22
              Subdivision plan
              processing fees:
16.12.010 A   1 to 4 lots              $100.00                   Nov-06
              5 to 9 lots              $100.00 plus $10.00/lot
              10 to 24 lots            $150.00 plus $10.00/lot
              25 lots and up           $250.00 plus $10.00/lot
              Fee for overall
16.12.010 B   preliminary plan for     $100.00                    
              phase developments
16.12.010 C   Appeal Authority action  $200.00                   July-13
              fee
              Plan revisions requiring
16.12.010 D   Planning Commission      $100.00                   Nov-06
              action
              Engineering review fees:
              Subdivision developments $125.00 per lot per phase Oct-14
16.12.020     Site plan reviews        $1,000.00
              Storm water inspection
              for new development/     $500.00                   Apr-21
              construction
              Application to vacate
16.28.020 (f) public road or public    $150.00                   Nov-20
              utility easement
              Rezone fees:
              Up to 5 acres            $150.00
              More than 5 acres        $200.00
              Commercial and           $250.00
              manufacturing
17.12.020 G   Conditional Use          $100.00                   Oct-14
              Application fee
              Commercial Site Plan     $100.00
              Application fee
              Sign Site Plan           $25.00
              Application fee
 
 
Special Event Fees
Application Fee (Refundable) $25.00  Jul-22
Standard Event               $75.00  Jul-22
Large Event                  $150.00 Jul-22
Cleaning/Damage Deposit      $100.00 Jul-22
 
Smith Family Park
  # Available Resident Non-Resident
Smith Family Park
                                     # Available Resident Non-Resident
                Full Day
Pavilion        (9:00 a.m. - 9:00    3           $50.00   $100.00      Jul-22
                p.m.)
North Field (2) Per Field, Per Hour  1           $50.00   $50.00       Jul-22
South Field (2) Per Field, Per Hour  1           $50.00   $50.00       Jul-22
                Full day, per field
Tournament      (9:00 a.m. - 9:00    2           $200.00  $200.00      Jul-22
                p.m.)
Rodeo Arena     Per Hour             1           $25.00   $25.00       Jul-22
                (2 Hour Minimum)
Stock Charge    Per event                        $50.00   $50.00       Jul-22
Special Event   Per Day (9:00 a.m. -             $250.00  $250.00      Jul-22
                9:00 p.m.)
 
 
Mountain View Park
                                     # Available Resident Non-Resident
Pavilion         Full Day (9:00 a.m. 1           $50.00   $100.00      Jul-22
                 - 9:00 p.m.)
West Field       Per Field, Per Hour 1           $50.00   $50.00       Jul-22
East Field       Per Field, Per Hour 1           $50.00   $50.00       Jul-22
Fields- Full Day Full Day (9:00 a.m. 2           $250.00  $250.00      Jul-22
Use (per field)  - 9:00 p.m.)
 
 
Farr West Park
                                      # Available Resident Non-Resident
                  Full Day
Pavilion          (9:00 a.m. - 9:00   1           $50.00   $100.00      Jul-22
                  p.m.)
Fields            Per Field, Per Hour 1           $50.00   $50.00       Jul-22
Fields- Tournamen Full Day
t                 (9:00 a.m. - 9:00   1           $250.00  $250.00      Jul-22
                  p.m.)
 
 
Civic Center Park
                               # Available Resident Non-Resident  
Pavilion Full Day                1           $50.00   $100.00      Jul-22
         (9:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.)
 
 
North Park
                               # Available Resident Non-Resident  
Pavilion Full Day                1           $50.00   $100.00      Jul-22
         (9:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.)
 
Rec Center
 Resident           Non-Resident
 Per month Per year Per month Per year
Rec Center
                                Resident           Non-Resident
                                Per month Per year Per month Per year
Individual                      $15.00    $150.00  $25.00    $250.00  Jul-22
Family (4)                      $55.00    $550.00  $90.00    $980.00  Jul-22
Senior (55 +)                   0         0                           Jul-22
*Must purchase key fob
Other charges
Day pass                        $5.00                                 Jul-22
Day pass (purchase with credit  $6.50                                 Jul-22
card)
Key fob (new or replacement)    $8.00                                 Jul-22
Full court rental               $50.00 Per hour                       Jul-22
Pickleball open play            $5.00                                 Jul-22
Pickleball punch pass (12 open
play sessions. Passes are valid $60.00                                Jul-22
for current calendar year only)
Card service charge (up to $50) $1.50                             Jul -22
 
(Ord. 2025-04: Ord. 2024-19: Ord. 2024-18: Ord. 2024-14: Ord. 2024-03: Ord.
2023-05: Res. 2023-01: Res. 2022-02: Res. 2021-01: Res. 2020-03: Res. 2020-02:
Res. 2019-03: Res. 2019-01: Res. 2018-02)
CHAPTER 3.40
TRANSPORTATION UTILITY
SECTION:
3.40.010: Policy And Purpose
3.40.020: Definitions
3.40.030: Transportation Utility
3.40.040: Transportation Utility User Fee
3.40.050: Billing And Collection
3.40.060: Annual Report
3.40.070: Severability
3.40.010: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
   The City has determined and hereby declares that the use of the City’s
streets and related facilities benefits and services all property within the
incorporated limits of Farr West City and that the public necessity to provide
maintenance, upkeep, improvement, and repair of the City’s streets and related
facilities within the rights-of-way protects the health, safety, and welfare of
the city and its residents, businesses, and visitors by reducing hazards to
life and property and by reducing undesirable street, right-of-way, or other
easement conditions through regular maintenance.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
3.40.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter the following definitions apply:
BASE RATE: The standard transportation utility user’s fee set forth in the
consolidated fee schedule for Farr West City.
CITY: Farr West City.
COUNCIL: Farr West City Council.
CUSTOMER OR PERSON: Any individual; public or private corporation and its
officers; partnership; association; firm; trustee; executor of an estate; the
state or its departments, institutions, bureaus, agencies; county; city;
political subdivision; or any other governmental or legal entity recognized by
law.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit that provides living space for one or more people.
One Dwelling Unit is the standard measure of an Equivalent residential unit.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT OR ERU: For purposes of the Transportation utility
fee means the standard trip ends for a dwelling unit adjusted for axle weight.
STREET OR STREETS: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley, or other way for the movement of vehicular traffic, or a street or way
shown upon a plat, heretofore approved, pursuant to law or approved by official
action; and includes the land between street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement shoulders, gutters, parking areas, and
other areas within the rights-of-way.
TRANSPORTATION UTILITY FUND: The fund created by this ordinance to receive
Transportation utility user fees and operate, maintain, repair, and improve the
city’s streets, rights-of-way and related facilities.
TRANSPORTATION UTILITY: The utility created by this chapter which operates,
maintains, regulates, and improves streets and related facilities within the
city.
TRANSPORTATION UTILITY USER FEE: The fee(s) calculated pursuant to this chapter
and codified in Farr West City Consolidated Fee Schedule, Title 3, Chapter 30.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
3.40.030: TRANSPORTATION UTILITY:
   A.   Creation. There is hereby created and established a Transportation
utility operated by the City and funded by a service fee rate structure.
   B.   Special Revenue Fund. There is hereby established a Transportation
utility special revenue fund (“Transportation utility fund”) to record all
revenue, expenses, asset, and liability information as well as other financial
transactions related to the Transportation utility. All fees and other revenue
collected in accordance with this ordinance shall be recorded into the
Transportation utility fund accounts and shall be used exclusively for the
Transportation utility. All revenue and expenses and other financial
information shall be reported as prescribed by the State of Utah’s Uniform
Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities, or its successor provisions.
   C.   Administration. The Public Works Director of the City shall administer
and enforce this Transportation utility ordinance, and all regulations and
procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance,
operation, and alteration of the streets and associated facilities unless
otherwise designated by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
3.40.040: TRANSPORTATION UTILITY USER FEE:
   A.   Fee Imposed. All users of City utilities not expressly exempted by this
Chapter shall pay the Transportation utility fee as established herein.
   B.   Base Rate. The council, by ordinance or resolution, shall establish,
and periodically adjust, the base rate for the Transportation utility to ensure
adequate revenues to fund the costs of street maintenance and management. The
base rate shall be set forth in the Farr West City Consolidated Fee Schedule,
available at Title 3, Chapter 30.
   C.   Amount of Charge. The Transportation utility user fee rate imposed
shall be established based on the intensity of use as shown by a study
commissioned by the City and overseen by the Public Works Director. The Public
Works Director shall present the findings of the study to the Council who will
then establish the rate by ordinance in the Farr West City Consolidated Fee
Schedule, available at Title 3, Chapter 30.
   D.   Property Owners Responsible for Charges. The property owner of record
is responsible for the Transportation utility user fee and retains all
obligations for payment of those fees.
   E.   Policies. The City may adopt policies and rules to assist in applying,
administering, and interpreting any other provisions related to the
Transportation utility.
   F.   Appeals. Any person or property owner who is aggrieved by the
provisions of this chapter, or the application and calculation of the service
charge to their property may appeal to the City pursuant to the procedures
established in Farr West City Code of Ordinances Title 2
Chapter 2.28.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
3.40.050: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The City shall bill users of City utilities for the Transportation
utility user fee via a separate line item on existing utility bills or a
separate invoice. Charges and fees shall be considered delinquent if not paid
as determined by rules, policies, and procedures established by the City. Such
delinquent fees shall be subject to recovery, with any assessed delinquent
charges and fees, by civil action or otherwise allowed by law.
   B.   Alternative Billing Arrangement. Owners may assign the payment of the
Transportation utility user fee to non-owners by signing an “alternate billing
agreement” with the City.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
3.40.060: ANNUAL REPORT:
   The City’s Public Works Director shall develop an annual report on the
Transportation utility, to be made available to the Council and Transportation
utility Customers each year by the first Council meeting in October. This
report shall summarize the financial activities of the utility and the major
areas of expenditure, activities, accomplishments, and the upcoming year’s
priorities.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
3.40.070: SEVERABILITY:
   If any section of this chapter is determined to be illegal, invalid, or
superseded by other lawful authority, including any federal or state
legislative, regulatory, or administrative action, such section shall be deemed
a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such determination shall
have no effect on the validity of any other section.
(Ord. 2025-09, 10-2-2025)
TITLE 4
RESERVED
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
SECTION:
5.04.010: Definitions
5.04.020: License Required
5.04.030: Unlawful Operation
5.04.040: License Exempt Businesses
5.04.050: Application; Requirements
5.04.060: Application Content
5.04.070: Bond Required
5.04.080: License Fee
5.04.090: Late Payment Penalty
5.04.100: Fee For Multiple Businesses
5.04.110: License Fee For New Business
5.04.120: Fee; Debt To City
5.04.130: Rebate
5.04.140: License Revocation
5.04.150: Board Of Equalization
5.04.160: License Inspectors
5.04.170: Operating With Revoked License Prohibited
5.04.180: Interstate Commerce; Registration Required
5.04.190: Temporary Businesses; Requirements
5.04.200: Christmas Tree Sales
5.04.210: Violation; Penalty
5.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purpose of this
chapter:
   BUSINESS: Every trade, occupation, profession or activity engaged in within
the City with the object of gain or economic profit, excluding, however, the
act of employees rendering service to employers.
   EMPLOYEE: All natural persons who work for an employer for salary or
commission or wages and who are subject to the direction and control of such
employer and who do not share the profits and losses of such employer. It
includes all full time officers of public agencies.
   ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal or real property and the rendering of personal service for others for
a consideration by persons engaged in craft, business, occupation, or hobbies.
Engaging in business shall also include the occupancy of any office, retail,
warehouse or other space in which business transactions are carried out.
Engaging in business shall also include the renting by a lessor of space,
whether enclosed or not, to be used as office space for any use or endeavor,
including, but not limited to, commercial, medical, dental, or other
professional activities. Engaging in the rental business shall include the
renting by a lessor of all separate units, buildings, apartments, or houses for
the purpose of profit.
   PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust,
firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, club, company, business trust,
association, society or other group of individuals acting as a unit, whether
mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS: A place maintained or occupied by the licensee for the
transaction of business. It does not include a place in which goods of the
licensee are kept for storage or display only if no services are tendered,
business transacted or sales consummated at such place.
   SOLICITOR: Any person selling, soliciting the sale of, offering for sale, or
taking orders for merchandise door to door within the City. Merchandise shall
include goods, food, wares, photographs, subscriptions to any kind of
publication, tickets, coupons or receipts representing value. The term
"solicitor" also includes, but is not limited to, photographers, sellers of
magazines, cosmetics, home care products, etc., and any other person engaged in
direct sales, but specifically excludes newspaper carriers and any person who
obtains orders for or sells goods solely for resale.
   TEMPORARY BUSINESS: A business conducted on a lot for a period of no more
than ninety five (95) consecutive days within a single calendar year (with or
without a permanent building) and which is not associated with any other
business conducted on the same lot. (Ord. 2017-10: Ord. 91-07)
5.04.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Every person engaged in business in the City shall secure a license
from the City for such business. Such license shall be issued upon written
application in such form as the City may prescribe and upon payment of the fees
required, and when it is ascertained that all prerequisites or the issuance of
each such license have been satisfied and fulfilled.
   B.   In the case of a new building, the business license will not be
approved until the building has been approved for occupancy by the Farr West
City Building Inspection Department.
   C.   If the proposed business or existing business is located or relocated
in an existing building, the business license or relocation of business will
not be approved until site plan approval is granted by the Farr West City
Planning Commission and City Council. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.030: UNLAWFUL OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business without first obtaining a
license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.040: LICENSE EXEMPT BUSINESSES:
The following businesses, ventures or activities are exempt from the licensing
and fee requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Any organization carried on or managed wholly for the benefit of
charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, directly or
indirectly, by any person;
   B.   Any activity the receipts from which are to be appropriated entirely to
any church, school, religious or benevolent purpose;
   C.   Any activity conducted by a religious, charitable, fraternal,
educational, military or governmental organization so long as the receipts from
such activity are appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such
organization is formed and no person directly or indirectly derives a profit
therefrom;
   D.   Any person conducting a business, venture or activity which is exempted
from the licensing and fee requirements pursuant to this section shall still be
required to pay any fee required to cover the costs of necessary inspection
done by the City, which shall include all inspection to determine compliance
with applicable codes. The inspection fees shall be in an amount determined by
resolution of the City Council;
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any public utility business
holding a franchise from the City under which the City is to be paid a
franchise fee or tax in lieu of all other license fees or taxes;
   F.   If any person furnishes such evidence as shall satisfy the City Council
that he or she, by reason of their misfortune or physical infirmities, merits
exception from the payment of any license fee required in this chapter, the
Mayor may remit such license with the consent of the City Council;
   G.   Any organization conducting a business on behalf or at the request of
the City in connection with the promotion of the City sponsored celebrations,
pageants, displays, projects or other City sponsored events. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.050: APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All applications for business licenses shall be made in writing on
forms provided by the City and submitted to the City Recorder for processing.
Applications must be filled out completely and signed by the business owner(s).
   B.   All applicable licensing fees, if any, must be paid when the
application is submitted. No application will be accepted without payment, if
fees are applicable.
   C.   The application will be approved by City Recorder (and Mayor), unless
in the opinion of the City Recorder or as required by this Title, the
application should first be referred to the building inspector, Fire Marshal,
Sheriff's Department or other department for review and approval, before being
approved by the City Recorder. After receiving such request from the City
Recorder or Mayor, the building inspector or other official or body shall
conduct the investigation and inspection provided for in this Title, and within
five business days after receiving such request, the official shall submit a
report of the investigation to the City Recorder, together with that
department's recommendations as to whether the license should be granted or
denied.
   D.   The following types of license applications shall be submitted to the
City Council for approval.
      1.   Solicitor's License
      2.   Temporary License
   E.   All business license applications for businesses which require new or
modified site plan approval or require a conditional use for the zone in which
the business will be operating must be approved by the City Council.
   F.   It is unlawful for any business license applicant or person licensed
under the provisions of this title to refuse permission to any inspector sent
by the city to enter the premises and inspect the same.
   G.   In the event the City Recorder and Mayor are uncertain about whether or
not a business license should be issued based on the information or lack of
information contained in the application or the report from investigating
departments or agencies, the City Recorder may refer the matter to the City
Council for final determination.
   H.   No business may be engaged in until the appropriate license has been
approved and issued.
   I.   The City Recorder shall submit to the City Council at a regular meeting
at least once each month a list of applications approved or denied by the city
recorder.
   J.   Upon granting a license, the City will issue a Certificate of License
which shall contain the name of the licensee, the name of the business, the
calling, trade or profession to be carried on thereunder, the class of the
license if such license is divided into classes, and the place including the
street address where the licensed business is to be carried on, and the
expiration date of the license. (Ord. 21-09: Ord. 2017-10: Ord. 2016-10: Ord.
91-07)
5.04.060: APPLICATION CONTENT:
The application shall contain:
   A.   The date of application;
   B.   The name of the person, firm or corporation desiring the license;
   C.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on;
   D.   The class of license desired if licenses are divided into classes;
   E.   Proof of such applicant's compliance or qualifications under applicable
State regulatory laws before issuing the City revenue license;
   F.   The period of time for which the license may be issued; and
   G.   Any other matter or thing which may be required and necessary for the
purpose of enabling the City to fix the amount of license fee. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.070: BOND REQUIRED:
All applicants for business licenses for the following businesses shall be
required to give bonds in favor of the City for the purposes indicated in such
amounts as may be set by resolution. All aggrieved persons shall have a right
to bring an action under such bond against the licensee and the sureties. Such
bonds shall be executed by corporate sureties only, unless otherwise authorized
by the City Council. No license shall be issued until the bonds required in
this chapter have been filed and approved by the City Attorney.
   A.   Employment agencies, conditioned upon the faithful observance of the
ordinances of the City and the payment of all damages occasioned to any person
by reason of any misstatement, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit practiced by
the licensee or his or her agents or employees;
   B.   Persons lending money upon personal securities, evidence of
indebtedness, assignments of salary, salary warrants or any property, excluding
personal property, other than banks and other regulated financial institutions,
conditioned upon faithful observance of the ordinances of the City and the laws
of the State of Utah respecting money brokers, loan agencies and usury laws;
   C.   Messenger or special delivery services conditioned upon the faithful
observance of all ordinances of the City and the payment of all damages arising
from any negligence in the conducting of such business; and
   D.   Solicitors, door to door salespersons and pollsters conditioned upon
the faithful observance of the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State
of Utah. (Ord. 97-22 §§ 1, 2, 3: Ord. 91-07)
5.04.080: LICENSE FEE:
An applicant shall, upon filing his or her application for a business license,
deposit with the City a fee prescribed by resolution for the business, trade,
profession, occupation or calling for which a license is applied as published
in the fee schedule codified in title 3, chapter 3.30 of this Code. Application
for a business license made prior to July 1 shall pay the full fee.
Applications made on July 1 through December 31 shall pay one-half (1/2) of the
prescribed fee. The City shall provide the applicant a receipt for the fee
payment, but such receipt shall not be deemed to be a certificate of license.
In the event the license application should not be approved by the City
Council, the fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant. All license fees
shall be payable annually, in advance (unless otherwise provided). (Ord. 2014-
07)
5.04.090: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
If any license fee or tax is not paid within fifteen (15) days of its due date,
the penalty prescribed in the fee schedule (see title 3, chapter 3.30 of this
Code) shall be added to the original amount thereof. All penalties provided for
in this section shall be collected by the City and payment thereof enforced in
the same manner as the license fees are collected and payment thereof enforced.
No license shall be issued until all penalties legally assessed have been paid
in full. (Ord. 2012-02)
5.04.100: FEE FOR MULTIPLE BUSINESSES:
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, whenever more
than one (1) business, trade, profession, calling or occupation is being
carried on by one (1) licensee under one (1) roof, such licensee shall for all
of such businesses, trades, professions, callings or occupations pay only the
highest license fees applicable to any of such businesses, trades, professions,
callings or occupations. (Ord. 2012-02)
5.04.110: LICENSE FEE FOR NEW BUSINESS:
The license fees for new businesses shall be due and payable on the date that
business is first commenced. The provisions of this section apply only to new
businesses, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as
exempting a late applicant from payment of the full license fee, or permitting
the refund of any portion of a license fee already paid. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.120: FEE; DEBT TO CITY:
Every license fee tax or assessment levied by any ordinance of the City and all
interest accruing thereon after the date of the delinquency, and all penalties
levied or assessed thereon by any ordinance of the City for failure to pay the
sum within the time required constitutes a debt to the City, and the City may
maintain an action to recover the same and all costs associated therewith,
including a reasonable attorney fee, in any court of competent jurisdiction,
which remedy shall be in addition to any and all other remedies which may be
provided. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.130: REBATE:
No rebate shall be allowed upon any license unless the licensee has been
damaged by fire or other unavoidable accident or property damage. In all such
cases the City Council shall have discretionary power as to what amount, if
any, shall be rebated. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.140: LICENSE REVOCATION:
   A.   All licenses which have been issued or which may hereafter be issued by
the City shall be subject to revocation as hereinafter provided, without regard
to any expiration date on such license as issued.
   B.   Whenever, in the opinion of the Mayor or City Council, the public
interest will be best served by revocation of any license or licenses issued by
the City, the City Council or the Mayor may direct that notice be sent to the
holder(s) of such licenses directing such holder(s) to appear before the City
Council at a definite date and hour to be stated in such notice, and to show
cause, if any, why such license or licenses should not be revoked; provided,
however, that the time set for such appearance by such licensee shall be not
less than five (5) days after the date of mailing such notice, and provided
further, that such notice shall be mailed to such licensee by regular mail,
postage prepaid, and addressed to the address of such licensee as shown on the
application for each license, or at any subsequent address which has been given
to the City by such licensee.
   C.   At the hour and date stated in such notice the licensee shall have an
opportunity to appear before the City Council and show cause why such license
should not be revoked and canceled, and may appear in person or by counsel, and
the City Council shall thereupon proceed to hear all persons interested in the
matter and determine whether or not such license should be revoked.
   D.   In the event that the City Council, after the required hearing, shall
determine that the public interests are best served by the revocation of such
license or that the licensee has failed to comply with City ordinances,
applicable Building Codes, Fire Codes, Health Codes, or applicable Federal,
State, or County laws or regulations or any professional ethics rules for
licensee's particular profession or has been convicted of a felony or a crime
involving moral turpitude or has admitted to conduct which is tantamount to
violating laws relating to felonious conduct or moral turpitude or has failed
to comply with the requirements of this chapter relating to business licenses,
the City Council shall thereupon order such license canceled and revoked and
shall provide notice of the revocation to the business. Upon revocation by the
City Council such license shall become null and void.
   E.   In the event of revocation as provided in this section, there shall be
no refund or rebate of any part of the original license fee paid by the
licensee.
   F.   In the event that the licensee fails, neglects or refuses to appear at
the hour and date set for such hearing, the City Council may proceed to
determine the matter in the absence of the licensee, or may in its sole
discretion, continue the date of such hearing to some later date and at such
later date proceed to act on the matter without further notice to the licensee.
(Ord. 2014-05: Ord. 91-07)
5.04.150: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION:
The City Council constitutes a Board of Equalization for the equalization of
license rates. The board shall have the authority to examine the assessment
rolls, to hear complaints of persons, firms or corporations aggrieved by their
license assessments, and to make corrections of any such assessments deemed to
be illegal, unequal or unjust; provided, however, that any corrections made by
the board shall be entered in detail in a record of license abatements and the
members of the board shall approve the entries in writing before the accounts
are adjusted. The board shall meet at the call of the mayor to hear any
complaints and authorize any adjustments which it may deem proper in the
assessments made by the city. All complaints pertaining to licenses due on
January 1 must be presented to the board prior to March 1, and all complaints
pertaining to licenses due at any other time must be presented to the board
within sixty (60) days from the date such licenses are due. All complaints not
presented before such deadlines shall be barred. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.160: LICENSE INSPECTORS:
All police officers and building inspectors are appointed license inspectors
and shall examine all places of business or persons required to obtain business
licenses. All business licenses shall be displayed in a visible and conspicuous
place during all business hours. Inspecting officers shall report to the city
administrator all businesses or persons that have failed to obtain or display
business licenses as required by this chapter. It shall be the duty and power
of all license inspectors:
   A.   To cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of
the provisions of this chapter;
   B.   To have and exercise the power to enter free of charge during business
hours any place of business of which a license is required by this chapter and
to demand the exhibition of a current license from any person or persons
engaged or employed in the transaction of such business. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.170: OPERATING WITH REVOKED LICENSE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to carry on, conduct or operate any business,
trade or profession for which a city license is required after such person's
license has been revoked or canceled in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.180: INTERSTATE COMMERCE; REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business, occupation, calling or
profession which is solely in interstate commerce without first registering
with the city and paying the registration fee prescribed by resolution and
filing with the city such information as may be required by the city council.
(Ord. 91-07)
5.04.190: TEMPORARY BUSINESSES; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Location Requirements: All temporary businesses must be located on
improved property containing improvements such as paved off street parking,
curb, gutter and sidewalk in good repair. The lot must meet the site
development standards for the zone in which it is located.
   B.   Zone Requirement: All temporary businesses must be located within
commercial or manufacturing zones.
   C.   Review And Approval: Review and approval of the site and proposed
temporary business by the following departments must occur prior to conducting
any sale or rendering any service:
      1.   Health department, for the purpose of ensuring adequate sanitary
facilities;
      2.   Building inspector, for the purpose of examining and approving the
construction of temporary shelters, electrical, plumbing and heating
installation, traffic flow and potential hazards, off street parking and
general site standards.
   D.   Site Plan; Premises Standards; Required Vehicle Information: The
applicant for a temporary business license must submit a site plan showing the
type of building or shelter from which sales are to be made, as well as its
location on the lot. Temporary structures shall be so constructed as to
withstand a seventy (70) mile per hour velocity force and to comply with
section 2311 of the uniform building code and where the temporary business is
conducted between November 15 and March 15 of any year, a roof of substantial
strength and design to support a snow load of not less than thirty (30) pounds.
If the business is conducted from a vehicle, its license number must be given.
The location of ingress and egress to the site from the street, the location
and size of all proposed signs and the number and size of off street parking
stalls must also be shown. In addition, the following is required:
      1.   The proposed hours of operation;
      2.   The dates upon which the sales are to be conducted;
      3.   A general description of goods offered for sale;
      4.   A letter from the property owner granting permission to the
temporary business to use his or her lot together with any conditions for
approval;
      5.   A revenue and regulatory license fee for each location, the same to
be established by resolution;
      6.   A refundable deposit in a sum to be established by resolution which
shall accompany the application and which shall be returned within fourteen
(14) days from the date of termination of the temporary business so long as the
area is cleaned and placed in the prebusiness condition and order.
   E.   Conditions And Responsibility Incumbent On License:
      1.   Every license issued shall contain on the face thereof the date upon
which the license period ends.
      2.   Every business shall immediately cease doing business at the
conclusion of the license period and shall vacate the temporary business site
within five (5) days thereof, leaving the same in its prebusiness condition.
      3.   In the event the city elects or deems it necessary to utilize city
manpower or equipment or expend public funds to replace the site of a temporary
business in its prebusiness condition, the city shall have and be authorized to
maintain a cause of action against the applicant, its officers and employees,
for the payment of all costs and expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee,
which may arise or accrue in cleaning or repairing the premises, or in pursuing
any remedy provided by the laws of the state, whether such remedy necessitates
or results in filing of a lawsuit or not.
      4.   Such applicant further grants unto the city, a lien against all
property of applicant located, brought or kept upon such premises for the
foregoing costs, expenses and fees. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.200: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES:
The sale of Christmas trees is subject to the licensing and other requirements
for a temporary business. Any nonprofit organization submitting an application
for the conduct of a temporary business shall not be required to pay the
license fee but shall be subject to other application and use standards set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 91-07)
5.04.210: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6) months,
or by both such fine and term of imprisonment. (Ord. 91-07)
CHAPTER 5.08
LICENSE REVOCATION FOR PORNOGRAPHY VIOLATION
SECTION:
5.08.010: Applicability
5.08.020: Conviction; Grounds For Business License Revocation
5.08.030: Conviction; Refusal Of New License To Persons
5.08.040: Conviction; Refusal Of New License For Premises
5.08.050: Hearing To Revoke License; Notice
5.08.060: Hearing To Revoke License; Conduct
5.08.070: Operation Unlawful During Revoked Period
5.08.080: Violation; Penalty
5.08.010: APPLICABILITY:
Notwithstanding any other licensing provisions contained in this title, all
licenses issued by the city on or after April 1, 1997, shall be subject to the
conditions, controls and regulations provided in this chapter. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.020: CONVICTION; GROUNDS FOR BUSINESS LICENSE REVOCATION:
The city council, upon notice and hearing as provided in this chapter, may
revoke any license issued by the city upon the conviction of the licensee or
any officer, employee or partner of the licensee of any ordinances of the city
relating to lewdness, profanity, nudity and pornography or of the Utah state
law as it now exists or may hereafter be amended concerning pornographic and
harmful materials and performances at the licensed premises. That state law is
Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-1202 to 1211, as amended. In addition, the
city council may refuse to issue a license of any kind to that licensee, its
officers, partner or the convicted employee in the event of such conviction of
the licensee, his or her officers, employees or partner for a period of not to
exceed one year after that conviction. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.030: CONVICTION; REFUSAL OF NEW LICENSE TO PERSONS:
The council may, after notice of hearing as provided in this chapter, refuse to
issue a business license of any kind to any person, corporation or officer
thereof or other business association including any partner of a partnership
for a period of one year after that person, corporation or business association
or his or her or its officers, employees or partners have been convicted of any
violation of the ordinances mentioned in this chapter or state law concerning
pornographic and harmful materials and performances. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.040: CONVICTION; REFUSAL OF NEW LICENSE FOR PREMISES:
The city council may, after notice of hearing, as provided in this chapter,
refuse to issue any city business license for any business at the premises
where a violation of this chapter or state law concerning pornographic and
harmful materials and performances has occurred for a period of one year after
such conviction. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.050: HEARING TO REVOKE LICENSE; NOTICE:
The notice to be given by the council of the hearing to consider action to
revoke or refuse to issue license under this chapter shall be a written notice
mailed first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee at the
address shown on the application for business license sought to be revoked or
on the license application which is sought to be refused. The notice required,
if the nonlicensing of the premises is involved, shall be to the owner of those
premises at the address then shown on the records of the Weber County recorder
for that property. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.060: HEARING TO REVOKE LICENSE; CONDUCT:
The hearing provided for in this chapter shall be informal and at a regular
city council meeting with the licensee or applicants for license, or the
property owner, to have reasonable opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.070: OPERATION UNLAWFUL DURING REVOKED PERIOD:
It is unlawful for any corporation, for the officer of any corporation, any
person and other business associate and any partner or other business
associate, who or which as a licensee had that license revoked, or as an
applicant for a license had that license refused by the council under this
chapter, to operate any business in the city requiring a city business license
until the time of revocation or refusal expires and a valid license is
obtained. (Ord. 91-07)
5.08.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation attempting to operate a business after the
license therefor has been revoked or refused under this chapter, and any owner
of any interest in the premises where such license has been revoked or refused,
and the governing body has determined that no other license will be issued for
that property, who allows any business to be operated therein requiring a city
license, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 97-09 § 1: Ord. 91-07)
CHAPTER 5.10
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.10.010: Purpose And Findings
5.10.020: Title For Citation
5.10.030: Purpose Of Provisions
5.10.040: Application Of Provisions
5.10.050: Definitions
5.10.060: Obscenity And Lewdness; Statutory Provisions
5.10.070: Location And Zoning Restrictions
5.10.080: Locations Of Businesses; Restrictions
5.10.090: Effects On Nonconforming Businesses
5.10.100: Signs
5.10.110: Additional Definitions
5.10.120: Business License Required
5.10.130: Exemptions From License Requirements
5.10.140: Legitimate Artistic Modeling
5.10.150: Business Categories; Number Of Licenses
5.10.160: Employee Licenses
5.10.170: Licenses; Application; Disclosures Required
5.10.180: License Fees
5.10.190: Bond
5.10.200: Premises Location And Name
5.10.210: License Issuance Conditions
5.10.220: License Term
5.10.230: Notice Of Chance Of Information
5.10.240: License Transfer Limitations
5.10.250: Hours Of Operation
5.10.260: Display Of License
5.10.270: License Statement In Advertisements
5.10.280: Regulations And Unlawful Activities
5.10.290: Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
5.10.300: Adult Businesses; Design Of Premises
5.10.310: Loitering And Exterior Lighting And Monitoring Requirements
5.10.320: Seminude Entertainment Business; Design Of Premises
5.10.330: Seminude Entertainment Business; Location Restriction
5.10.340: Alcohol Prohibited
5.10.350: Seminude Dancing Agencies
5.10.360: Performers; Prohibited Activities
5.10.370: Patrons; Prohibited Activities
5.10.380: Nudity; Defenses To Prosecution
5.10.390: Existing Businesses; Compliance Time Limits
5.10.400: Violation; Injunction When
5.10.410: Violation; License Suspension Or Revocation
5.10.420: Effect Of License Revocation
5.10.430: Appeal Procedures
5.10.440: Violation; Penalty; Responsibility
5.10.450: Severability
5.10.010: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of Farr West City, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
   B.   Applicability: Farr West City is approximately four and one- fourth
(41/4) miles long by two (2) miles wide. It is bisected in the middle by
Interstate 15 and Highway 126. The commercial business areas of the city are
located along Highway 126 and the northeastern edge of the city in the Weber
industrial park. Many new and existing residential areas are located in close
proximity to each other (currently zoned R-1-15) along Highway 126 making any
sexually oriented business located there incompatible with residents. The Weber
industrial park, zoned M-2 is zoned for sexually oriented businesses with
restrictions, but with many large businesses such as Kimberly-Clark, Parker
Hannifin, Pacific Cromolox, Associated Food Stores, and any other future
businesses that will locate in the Weber industrial park. Controlling the
negative secondary effects of any future sexually oriented business locating in
the Weber industrial park is of extreme importance to the city council.
   C.   Findings: Based on available evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and reports made
available to the council, and on findings incorporated in various federal and
state court cases, the Farr West council finds:
      1.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners
of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
      2.   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain
types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
      3.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
      4.   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which
creates unhealthy conditions.
      5.   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
      6.   At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-
AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections.
      7.   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
      8.   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
      9.   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented
films.
      10.   The findings noted in subsections C1 through C9 of this section
raise substantial governmental concerns.
      11.   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics,
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      12.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually
oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
      13.   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
      14.   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
      15.   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
      16.   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who
are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
      17.   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
      18.   The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses
for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads
to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
      19.   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of
the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 10-04: Ord.
10-03: Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.020: TITLE FOR CITATION:
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to
as the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 02-04
§ 1)
5.10.030: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
It is the purpose and object of this chapter that Farr West City establishes
reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time, place, and manner of
operation of sexually oriented businesses and their employees in Farr West
City. This chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests
recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional
protections provided by the United States and Utah constitutions. (Ord. 02-04 §
1)
5.10.040: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities, which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses, which are characterized as sexually
oriented business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions
require, this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related
ordinances, including, but not limited to, those codified in this code. (Ord.
02-04 § 1)
5.10.050: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machine, projectors, or other image
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE OR ADULT NOVELTY STORE: A commercial
establishment which has significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
to the sale or rental for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter; or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations, the central theme of which depicts or describes
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
   B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designated for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities", except for legitimate medically
recognized contraceptives.
   ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant bottle club or
similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, which regularly features: a) persons who appear seminude, b) live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities, or c) films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproduction which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: a)
offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which regularly
advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from
the public right of way or by means of any off premises advertising, including,
but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or
television and b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less
than ten (10) hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which as its
principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, regularly featured
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which:
A. Holds itself out as such a business; or
B. Which for any form of consideration, features persons who appear in live
performances in a state of seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer, as
an independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of employment
relationship.
   ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes,
visits, consorts with, or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize,
visit, or accompany another or others to or about social affairs,
entertainment, or places of amusement, or within any place of public or private
resort or any business or commercial establishment or any private quarters.
"Escort" shall not be construed to include persons who provide business or
personal services, such as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly, or
handicapped, social secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship
with their patron is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship
having a duration of more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not
principally characterized as dating or socializing. "Escort" shall also not be
construed to include persons providing services such as singing telegrams,
birthday greetings, or similar activities characterized by appearances in a
public place, contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the
service is being performed and of duration not longer than one hour.
   ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity that, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
   ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort, or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts, or
patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
   NUDITY: A state of dress in which the areola of the female breast or male or
female genitals, pubic region, or anus are covered by less than the covering
required in the definition of "seminude".
   OPERATOR: The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a
sexually oriented business.
   OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented
business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented
business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other
similar employees.
   PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or
escort or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.
   PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership, or
other legal entity.
   SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
areola of the female breast; and the male or female genitals, pubic region, and
anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than four inches
(4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back, which shall not
taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest point.
   SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership,
or any other entity or individual which furnishes, books, or otherwise engages
or offers to furnish, book, or otherwise engage the service of a professional
dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or appearance at a
business licensed for adult theaters.
   SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a seminude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Seminude entertainment businesses, sexually
oriented outcall services, adult businesses, and seminude dancing agencies, as
defined by this chapter.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY AND EMPLOYMENT: Those employees
who work on the premises of a sexually oriented business in activities related
to the sexually oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing
employees, dancers, escorts, models, and other similar employees, whether or
not hired as employees, agents, or as independent contractors. Employees shall
not include individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented
portion of the business, such as for repair, maintenance, delivery of goods,
and similar employees. All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter,
including escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs, and
other similar employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business
employees.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with
less than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, with less than full opaque covering.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy; or
   B.   Excretory functions as a part or in connection with any of the
activities described in subsection A of this definition. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.060: OBSCENITY AND LEWDNESS; STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any
matter, which is contrary to applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting
obscenity.
   B.   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow conduct or the showing or display of
any matter which is contrary to the provisions of section
5.08.020 of this title and chapter 9.04 of this code. Provided, however, that
for the purpose of sexually oriented businesses the definition of "private
parts" shall be construed to mean "nudity" as defined in this chapter. (Ord.
02-04 § 1)
5.10.070: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any
location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually oriented
businesses licensed as adult businesses or seminude entertainment businesses
pursuant to this chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use
pursuant to this code. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.080: LOCATIONS OF BUSINESSES; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted in areas zoned M-
1 under this code, subject to the following additional restrictions:
      1.   No sexually oriented business shall be located:
         a.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, public park,
library, or religious institution.
         b.   Within six hundred feet (600') of any residential use or any
agricultural or residential zoning boundary.
         c.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other sexually oriented
business.
         d.   Within three hundred feet (300') of 2000 West, 2700 North, or
1800 North. The distance shall be measured from the right of way boundary.
   B.   Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this
section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or zoning districts, from the property boundaries of the school,
public park, religious or cultural activity, residential use, or other sexually
oriented business, or from the right of way line of a gateway to the structure
of the sexually oriented business.
   C.   Distance requirements from zoning districts for this section shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning
districts, from the closest zoning boundary of a residential or agricultural
district to the sexually oriented business structure. (Ord. 10-04: Ord. 10-03:
Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.090: EFFECTS ON NONCONFORMING BUSINESSES:
All existing legal, nonconforming sexually oriented businesses, as of the
effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter within three (3) months from the date this chapter
is enacted. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.100: SIGNS:
Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in title 17, chapter 17.56 of this
code, the more restrictive requirements for signs shall prevail. Signs for
sexually oriented businesses shall be limited as follows:
   A.   No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed.
   B.   No sign shall be allowed to exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
   C.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the
exterior walls or roof of such premises.
   D.   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or
inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs
shall contain alphanumeric copy only.
   E.   Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted.
   F.   Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed.
   G.   Other than the signs specifically allowed by this chapter, the sexually
oriented business shall not attach, construct, or allow to be attached or
constructed any temporary sign, banner, light, or other device designed to draw
attention to the business location. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.110: ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS:
Terms involving sexually oriented businesses which are not defined in this
chapter shall have the meanings set forth in chapter 5.04 of this title. (Ord.
02-04 § 1)
5.10.120: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business, as
specified herein, without first obtaining a general business license and a
sexually oriented business license. The sexually oriented business license
shall specify the type of business for which it is obtained. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.130: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar
individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or
counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist,
psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for
activities in the classroom. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.140: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING:
   A.   The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit
legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected
by the first amendment or similar state protections. The city does intend to
prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude
modeling: Notwithstanding the provisions of section
 5.10.280 of this chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of
nudity before a customer or patron, providing that a written contract for such
appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and
signed at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the
other applicable provisions of this chapter shall still apply to such nude
appearance.
   B.   In the event of a contract for nude modeling or appearance signed more
than forty eight (48) hours in advance of the modeling appearance, the
individual to appear nude shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to
this chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
      1.   Appear nude or seminude in the presence of persons under the age of
eighteen (18);
      2.   Allow, offer, or agree to any touching of the contracting party or
other person by the individual appearing nude;
      3.   Allow, offer, or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
      4.   Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
city ordinances or state statute;
      5.   Allow, offer, agree, or permit the contracting party or other person
to masturbate in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude;
      6.   Allow, offer, or agree for the individual appearing nude to be
within five feet (5') of any other person while performing or while nude or
seminude. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.150: BUSINESS CATEGORIES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for
more than one category of sexually oriented business, except that a business
may have a license for both outcall services and a seminude dancing agency on
the same premises.
   B.   The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses, adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult novelty
stores, adult video stores, adult cabarets, adult motels, adult motion picture
theaters, adult theaters;
      3.   Seminude entertainment businesses;
      4.   Seminude dancing agency;
      5.   Sexual encounter establishments. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.160: EMPLOYEE LICENSES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ or for any
individual to be employed by a sexually oriented business in the capacity of a
sexually oriented business employee, unless that employee first obtains a
sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.170: LICENSES; APPLICATION; DISCLOSURES REQUIRED:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this chapter, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by Farr West City, the
following:
   A.   The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership,
limited partnership, or entity doing business under an assumed name;
   B.   If the applicant is a corporation; partnership; or limited partnership,
or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the information
required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for each partner
and each principal of an applicant, and for each officer, director, and any
shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock
of any applicant. Any holding company, or any entity holding more than ten
percent (10%) of an applicant, shall be considered an applicant for purposes of
disclosure under this chapter;
   C.   All corporations, partnerships, or noncorporate entities included on
the application shall also identify each individual authorized by the
corporation, partnership, or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such
corporation, partnership, or noncorporate entity;
   D.   For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state:
      1.   Any other names or aliases used by the individual,
      2.   The age, date, and place of birth,
      3.   Height,
      4.   Weight,
      5.   Color of hair,
      6.   Color of eyes,
      7.   Present business address and telephone number,
      8.   Present residence and telephone number,
      9.   Utah driver's license or identification number, and
      10.   Social security number;
   E.   Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
   F.   Attached to the form, as provided above, two (2) color photographs of
the applicant clearly showing the individual's face and the individual's
fingerprints on a form provided by the sheriff's department. For persons not
residing in the city, the photographs and fingerprints may be on a form from
the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly to the
issuing agency;
   G.   For any individual applicant required to obtain an annual sexually
oriented business employee license as an escort or a seminude entertainer, a
certificate from the Weber County health department, stating that the
individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the
original or renewal application, been examined and found to be free of any
contagious or communicable diseases;
   H.   A statement of the business, occupation, or employment history of the
applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application;
   I.   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant
for the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or territory, has
ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or
suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and state in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy
of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the
application;
   J.   All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those
which have been expunged, and the disposition of all such arrests for the
applicant, individual, or other entity subject to disclosure under this
chapter, for five (5) years prior to the date of the application. This
disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, excepting
minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be
construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each
conviction or plea of nolo contendere; and sentence of each conviction or other
disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court, and
providing the court identifying case numbers or docket numbers. Application for
a sexually oriented business or employee license shall constitute a waiver of
disclosure of any criminal conviction or plea of nolo contendere for the
purposes of any proceeding involving the business or employee license;
   K.   In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real
property upon which the business or proposed business is or is to be located,
the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or
equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically
acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for
the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant
shall furnish the name, address, and phone number of the owner of record of the
property, as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to
the premises in which the service is car will he located;
   L.   A description of the services to be provided by the business, with
sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to determine what business
will be transacted on the premises, together with a schedule of usual fees for
services to be charged by the licensee, and any rules, regulations, or
employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to operate. This
description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public,
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons
and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity,
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities,
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent
employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts
prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances,
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission
of disease, and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other
criminal activity.
It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or materially misleading information
on or with a sexually oriented business license application or to fail to
disclose or omit information for the purpose of obtaining a sexually oriented
business or employee license. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.180: LICENSE FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall be
required to pay regulatory license fees as set forth in section
5.04.080 of this title. An application is not complete until all appropriate
fees have been paid. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.190: BOND:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall post, with Farr
West City, a cash or corporate surety bond payable to Farr West City in the
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Any fines assessed against the
business, officers, or managers for violations of city ordinances shall be
taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of
the fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event
the funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond
shall be replenished to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) within fifteen (15)
days of the date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.200: PREMISES LOCATION AND NAME:
   A.   It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to
this chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to
which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall
require a separate license.
   B.   It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in
Farr West City under any name other than the business name specified in the
application. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.210: LICENSE ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
Farr West City shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed application, unless the official
finds one or more of the following:
   A.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
   B.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines,
or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant in
relation to a sexually oriented business;
   C.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for
information as authorized by this chapter;
   D.   The applicant has violated a provision of this chapter or similar
provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction within two (2)
years immediately preceding the application; a criminal conviction for a
violation of a provision of this chapter or similar provisions from any
jurisdiction, whether or not it is being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a
violation, but a conviction is not necessary to prove a violation;
   E.   The premises to be used for the business have been disapproved by the
Weber County health department, the fire department, the sheriff's department,
the building officials, or the zoning officials as not being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances of the city. If any of the foregoing reviewing
agencies cannot complete their review within the thirty (30) day approval or
denial period, the agency or department may obtain from the city an extension
of time of no more than fourteen (14) days for their review. The total time for
the city to approve or deny a license shall not exceed forty five (45) days
from the receipt of a completed application and payment of all fees.
      1.   Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review
the application shall determine within thirty (30) days whether or not the
application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a
specification of the items which are incomplete;
      2.   The time for processing applications specified in this section shall
begin to run from the receipt of a complete application;
      3.   In the event that a license for seminude entertainment, seminude
dancing agencies, adult businesses, or seminude entertainment businesses has
not been disapproved within thirty (30) or the forty five (45) days allowed
after an extension, the city shall issue the license pending completion of the
city's review;
      4.   Any license issued pursuant to subsection E3 of this section may be
revoked by the city, pursuant to the revocation procedures provided for herein,
if the completed review determines that the license should have been denied;
   F.   The required license fees have not been paid;
   G.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid;
   H.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or
ordinances from any jurisdiction;
   I.   An applicant has been convicted or pled nolo contendere to a crime:
      1.   Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution;
solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding
prostitution; sale, distribution, or display of material harmful to minors;
sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography; lewdness;
indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child;
sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; for forcible sodomy;
forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway child; criminal attempt,
conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses
involving similar elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title
of the offense, for which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction,
if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years if
the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years,
or
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the offense is of a felony;
         c.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification pursuant to this section. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.220: LICENSE TERM:
Sexually oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through December 31 of each
succeeding year. The license fees shall not be prorated for any portion of a
year, but shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year the license is
applied for. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.230: NOTICE OF CHANCE OF INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for
either a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license shall be given, in writing, to Farr West City and the
sheriff's department within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord. 02-04 §
1)
5.10.240: LICENSE TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be
transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be
transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership,
or other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in excess of ten percent
(10%) thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior city
approval. If any transfer of the controlling interest in a business licensee
occurs, the license is immediately null and void, and the business shall not
operate until a separate new license has been properly issued by the city as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.250: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually operated business shall remain open to do business before ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. or remain open after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 02-
04 § 1)
5.10.260: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the
boundaries of Farr West City to fail to display the license granted pursuant to
this chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is
unlawful for any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter to fail to carry,
at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city, their employee license on their person. If the
individual is nude, such license shall be visibly displayed within the same
room the employee is performing. When requested by police, city licensing or
other enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show
the appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the
corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.270: LICENSE STATEMENT IN ADVERTISEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or
employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the
city; and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.280: REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to:
   A.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed
premises;
   B.   Allow, offer, or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years;
   C.   Allow, offer, or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used, or
consumed on or in the licensed premises;
   D.   Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any customer
is in the premises;
   E.   Allow, offer, or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
   F.   Allow, offer, or agree to any sexually oriented business employee
touching or being touched by any patron or customer; except that outcall
employees and customers may touch, except that any touching of specified
anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited;
   G.   Allow, offer, or agree to illegal possession, use, sale, or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
   H.   Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell, or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business;
   I.   Allow, offer, or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities harmful to aa
minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall employee
or business, the outcall employee committing, offering, or agreeing to commit
prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution,
soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
   J.   Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any specified sexual activity as
validly defined by city ordinances or state statute in the presence of any
customer or patron;
   K.   Allow, offer, or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any
customer or patron in a state of nudity;
   L.   Allow, offer, or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in
the presence of the sexually oriented business employee or on the premises of a
sexually oriented business;
   M.   Allow, offer, or agree to commit an act of lewdness as defined in this
title. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.290: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for in the city to fail to comply with the following requirements:
   A.   All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this
chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of pecuniary
compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of
services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed,
the total amount such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or
conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract need not
include the name of the patron. The business licensee shall keep and maintain a
copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this section for a
period not less than one year from the date of provision of services hereunder.
The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a register listing the
contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract, and
pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain
an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's designated
agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees are
working. The address and phone number of the license location shall appear and
be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For outcall
businesses which premises are licensed within the corporate limits of the city,
private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall employee
shall not be provided at the open office or any other location by the service,
nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the business premises.
   C.   Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a
reasonably prudent person to conclude that the outcall employee would perform
specified sexual activities.
   D.   All employees of outcall services who provide outcall services within
the city shall be licensed in accordance with this chapter, regardless of the
primary location of the business. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.300: ADULT BUSINESSES; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually
oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business shall also
submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the applicant. The design
and construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall
conform to the following:
      1.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      2.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the city.
      3.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
      4.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of
the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person being
allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time,
and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's station
areas.
      5.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses, which exclude minors from less than all of
the premises, shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into
the area from which they are excluded.
      6.   The diagram required shall be a professional engineer's or
architect's blueprint; the diagram must show marked internal dimensions, all
overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for illumination capacity.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to
ensure that the views from the manager's station in subsection A3 of this
section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or
any other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises,
and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
   C.   The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-
candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the
licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.310: LOITERING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the operator or owner of a sexually oriented
business to: 1) initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external
boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located; 2) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property; 3) provide one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property hourly or by the use of video cameras and monitors;
and 4) provide exterior lighting of such property to provide for visual
inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If video cameras and
monitors are used they shall operate continually at all times when the premises
are open for business; all monitors shall be installed within the manager's
station.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.320: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   It is unlawful for business premises licensed for seminude
entertainment to:
      1.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress, or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater such items may be on the stage as part of a performance;
      2.   Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the
door to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors, and
restroom doors, to be lockable from the inside;
      3.   Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patron
or patrons are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier
at least three feet (3') high and six inches (6") wide. The patron or patrons
shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall
remain on the other side of the barrier.
   B.   Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be
separated from the patrons by a minimum of ten feet (10'), which separation
shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least four feet (4') high. (Ord.
02-04 § 1)
5.10.330: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; LOCATION RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful for any business licensed for seminude entertainment to be
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a business licensed for the sale
or consumption of alcohol. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.340: ALCOHOL PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter to
allow the sale, storage, supply, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the premises of any sexually oriented business. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.350: SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model, or performer to
appear in a state of seminudity for pecuniary compensation, in or for any
seminude entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this
chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model, or performer in a state of seminudity or nudity, either gratuitously or
for compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter,
unless such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.360: PERFORMERS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model, or performer, while
performing in any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, to:
   A.   Touch in any manner any other person;
   B.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
   C.   Accept any money, drink, or any other object directly from any person;
or
   D.   Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or
object on the performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or
   E.   Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while
performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.370: PATRONS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any business to touch in any
manner any performer; to place any money or object on or within the costume or
person of any performer; or to give or offer to give to any such performer any
drinks, money, or object while such performer is performing; except that money
may be placed on the stage, which shall not be picked up by the performer
except by hand. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.380: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   C.   In a structure:
      1.   Which has no visible sign from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a seminude person is available for viewing,
and
      2.   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.390: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date hereof and regardless of whether
such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in the city.
   B.   All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses
shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date hereof, or until their
current license expires, whichever is first in time, to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   All seminude dancing agency licensees shall have ninety (90) days from
the effective date hereof, or until their license must be renewed, whichever is
first, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   All adult businesses and seminude entertainment businesses shall have
ninety (90) days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license
must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.400: VIOLATION; INJUNCTION WHEN:
Are entity or individual who operates or causes a sexually oriented business to
be operated without a valid license, or who employs or is employed as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates such a business or
functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal
violations provided herein, and any other remedy available at law or in equity.
(Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.410: VIOLATION; LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually oriented
business or employee license granted under this chapter if a licensee or an
employee of the licensee has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this chapter or by any other
statute or ordinance;
      3.   Failed to replenish the cash or corporate surety bond as provided in
this chapter (such a suspension shall extend until the bond has been
replenished);
      4.   Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the
license;
      5.   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked under
the employee license during the period when the business licensee or employee
licensee's license was suspended;
      6.   A licensee has committed an offense, which would be grounds for
denial of a license for which the time period required has not elapsed;
      7.   On one or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person
or persons committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, or an
outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense
which would be grounds for denial of a license or for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees, whether or not
licensed, of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were
committed;
      8.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem
taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   B.   Suspension or revocation shall take effect within fifteen (15) days of
the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.420: EFFECT OF LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the revocation shall
continue for one year from its effective date, and the licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business or employee license for one year from the
date of such revocation. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.430: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
The denial, suspension, or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this
chapter may be appealed as set forth in section
5.04.140 of this title. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.440: VIOLATION; PENALTY; RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in
this chapter, each violation of this chapter shall, upon citation by Farr West
City, require the licensee to pay a civil penalty not to exceed the amount of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Such fines shall be deducted
from the cash or surety bond posted pursuant to this chapter, unless paid
within ten (10) days of notice of the fine or the final determination after any
appeal. In addition to the civil fines provided in this chapter, the violation
of any provision of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day of a
violation shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall he deemed the act or omission of the sexually
oriented business licensee and/or operator, if such act or omission occurs
either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee and/or
operator, or as a result of the licensee's and/or operator's negligent failure
to supervise the conduct of the employee, and the sexually oriented business
licensee shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the licensee committed the act or caused the omission.
   C.   A sexually oriented business licensee and/or operator shall be
responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises,
and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee
and/or operator for the purposes of determining whether the licensee's license
shall he revoked, suspended, or renewed. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
5.10.450: SEVERABILITY:
This chapter and each section and provision of this chapter hereunder, are
hereby declared independent divisions and subsections and, not withstanding any
other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the
controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this chapter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and
provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held
invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such
sections and provisions would have passed independently of such section or
provision so known to be invalid. (Ord. 02-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 5.12
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
SECTION:
5.12.010: Adoption Of State Statute
5.12.020: Definitions
5.12.030: Licenses Required
5.12.040: Application Procedure
5.12.050: Fee For License
5.12.060: Granting Or Denying License
5.12.070: Expiration Of License
5.12.080: Alcohol Training And Education Seminar
5.12.090: License Requirements
5.12.100: Grant Of License Deemed Consent
5.12.110: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
5.12.120: Prohibited Acts And Activities
5.12.130: Search Of Licensed Premises
5.12.140: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
5.12.150: Penalty
5.12.010: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE:
   A.   For purposes of alcoholic beverage control within the corporate limits
of Farr West City, the city incorporates herein the provisions of Utah code
32B, the alcoholic beverage control act.
   B.   All alcohol business licenses shall comply with the alcoholic beverage
control act of the state or its successor provisions, the regulations of the
alcoholic beverage control commission, and this chapter. If the provisions of
this chapter are inconsistent with those of the alcoholic beverage control act
or the regulations of the alcoholic beverage control commission, the more
restrictive provision shall prevail, to the extent permitted by law. (Ord.
2016-07)
5.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in this chapter shall be given the following
defined meanings wherever used in this title:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: "Beer" and "liquor", as they are defined herein.
   APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of a license.
   BEER: All products that contain at least 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume,
but not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent by
weight and are obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of malted
grain. Beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products. Beer
includes all products that contain alcohol in the percentages described above
and is referred to as, beer, ale, porter, stout, lager or a malt or malted
beverage. Beer does not include a flavored malt beverage.
   LICENSE: The right to engage in the type of conduct hereafter described, as
evidenced by a written document issued by this city. Licenses issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be of one of the following types and shall authorize the
type of conduct, and only the type of conduct, indicated after each
designation:
   A.   Class A Off Premises Beer Retailer License: Authorizes the licensee to
sell beer on the licensed premises in original containers for consumption off
the licensed premises. All employees between sixteen (16) years old and twenty
one (21) years old are to be supervised by a person on the store premises who
is twenty one (21) years or older.
   B.   Class B Beer Only Restaurant License: Authorizes the licensee to sell
beer on the licensed premises occupied by a restaurant for consumption on the
premises in conjunction with a meal and in strict compliance with the Utah
alcoholic beverage control act.
   C.   Class C Limited Service Restaurant License: Authorizes the licensee to
sell wine and beer on the licensed premises of the restaurant for consumption
on the premises in conjunction with a meal and in strict compliance with the
Utah alcoholic beverage control act.
   D.   Class D On Premises Retail Beer License: Authorizes the licensee to
sell beer to bona fide patrons at golf courses and bowling alleys for
consumption on the premises as a secondary or incidental use only and in strict
compliance with the Utah alcoholic beverage control act.
   E.   Class E Full Service Restaurant License: Authorizes the licensee to
sell liquor and beer on the licensed premises of the restaurant for consumption
on the premises in conjunction with a meal and in strict compliance with the
Utah alcoholic beverage control act.
   LICENSEE: Includes the person, firm, corporation or association to whom the
license is issued, and also means and includes the licensee's managers, agents,
servants and employees, and all other persons acting for the licensee with his/
her consent or knowledge.
   LIQUOR: Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or
other liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous
or fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids that contain more than
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for
beverage purposes. Liquor includes heavy beer, wine and flavored malt
beverages. Liquor does not include beer.
   NUISANCE: Any room, house, building, structure, place or licensed premises,
where:
   A.   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored,
given away or used contrary to the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah or
this title, or where persons resort for drinking alcoholic beverages contrary
to the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah or this chapter; or
   B.   Intoxicated persons are permitted to loiter about, or profanity,
indecent, immoral, loud or boisterous language or immoral or lewd conduct is
permitted or carried on; or
   C.   Persons under the age of twenty one (21) are permitted to purchase or
drink alcoholic beverages, or are employed in violation of this chapter; or
   D.   Laws or ordinances are violated by licensee or his agents or patrons
with the consent or knowledge of licensee upon such premises; or
   E.   Any condition dangerous to human life or health is permitted to exist,
and all alcoholic beverages, packages, equipment and other property used in
maintaining the same.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS: Shall be deemed to include cafes, restaurants, public
dining rooms, cafeterias, and any other place where the general public is
invited or admitted for business purposes, and shall also be deemed to include
corporations and associations operating under charter or otherwise wherein only
the members and their guests are invited. Occupied hotel and motel rooms that
are not open to the public shall not be deemed to be "places of business", as
herein defined.
   RESTAURANT: Any place of business where a variety of hot food is prepared
and cooked and complete meals are served to the general public in connection
with indoor or outdoor dining accommodations.
   RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages to the consumer.
   SELL OR TO SELL: When used in this chapter in any provision, shall be
construed to solicit, or to receive any order for, to keep or expose for sale,
to deliver for value or gratuitously, to peddle, to possess with intent to
sell, to traffic in for any consideration proposed or obtained directly or
indirectly or under any pretext or by any means whatsoever to procure or allow
to be procured for any other person, and "sale" when so used shall include
every act of selling, as above defined.
   WHOLESALER: Any person other than a brewer or retailer engaged in
importation for sale or in the sale of alcoholic beverages in wholesale or
jobbing quantities. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.030: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Sale Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or association to sell any alcoholic beverage, except
as such person, etc., may be expressly permitted to do so by this chapter.
   B.   City License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any conduct described in the definition of "license", as provided in section
5.12.020 of this chapter, within the corporate limits of the city, without
having first procured the appropriate license therefor as described in said
definition.
   C.   State License: If said license is intended to permit on premises
alcohol consumption, a state license is required before sales may take place.
Applicants shall contact the Utah department of alcoholic beverage control for
said license. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.040: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: All businesses desiring to sell alcohol must submit to the
city an application for an alcohol business license, which is included on the
Farr West City business license application form. All portions of said
application shall be completed in full. The completed application and all
attachments, together with the license fee, shall be submitted at one time; no
partial submittals shall be accepted. The application shall be filed with the
city recorder.
      1.   The city council is hereby empowered to change, modify or amend the
city alcoholic beverage license application, as set forth in this chapter, by
resolution duly presented and voted upon by said council.
   B.   Criminal Background Check: For the initial license, in addition to the
written application, each applicant for an alcohol business license under this
chapter will provide the city with a current (6 months) criminal background
check on said applicant.
      1.   Partnerships: If the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall provide the information required for each partner and a current (6
months) criminal background check for each partner.
      2.   Corporations: If the applicant is a corporation, the application
shall provide the information required for each director and officer of the
corporation and current (6 months) criminal background check on each director
and officer.
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant: The city recorder shall cause an
examination to be made of all applications and investigate all applicants for
licenses under this chapter. Following such examination and investigation, the
recommendations of the city recorder shall be made in writing to the city
council.
   D.   Qualifications Of Applicants:
      1.   No license shall be granted to or renewed for any retailer to sell
alcohol within the municipality unless he/she is of good moral character, over
the age of twenty one (21) years, and a citizen of the United States. If the
applicant is a partnership, each partner or manager shall be a citizen of the
United States; and if a corporation, it shall be a domestic corporation or
foreign corporation which has qualified to do business in the state of Utah,
and each officer and director shall be a citizen of the United States.
      2.   No license shall be issued to or renewed for any person who has been
convicted of a felony or who has pleaded guilty to or has forfeited his bail on
a charge of having committed a felony, or who has previously had any liquor or
beer license permanently revoked by any licensing authority.
      3.   No license shall be issued to or renewed for any person who, within
six (6) months prior to application, has violated any provision of any law of
the state or any provision of the ordinances of this municipality relating to
intoxicating liquors or alcoholic beverages, or has violated laws or ordinances
against keeping a gambling or disorderly house, and said prohibition shall
apply whether the person has been convicted, pleaded guilty to or has forfeited
his bail on a charge of having violated any such law or ordinance; nor shall a
license be issued to or renewed for any person whose license has been suspended
or temporarily revoked within said six (6) month period. No partnership shall
have its annual license renewed unless it has on file with the recorder/clerk a
current list of its partners and managers, and no corporation shall have its
annual license renewed unless it has on file with the recorder/clerk a current
list of its officers, directors and stockholders who own twenty percent (20%)
or more of its stock.
   E.   Considerations By City Council: In determining whether to grant an
alcohol business license to any applicant, the city council shall give
consideration to the following:
      1.   The locality and neighborhood within which the proposed licensed
premises will be located and the prospective impact of the same upon such
locality and neighborhood.
      2.   The proximity of the proposed licensed premises to existing licensed
premises.
      3.   The extent of present or anticipated tourist traffic within the area
of the proposed licensed premises.
      4.   The proximity of the proposed licensed premises to any school,
church, library, public playground or park.
      5.   The extent to which the application makes a full, complete and
candid disclosure of all information required thereby.
      6.   The integrity, character and reputation of the applicant, its
partners, directors, trustees, officers, lessors, managers and operators.
      7.   The business acumen and experience of the applicant, its partners,
directors, trustees, officers, lessors, managers and operators.
      8.   The prospective impact of the licensed premises upon vehicular
traffic, congestion and parking.
      9.   The number of full service restaurant, limited restaurant and off
premises beer licenses that exists in the city.
      10.   Whether the granting of the requested license is in the greatest
public interest and in the interest of the general health and welfare of the
city's residents.
      11.   Such other facts or circumstances that may be considered material.
(Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.050: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fees for the various licenses provided for in this chapter shall be
set forth in the fee schedule (see title 3, chapter 3.30 of this code). No
refund shall be made in the event the license is suspended, revoked or
voluntarily surrendered. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.060: GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE:
Upon receipt of a completed application, all required attachments thereto, the
required license fee, and the investigative report of the police service, and
providing the applicant is deemed qualified under the criteria set forth in
section
5.12.040 of this chapter, the city council may conduct such further
investigations and hold such hearings as it may deem appropriate for the
purpose of determining whether to issue the requested license, taking into
consideration those matters set forth in section
5.12.040 of this chapter, and may either grant or deny the same, as in the
exercise of its discretion it determines best. In the event the city council
denies the issuance of the license, it shall set forth in writing delivered to
the applicant, the reasons for the denial. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.070: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the year for which issued. No license shall
be renewed except upon the filing of a complete application as provided in
section
5.12.040 of this chapter, and then only upon the conditions and procedures set
forth in said section. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.080: ALCOHOL TRAINING AND EDUCATION SEMINAR:
   A.   Certificate Of Completion Required: No person shall be granted an
alcohol business license unless that person shall show certificates granted by
the Utah division of alcoholism and drugs that each employee of the business
engaging in the serving, selling or furnishing of alcohol has completed the
alcohol training and education seminar as required in Utah Code Annotated
sections 32B-5-403 and 62A-15-401.
   B.   Off Premises Beer Retailer: Any individual who sells or directly
supervises the sale of beer to a patron for consumption off the premises shall
be required to complete an alcohol training and education seminar. The
individual shall complete an alcohol training and education seminar within
thirty (30) days of the day on which the individual becomes staff of an off
premises beer retailer. It shall be required for all off premises beer
retailers to have a valid record that the individual completed an alcohol
training and education seminar. The local authority may immediately suspend the
license of an off premises beer retailer that allows staff to directly
supervise the sale of beer or to sell beer to a patron without having a valid
record that the individual completed alcohol training as required in Utah Code
Annotated sections 32B-5-403 and 62A-15-401. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.090: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Display Of License: Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
at all times be conspicuously displayed in the premises for which it is issued.
   B.   Compliance With State Laws: All licensees shall comply with all
applicable state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
alcoholic beverage control act and the regulations of the alcoholic beverage
control commission.
   C.   Transfer Of License: No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be transferred to a licensee nor to a licensed premises different from the
licensee or licensed premises referred to in the original license and original
supporting application therefor. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.100: GRANT OF LICENSE DEEMED CONSENT:
The granting of a class B beer only restaurant license, class C limited service
restaurant license, class D on premises retail beer license or class E full
service restaurant license, pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed the
consent of the city as required by Utah Code Annotated section 32B-5-201(2)(d).
(Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.110: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance By Licensee: All alcohol business licensees shall comply
with the rules and regulations of the alcoholic beverage control act of the
state of Utah or its successor provisions, the regulations of the alcoholic
beverage control commission and the requirements covered in this chapter.
   B.   Illumination Of Licensed Premises: The licensed premises shall be kept
brightly illuminated at all times while occupied or open for business. In any
prosecution for violation of this subsection, if it is shown that there was
less than five (5) foot-candles of light anywhere on said premises at any time
while it was occupied or open for business, except in closets used exclusively
for storage, it shall be presumed that said premises was not sufficiently
illuminated.
   C.   Lawful Hours:
      1.   On Premises Alcohol License: All licenses for on premises
consumption of alcohol shall comply with all applicable state laws and
regulations, including, but not limited to, the alcoholic beverage control act.
      2.   Off Premises Beer Retailer License: Beer may not be sold or offered
for sale by any off premises beer retailer licensee after one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and before six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   D.   Employment Of Minors: It is unlawful for any licensee, except a class A
off premises beer retailer licensee, to permit any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to sell or serve alcohol. A minor may not sell beer on
the licensed premises of an off premises beer retailer unless the sale is done
under the supervision of a person twenty one (21) years of age or older who is
on the licensed premises and the minor is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
(Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.120: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Compliance Required: All licensees shall comply with all applicable
state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the alcoholic
beverage control act, the regulations of the alcoholic beverage control
commission and the requirements covered in this chapter.
   B.   Frequenting Unlicensed Premises: It is unlawful for any person to
visit, to loiter about, to frequent or to resort to any house, building, room
or premises where any alcoholic beverages are kept, stored, sold, bartered,
offered or exposed for sale in violation of the alcoholic beverage control act
or of any ordinance of the city.
   C.   Nuisances: It is unlawful for any person to commit, keep or maintain a
nuisance upon any licensed premises. It is unlawful for any person to suffer a
nuisance to be maintained upon licensed premises owned, occupied, operated or
controlled by him, or which may be in his charge.
   D.   Lookouts: It is unlawful for any person commonly known as a "lookout"
to be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of any peace
officer to such premises. It is unlawful to maintain or operate any electrical
or other device which is used or capable of being used to give warning of any
peace officer.
   E.   Failure To Maintain Control By Licensee: It is unlawful for any
licensee hereunder to fail to maintain full control of the conduct of the
business upon the licensed premises, or to fail to inform himself of the manner
in which said business is conducted and of the activities of his agents,
servants and employees in and about the licensed premises. The licensee shall
be responsible, under this chapter, for all of the activities of his agents,
servants and employees in and about the licensed premises, and by accepting a
license hereunder, the licensee unconditionally guarantees to the city that
neither he nor his agents, servants, or employees will violate the terms of
this chapter upon the licensed premises, and for breach of such guarantee the
license may be revoked. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.130: SEARCH OF LICENSED PREMISES:
Every licensee, by accepting a license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, thereby irrevocably consents that any peace officer may at any time
during the effective period of the license freely enter upon and inspect and
search the licensed premises for any alcoholic beverage, or for any other goods
or chattels illegally possessed or kept thereon, or for evidence of any alleged
crime under investigation by such peace officer and further consents to the
seizure of any such alcoholic beverage or any goods, chattels or evidence, or
the property of the licensee, which may be found therein upon such search.
(Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.140: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the city council for
the violation on the licensed premises of any provision of this chapter or of
any other applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages, or if
the person to whom the license was issued no longer possesses the
qualifications required by this chapter and the statutes of the state.
   B.   Hearing: All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended
by the city council without a prior hearing. Immediately following any
suspension order issued without a prior hearing, notice shall be given such
licensee, advising him of his right to a prompt hearing, and listing the cause
or causes for such suspension. If cause for the suspension is established at
the hearing, the suspension order may be continued for up to one year in
duration, or may be revoked. However, no license shall be revoked or suspended
beyond the initial hearing without first establishing cause therefor, nor shall
any license be revoked without first giving the licensee an opportunity for a
hearing on the cause specified for revocation. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee to sell or permit any person to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the licensed premises during the period of suspension or after the
revocation of the license. (Ord. 2016-07)
5.12.150: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section
 5.04.210 of this title. Each day of any continuing violation shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 2016-07)
CHAPTER 5.16
RESIDENTIAL BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.16.010: Required Conditions For Operation
5.16.020: Nonconforming Uses
5.16.030: Application For License
5.16.040: Licensing And Regulation
5.16.050: Violation And Penalty
5.16.010: REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR OPERATION:
It is unlawful to conduct or pursue a residential business within the corporate
limits of Farr West City, unless each of the following conditions are observed:
   A.   A residential business is the use of a portion of a single family
dwelling, and/or accessory building, for business purposes. Only persons who
are bona fide residents of the premises shall engage in the business.
Residential businesses which employ volunteers or employees who are not bona
fide residents of the residence are not permitted.
   B.   The residential business will not physically change the exterior of the
dwelling to the extent that it would alter the residential character of the
dwelling or the residential atmosphere of the neighborhood in which it is
located.
   C.   There shall be no display of goods, wares or merchandise offered for
sale upon the premises.
   D.   No sign or advertising shall be displayed on or in the premises. (This
requirement shall not apply to temporary advertising of fruit or garden produce
in season.)
   E.   The residential business shall not generate a type of vehicular traffic
not commonly associated with the residential zone in which it is located.
   F.   The addition of off street parking facilities on the premises of the
residential business beyond that normally required for residential uses is
prohibited. Parking of automobiles generated by the residential business will
be confined to existing residential parking, except that one (1) of the parking
places may be allowed on a street sixty feet (60') wide or wider, provided
there is at least thirty five feet (35') of unobstructed and unrestricted
frontage on the street in front of the dwelling used by the residential
business.
   G.   Within the main dwelling and/or accessory building, there shall be
complete conformity with Fire, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Health Codes;
and to all State and City ordinances and other laws, covenants, restrictions or
regulation pertaining to the premises upon which the residential business is
conducted, including complete adherence to all protective covenants governing
the conduct and activities of homeowners within the subdivision or development
in which the residential business is being conducted.
   H.   The residential business shall not produce noise, dust, odors, noxious
fumes, glare or other hazards to safety and health which are emitted from and
may be discernible beyond the premises. Residential businesses may not create a
public nuisance as defined by State law or this Code.
   I.   The residential business shall not create a hazard by using flammable,
explosive or other dangerous materials or by keeping or raising animals which
are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health and
safety of any person or property. The number and types of animals permitted in
a residential zone are governed by other sections of this Code.
   J.   The residential business shall not create a demand for Municipal or
utility services or community facilities in excess of those usually and
customarily provided for residential uses.
   K.   Any nursery or daycare use of the dwelling shall comply with State law
governing such use.
   L.   If a residential business is conducted within the living quarters of a
dwelling unit, the residential business shall not occupy more than the
equivalent of twenty five percent (25%) of the main floor area, up to a maximum
of four hundred (400) square feet. If the residential business is conducted
within the garage of a dwelling unit, it shall not occupy more than thirty
three percent (33%) of the garage area. In an accessory building it may use one
hundred percent (100%) of the area. (Ord. 2017-10)
5.16.020: NONCONFORMING USES:
All residential businesses are subject to all restrictions and regulations
provided for within this Code, or as this Code may be hereafter amended, and as
such uses are accessory, incidental, and secondary to the primary use of the
structure or land upon which they are located and do not qualify as a valid,
nonconforming use. (Ord. 2017-10)
5.16.030: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for a business license shall be made in writing to the City
Recorder on the City-approved business license application. Upon receipt of an
application for a business license the application will then be considered at
the next available regularly scheduled City Council meeting; unless in the
opinion of the City Recorder or as required hereunder, the application is or
should be referred to the building inspector, Fire Marshal or other department
for investigation. After the application is submitted to the City Council for
approval, the applicant must attend the scheduled City Council meeting when the
application will be considered to answer any questions prior to license
approval. The City Council may then grant approval, attach conditions for
renewal or approval or deny the application for cause. (Ord. 2017-10)
5.16.040: LICENSING AND REGULATION:
All residential businesses must obtain a City-issued business license before
engaging in business. No licensing fee shall be charged for residential
businesses which are conducted entirely within the primary residence and when
the combined offsite impacts of the residential business and the primary
residential use do not materially exceed the offsite impact of the primary
residential use alone. License fees shall apply to residential businesses which
are conducted wholly or in part in residential accessory or out buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit Farr West City from licensing, taxing or
regulating a residential business to the extent permitted by Utah law. (Ord.
2017-10)
5.16.050: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who is in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2017-10)
CHAPTER 5.20
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
5.20.010: Prohibited When
5.20.020: License Required; Bond
5.20.030: License Issuance; Investigation
5.20.040: License Revocation
5.20.050: Surrender Of License; Return Of Bond
5.20.060: License Expiration
5.20.070: Exemptions
5.20.080: Violation; Penalty
5.20.010: PROHIBITED WHEN:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to call at the residence of any other
person for the purpose of soliciting or taking orders, sale, barter, exchange,
delivery of any goods, wares, or merchandise on any Saturday, Sunday or
holiday. Soliciting is prohibited between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. This chapter shall not apply to any person
who was previously invited by the householder to come to such residence for any
of the foregoing purposes.
   B.   Solicitation permitted under this chapter does not authorize the entry
onto any private property when such property displays a notice or sign such as
"No Trespassing" or "No Soliciting" or other similar language. Soliciting at
property where such a notice is posted could subject the solicitor to
revocation of the solicitor's license and/or criminal citation. (Ord. 2014-07:
Ord. 10-04)
5.20.020: LICENSE REQUIRED; BOND:
It is unlawful or any person to engage in the activities of a solicitor without
first complying with the following requirements:
   A.   Application; Required Information: Submit a completed business
application which shall contain the following:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is an
employee or agent of a corporation or other entity, the name and address of the
corporation or entity,
      2.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold and from whom and where the applicant obtains the goods to be sold,
      3.   The length of time for which the applicant desires to engage in
business within the city,
      4.   The place or places within the city where the applicant proposes to
carry on his or her business or engage in soliciting,
      5.   A list of other municipalities in which the applicant has engaged in
business within the six (6) month period preceding the date of the application,
      6.   Provide a current (within 6 months) bureau of criminal
identification (BCI) background check for all solicitors,
      7.   If the applicant is employed by another person, documents showing
that the person for which the applicant proposes to do business is authorized
to do business within the state;
   B.   Current Photos: Furnish the city with two (2) photographs not larger
than two inches by three inches (2" x 3") of the applicant taken within the
last twelve (12) months. One shall be affixed to the license in the files and
records of Farr West City; the other will be used as photo identification that
is to be worn in plain sight by the solicitor;
   C.   Legal Signature: Sign his or her name to a registration card to be kept
by Farr West City;
   D.   Bond: Submit a corporate surety bond conditioned upon the observance of
all laws and ordinances of the city and license conditions agreed to by the
licensee. The amount of such bond shall be established and listed in the Farr
West City fee schedule;
   E.   License/Photo: The license must be kept on the solicitor's person at
all times. The photograph must be visible and in plain sight while soliciting
is being conducted. The license must be presented upon the demand of any
person;
   F.   Fee: Pay a license fee as specified in the Farr West City fee schedule.
(Ord. 2014-07: Ord. 10-04: Ord. 10-03: Ord. 91-07)
5.20.030: LICENSE ISSUANCE; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   On receiving the application, the city recorder shall cause such
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as
deemed reasonable and necessary for the protection of the public good.
   B.   If as a result of the investigation the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the city recorder shall
endorse such upon the application together with a statement of reasons therefor
and submit it to the city council. If found to be unsatisfactory by the city
council, the applicant thereupon shall be notified that his or her application
has been disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued.
   C.   If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the city recorder
shall endorse such upon the application. Upon payment of the prescribed license
fee (see title 3, chapter 3.30, "Fee Schedule", of this code), the city shall
deliver to the applicant his or her license. Such license shall contain a
signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and
photograph of the licensee and the kind of goods to be sold pursuant to the
application together with an expiration date. (Ord. 2012-02: Ord. 91-07)
5.20.040: LICENSE REVOCATION:
   A.   Causes For Revocation: Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the city council, after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for the license;
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement made in the course of
carrying on his or her business or soliciting;
      3.   Any violation of this title;
      4.   Conviction of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      5.   Conducting the business of soliciting in an unlawful manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Hearing: Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his or her last known address or at the address shown on his or her
application, or may be made by personal communication by any city officer or
employee.
   C.   Temporary Revocation: Any duly appointed license inspector may
temporarily revoke the license of any solicitor when he or she has reasonable
cause to believe that the solicitor has engaged in conduct which constitutes a
breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public. (Ord. 91-07)
5.20.050: SURRENDER OF LICENSE; RETURN OF BOND:
Upon the surrender by a licensee of his or her license to the city, the
licensee's bond or cash deposit shall be returned, provided there have been no
violations by the licensee of any of the conditions for which the bond or cash
deposit was made. If the licensee applies for the renewal of this license, the
bond or deposit shall be renewed or retained for the term of such newly
acquired license. (Ord. 91-07)
5.20.060: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 in the
year it is issued. (Ord. 91-07)
5.20.070: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Persons Holding Business License: Persons already licensed pursuant to
the provisions of this title but who also engage in soliciting activities are
exempt from the licensing requirements in this chapter, provided, that such
solicitation is for the sale of merchandise from a location or business already
licensed. All other solicitors doing business within the city are nonexempt and
shall comply with the foregoing licensing provisions.
   B.   Home Occupation Provisions Apply: Solicitors who reside in and do
business in the city from their homes are exempted from the provisions of this
chapter, but shall be licensed and regulated under the applicable provisions of
the city zoning ordinance relating to home occupations.
   C.   Exempt Purposes: Persons engaged in soliciting for bona fide charitable
organizations, religious organizations, or those campaigning for elected public
offices who reside in the city are exempted from the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 10-04: Ord. 10-03: Ord. 91-07)
5.20.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as is prescribed by law.
(Ord. 10-04)
CHAPTER 5.24
TAXICAB SERVICES
SECTION:
5.24.010: Definitions
5.24.020: Business License Required
5.24.030: Business License Requirements And Application
5.24.040: Driver Qualifications
5.24.050: Requirement To Display License
5.24.060: Schedule Of Rates
5.24.070: Demand Of Fare In Advance
5.24.080: Record Of Business
5.24.090: Penalty
5.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
"Taxicab service" means a business primarily engaged in the act of transporting
persons for hire by class D motor vehicle, excluding any vehicle owned,
operated, or licensed by the Utah transit authority. (Ord. 15-08)
5.24.020: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person engaged in the act of transporting persons for hire in any vehicle
requiring a class D motor vehicle license to operate within the city must first
obtain a valid business license. (Ord. 15-08)
5.24.030: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION:
   A.   An application for a business license to conduct a taxicab service
shall be filed in writing with Farr West City. The license application shall
include:
      1.   The name and location of the applicant's principal place of business
and any other office located in the state of Utah.
      2.   The number of vehicles to be used in the taxicab service, a
description of each vehicle, its license plate number and vehicle
identification number (VIN).
      3.   Provide a current (within 6 months) bureau of criminal
identification (BCI) background check for applicant.
      4.   Provide competent evidence of valid liability insurance coverage for
each driver and each taxicab service vehicle as required by state code and
maintain continuous vehicle insurance coverage while the vehicle is operational
at the minimum levels of coverage required by state statute. (41-12a-303.2)
(72-9-103)
      5.   Evidence that all drivers have a current motor vehicle chauffeur's
permit issued by the state of Utah, authorizing the transportation of
passengers (a class D license with a Z endorsement).
      6.   If any of the foregoing information changes, the applicant or
licensee, as the case may be, shall deliver current information to the Farr
West City office within ten (10) business days following the change.
      7.   Any taxicab licensed through another jurisdiction within the state
of Utah shall be recognized as properly licensed in the city of Farr West.
(Ord. 15-08)
5.24.040: DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS:
No permit or renewal of a permit shall be issued to any of the following
persons:
   A.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
   B.   Any person who is currently required to register as an offender under
title 77, chapter 41, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor;
   C.   Any person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude,
possession or use of narcotics or dangerous drugs, a felony conviction for an
offense against a person or property;
   D.   Any person who has been convicted of reckless driving within the five
(5) year period immediately preceding application for a permit;
   E.   Any person who has been convicted of driving a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol or a controlled substance;
   F.   Any person not possessing a valid taxicab endorsement license issued by
the state of Utah; or
   G.   Any person who has been convicted of violating any provisions of this
chapter. Any conviction for any immoral, indecent or offensive conduct after a
taxicab license has been issued may result in the suspension, denial or
revocation of the taxicab license. (Ord. 15-08)
5.24.050: REQUIREMENT TO DISPLAY LICENSE:
The taxicab driver's business license shall be displayed in plain view when the
taxicab is in operation. (Ord. 15-08)
5.24.060: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
An owner or driver of a taxicab may establish the rate at which passengers may
be charged. Rates are to be clearly displayed and charges are to be agreed upon
prior to the transport of the customer. If the rates to be charged are to be
computed by taximeters, it shall be the duty of every person owning or
operating such taxicab to keep the taximeter in good and workable condition.
(Ord. 15-08)
5.24.070: DEMAND OF FARE IN ADVANCE:
The owner or driver of a licensed taxicab shall have the right to demand in
advance the minimum fare of any person employing the driver and may refuse to
convey any person who shall not comply with such demand. (Ord. 15-08)
5.24.080: RECORD OF BUSINESS:
Every person engaged in driving a taxicab shall keep a true and exact record of
every fare trip they make. Such record shall show the exact time of departure
from the place where the fare is picked up, the place where every stop was
made, the length of time that elapsed at each stop, the exact time when the
fare terminated, and the place where the fare, or if more than one, where each
fare was discharged. This record shall at all times be open to the inspection
of any law enforcement officer upon demand. (Ord. 15-08)
5.24.090: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day of any continuing violation shall
be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 15-08)
CHAPTER 5.30
AGRIBUSINESS
SECTION:
5.30.010: Purpose And Intent
5.30.020: Definitions
5.30.030: Applicability
5.30.040: General Standards
5.30.050: Farm Classification
5.30.060: Permitted Use Table
5.30.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to support agriculture within
our city. This can be accomplished by fostering economically feasible land use
alternatives for local and enterprising agriculture operators who are committed
to providing local agricultural produce, artisan goods, and sustainability or
rural experience to the public.
   B.   Intent. It is the intent of this Chapter to benefit farm owners,
operators, residents, and the region by aiding such operations in generating
supplementary farm income while allowing the preservation of agriculture by
enhancing food production, artisan goods, education and related opportunities.
This Chapter seeks to:
      1.   Support a sustainable agricultural environment.
      2.   Develop agri-business, agri-tourism, farm-to-market, farm-to-table,
and related strategies and objectives.
      3.   Allow an environment for agricultural, and artisan goods that
benefit both community and commerce; including agricultural involved
experience, education, and outreach. (Ord. 21-04: Ord. 20-08)
5.30.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this Chapter:
 
               The growing of produce or raising of livestock for human
AGRICULTURE:   consumption that is consistent with the A-1 or A-1-R Zone where
               the property is located.
               The use of land to generate revenue as an agricultural
AGRI-BUSINESS: operation, the production of food and artisan goods for retail,
               wholesale, or commercial use, and is inclusive of agri-tourism,
               farm-to-market, and farm-to-table.
               A visit to a working farm or any agricultural, horticultural, or
AGRI-TOURISM:  agri-business operation for enjoyment, education, or involvement
               in the activities of the farm or operation.
               Products that are produced by artisans, either completely by
               hand or with the help of hand-tools or even mechanical means, as
ARTISAN GOODS: long as the direct manual contribution of the artisan remains
               the most substantial component of the finished product. (Ord.
               21-04: Ord. 20-08)
 
5.30.030: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter applies to properties in the A-1 and A-1-R Zones. The uses and
standards in this Chapter supplement and are in addition to those in the A-
1 and A-1-R Zones. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or
operator to understand and comply with all applicable codes and any agency
requirements. If a conditional use permit is required per the permitted use
table in
5.30.060, the conditional use permit application must be completed and
submitted to the city for review and receive recommendation by the planning
commission and approval by the city council before engaging in any agri-
business.
All agri-business and agri-tourism operations, whether the use is permitted or
conditional, require a business license. All operations must obtain a business
license approved and issued by the City before engaging in business. (Ord. 21-
04: Ord. 20-08)
5.30.040: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Primary Use: Agriculture is the primary use in the A-1 and A-1-R Zones.
Agri-business uses are complementary and accessory to the primary agriculture
use.
   B.   Narrative: All agri-business applications shall be accompanied by a
concise narrative describing the farm, agriculture operation, and the overall
vision for the proposed agri-business operation. The narrative shall include:
      1.   Agriculture and farm history.
      2.   A description or plan for the general maintenance of its
agricultural product(s) and proposals for the following:
         a.   Proposed agri-business uses, including any non-agriculturally
related products, uses, or activities.
         b.   Agriculturally related and non-agriculturally related types of
facilities and equipment.
         c.   Time(s) of normal day-to-day operation.
         d.   Anticipated number of daily patrons and employees.
         e.   Parking needs.
      3.   Site Plan (see Section
17.12.070): All agri-business uses shall have a general design and layout. A
site plan is required for conditional uses and new construction, including
where additional parking is created for agribusiness use beyond existing hard
surfaces.
         a.   Newly constructed buildings and facilities intended for agri-
business purposes and/or to serve agri-tourism needs shall reflect an
architectural vernacular that is consistent with the area's rural character.
New construction must adhere to the existing City code for accessory buildings.
Distance from adjacent lots/parcels and/or dwellings shall be taken into
consideration for all buildings and structures. Temporary sanitary facilities
are discouraged; however, if found necessary, they shall be discretely
incorporated into the agri-business operation and completely screened from
street and adjacent property view.
         b.   An agri-business operation may consist of multiple adjacent
properties. However, all properties shall have common ownership. When applying
this Chapter to multiple properties, all properties are considered in
aggregate.
      4.   Production. An agri-business use shall, with exception of the winter
season, actively and continuously produce an agricultural product for sale and
purchase. In the event that the agri-business ceases or becomes improperly
maintained, as determined by the City, the right to operate an agri-business
use under this Chapter is revoked.
      5.   Parking. All uses shall have adequate off-street parking as
determined based upon the narrative, site plan, and determination of the City
Engineer. No on street parking is allowed. Parking areas must look presentable
and be maintained.
      6.   Facilities. Buildings open to the public shall have approved water,
sewer, and toilet facilities for use by patrons. The facilities must meet
applicable building, occupancy, and fire codes.
      7.   Uses. To ensure that agriculture is maintained as the primary use,
and that an appropriate balance and mixture of agriculturally related and non-
agriculturally related uses exist. It shall be required that a minimum of one-
half (½) of all uses be agriculture as defined in this Chapter. Uses are
measured by the square footage area designated for the uses, including related
buildings.
      8.   Hours of Operation. Agri-business uses are limited to 8:00 A.M. and
10:00 P.M., except where hours may be extended as allowed and permitted by the
City.
      9.   Development Agreement. The City may require a development agreement
to be recorded on the property as part of any agri-business use. (Ord. 21-04:
Ord. 20-08)
5.30.050: FARM CLASSIFICATION: 
The following establishes the classification for farm operations based on
acreage:
   A.   Small Farm. Includes an agriculturally productive property consisting
of lot sizes one (1) to five (5) acres.
   B.   Large Farm. Includes an agriculturally productive property consisting
of lot sizes over five (5) acres. (Ord. 21-04: Ord. 20-08)
5.30.060: PERMITTED USE TABLE:
The following uses are determined desirable in conjunction with a primary
agriculture operation. The uses in this Section may be subject to other
requirements beyond those imposed by this Chapter. "P" denotes a permitted use,
"C" denotes a conditional use in the A-1 and A-1-R Zones.
Use / Activity Small Farm Large Farm
Use / Activity                                     Small Farm Large Farm
Agricultural Demonstrations or Educational Classes P          P
Artisan Goods Production                           P          P
Festival Related to Agribusiness                   C          C
Community Garden / Rent-a-row                      P          P
Corn Maze                                          None       C
Herb Garden                                        P          P
Market for On-site Produce                         P          P
Market for Multi Farmers / Off-site Products       None       C
Nursery or Greenhouse                              P          P
Passenger Rides (tractor, sleigh, wagon, etc.)     None       P
Petting Farm or Zoo                                None       C
Photography                                        P          P
Pumpkin Patch or U-Pick Operation                  P          P
Any Other Approved Agribusiness Use                C          C
 
(Ord. 21-04: Ord. 20-08)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6.04
ANIMALS GENERALLY
SECTION:
6.04.010: Adoption Of Weber County Animal Control Ordinance
6.04.020: Household Pets
6.04.010: ADOPTION OF WEBER COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE:
The title 2 comprehensive animal control ordinance currently adopted by Weber
County, and as amended or superseded from time to time, is hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this code as if fully set out at length herein. All
laws, rules and regulations contained therein, where applicable and within the
jurisdictional authority of Farr West City, shall be in full force and effect
within the limits of the city, except as hereinafter specified. (Ord. 11-04)
6.04.020: HOUSEHOLD PETS:
See section
17.08.010 of this code for definitions of "household pets" and "kennel". See
section
17.44.170 of this code for number of household pets permitted in all
residential zones. (Ord. 15-04)
CHAPTER 6.08
LIVESTOCK
SECTION:
6.08.010: Definitions
6.08.020: Purpose And Intent
6.08.030: Animal Allowance
6.08.040: Yard And Structure Regulations
6.08.050: Other Regulations
6.08.060: Enforcement And Penalties
6.08.070: Controlling Ordinance
6.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION: The production of agricultural goods for
                                    sale.
                                    Geese, chickens, ducks, turkeys, peacocks,
FOWL:                               pigeons, other domestic animals of similar
                                    size.
                                    Home based activities such as gardening,
HOME FOOD PRODUCTION:               raising fowl or livestock and generally
                                    seeking ways to increase self-sufficiency
                                    in a city or suburban environment.
                                    Animals greater than 400 pounds in weight.
LARGE ANIMALS:                      Horses, cattle, mules, burros, llamas,
                                    ostrich, and other domestic animals of
                                    similar size.
                                    Any normally domesticated animal that is
LIVESTOCK:                          not a cat, or dog, such as: cattle, sheep,
                                    goats, mules, burros, horses, chickens,
                                    geese, ducks, turkeys, llamas, etc.
                                    Animals between 151 and 400 pounds in
MEDIUM-LARGE ANIMALS:               weight. Sheep, goats, swine, and other
                                    domestic animals of similar size.
                                    Animals between 30 and 150 pounds in
MEDIUM-SMALL ANIMALS:               weight. Mini-pigs, pygmy goats, and other
                                    domestic animals of similar size.
                                    Animals less than 30 pounds in weight.
SMALL ANIMALS:                      Chickens, ducks, geese, pigeons, rabbits,
                                    turkeys, other domestic animals of similar
                                    size.
                                    A form of agriculture where almost all the
SUBSISTENCE FARMING:                produce goes to feed and support the
                                    household and is not for sale. Some of the
                                    output may be bartered.
                                    Lot acreage not devoted to dwellings,
VACANT ACREAGE:                     garages, or accessory buildings. (Ord. 21-
                                    11, 10-7-2021)
 
6.08.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
To establish the standards and criteria by which livestock may be kept within
Farr West City. The city recognizes that livestock is associated with certain
noises, sights, and smells. However, the city also recognizes the importance of
maintaining its farming heritage consisting of subsistence farming and
commercial agricultural production and the traditional values associated with
that heritage. It is with this purpose, to preserve the farming heritage of the
community while protecting the rights of the property owners and residents,
that this chapter is enacted. (Ord. 11-04)
6.08.030: ANIMAL ALLOWANCE:
   A.   Home food production or subsistence farming livestock is permitted in
the A-1, A-1-R, and R-1-15 residential zones unless restricted by private
development agreements, covenants, or other legally binding contracts.
   B.   The quantity of large, medium-large, and medium-small sized animals
permitted on a property shall be determined on the basis of 100 animal points
per vacant acre. Vacant acreage on residential properties shall be determined
by deducting 0.20 acre (approx. 8,700 square feet) from the total acreage
before calculating the animal allowance (e.g., [0.50 acre - 0.20 acre] x 100 =
30 animal points; [1.45 acres - 0.20 acre] x 100 = 125 points). All other
properties shall deduct the exact amount of acreage not being used for animal
production before calculating the animal allowance.
 
Type Of Animal                                      Number Of Points Per Animal
Large animals: horses, cattle, mules, burros,
llamas, ostrich, other domestic animals of similar  20
size
Medium-Large animals: sheep, goats, swine, other
domestic animals of similar size (Swine are only    10
allowed in the A-1 residential zone)
Medium-Small animals: mini-pigs, pygmy goats, other 5
domestic animals of similar size
 
   C.   Small animals (chickens, ducks, geese, pigeons, rabbits, turkeys, other
domestic animals of similar size) are allowed on the basis of one animal per
0.05 acre (e.g., 0.35 acre = 7 small animals, 1.0 acre = 20 small animals).
   D.   Vacant acreage exceeding five (5) acres is not subject to the animal
allowance requirements.
   E.   Commercial agricultural production businesses shall only be permitted
in the A-1 residential zone. Intensive commercial agricultural operations or
businesses shall only be permitted by conditional use with a minimum lot size
of five (5) acres and must comply with applicable business regulations in title
5 of this code. (Ord. 2014-02: Ord. 11-04; amd. Ord. 21-11, 10-7-2021)
6.08.040: YARD AND STRUCTURE REGULATIONS:
All barns, coops, stables, and other structures are to be constructed in
accordance with the accessory structure restrictions in the building codes of
Farr West City. (Ord. 11-04)
6.08.050: OTHER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Additional Conditions May Be Adopted: The provisions of this chapter
shall be the minimum requirements. The planning commission may recommend and
the city council may adopt additional conditions as provided in this chapter
for conditional uses or as they deem in the best interest of the general
public.
   B.   Nuisance Animals, Control And Fencing, And Animal Trespass: Nuisance
animals, control and fencing, and animal trespass are addressed in title 2,
Weber County comprehensive animal control ordinance as currently adopted by
reference. All laws, rules and regulations contained therein, where applicable
and within the jurisdictional authority of Farr West City, shall be in full
force and effect within the limits of the city.
   C.   Dead Livestock: All dead livestock shall be disposed of within forty
eight (48) hours after death. The livestock owner shall dispose of the dead
livestock in a sanitary manner. Failure to remove dead livestock within forty
eight (48) hours shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be a violation of
this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to dispose of dead livestock by
burning, dumping in any waterway, or leaving aboveground. (Ord. 11-04)
6.08.060: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: Enforcement of this chapter is vested with the city
inspector and authorized animal control officers.
   B.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished as prescribed by
the laws of the state of Utah. If any violation is continued, each day's
violation shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 11-04)
6.08.070: CONTROLLING ORDINANCE:
In the event of any inconsistency between this title and any other title of
this code, this title shall be controlling. (Ord. 11-04)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 8.04
GARBAGE
SECTION:
8.04.010: Definitions
8.04.020: Receptacles For Garbage
8.04.030: Ashes
8.04.040: Collection Times
8.04.050: Accumulation Of Garbage Unlawful
8.04.060: License To Collect
8.04.070: Littering
8.04.080: Power To Contract Hauling Of Garbage
8.04.090: Garbage Disposal Charges; Property Owner Liable
8.04.100: Billing For Garbage Collection Service
8.04.110: Past Due Accounts
8.04.120: City To Remove Objectionable Garbage At Owner's Expense
8.04.130: Violation; Penalty
8.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   APARTMENT HOUSE: A building comprising four (4) or more units designated for
separate housekeeping tenements with heat furnished in common.
   GARBAGE: Includes, but is not limited to, all animal and vegetable refuse
from kitchens of residences, hotels, cafes, restaurants and places where food
is prepared for human consumption, including all animal and vegetable refuse
from such kitchens; and also all condemned or decayed or unsound vegetables,
meat, fish, fruit and all waste and offal therefrom from markets, stores and
factories; provided, however, that it shall not include waste from
slaughterhouses.
   OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT: Includes any house, apartment, condominium, mobile
home or any similar structure used for living quarters by one or more persons.
An occupied dwelling unit shall not include any such unit that is vacant and
shall not include businesses or commercial establishments not engaged in
providing renting or leasing dwelling units. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-1)
8.04.020: RECEPTACLES FOR GARBAGE:
   A.   Every owner, lessee or occupant of any dwelling house, business
premises, or place of business shall provide, or cause to be provided, and at
all times keep, at such times as the city council may by resolution direct,
suitable and sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding garbage, paper in
which garbage is encased, swill, market waste and other refuse. No such
receptacle shall be filled to exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight, including the
weight of such receptacle.
   B.   All garbage, paper in which garbage is encased, and swill must be
placed in rainproof and flyproof receptacles, with proper covers or in plastic
bags and shall at all times be kept securely closed and be kept in such place
and in such manner as to prevent offense.
   C.   Receptacles containing garbage and other waste material to be hauled
away by the city or by the person, firm or corporation contracting with the
city for garbage removal, shall be set out for collection at the place and at
such time as may be designated by the city council by resolution. All empty
receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as practicable after being
emptied, and in every case must be removed from the street on the day they are
emptied. (Ord. 81-2 §§ 2-1-2 – 2-1-4)
8.04.030: ASHES:
No ashes or noncombustible rubbish shall be deposited in the same vessel or
receptacle with combustible garbage or wet or liquid substance. No hot ashes
shall be placed out for collection or removal either in receptacles or
otherwise. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-5)
8.04.040: COLLECTION TIMES:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or deposit in or on
any of the public streets, alleys or parks in Farr West City any rubbish,
garbage, debris, grass cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, branches, sticks, stones,
junk, cast off clothing, papers, printed matter, dirt or other discarded thing
or matter incident to house cleaning or yard cleaning, except on regular
garbage collection days, and except in receptacles as herein set forth. (Ord.
81-2 § 2-1-6)
8.04.050: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit garbage, swill,
rubbish or similar wastes to accumulate or remain on or about the premises,
under the control of such person, for such period of time as to become
objectionable or unsanitary. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-7)
8.04.060: LICENSE TO COLLECT:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of
collection, hauling or disposal of garbage, swill, rubbish or similar wastes
within the corporate limits of the city of Farr West without first having
obtained a license to do so from the city council. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-8)
8.04.070: LITTERING:
It is unlawful for any person hauling garbage, rubbish, swill or matter of any
kind to permit or allow any such matter to fall upon and remain in any street,
alley or park within the corporate limits of the city of Farr West, or to
deposit any such matter at any place except a dumping ground as authorized by
Weber County or Farr West City. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-9)
8.04.080: POWER TO CONTRACT HAULING OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Residential Properties: The city council shall have the power at any
time it may deem advisable, to contract with any person, firm or corporation
for the hauling and disposal of garbage, rubbish and similar household wastes
from residential property, and may provide, by resolution, for such fees as the
council may determine to be collected from all persons, firms or corporations
occupying residential property other than trailer courts and apartments; and
provided further, that until changed by resolution of the city council, such
fees shall be as prescribed in the fee schedule (title 3, chapter 3.30 of this
code).
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Properties: The occupants of all commercial
and industrial property, shall arrange and pay for their own garbage collection
and disposal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter regulating the
same. (Ord. 2012-02: Res. 04-04 § 1: Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-10)
8.04.090: GARBAGE DISPOSAL CHARGES; PROPERTY OWNER LIABLE:
   A.   Property owners shall be held liable for payment of their sewer service
and garbage disposal charges for self-occupied homes. Property owners shall be
held liable for payment of sewer service and garbage disposal charges for a
minimum of eight (8) months after a home is left vacant.
   B.   Property owners of rental units have a financial interest in said units
through ownership and shall be held liable for the payment of sewer service and
garbage disposal charges, should the charges not be paid by the renter.
   C.   Property owners either occupying or renting out buildings for business
purposes, shall be held liable for the payment of sewer service fees, garbage
disposal to be provided by the property owner or renter from a private hauler.
   D.   Any property owner violating any of the provisions of this section, or
failing or refusing to make payment of charges herein contained, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as
provided by law. (Ord. 97-04 §§ 2 – 5)
8.04.100: BILLING FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICE:
The city council may, in its discretion and when it shall determine that the
public interest shall be best served thereby, arrange for the collection by the
city treasurer, of any charges or collection of garbage by a contractor of the
city under the provisions of this chapter and shall arrange for such collection
service and bill for the charge of such service on the regular statement once a
quarter. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-11)
8.04.110: PAST DUE ACCOUNTS:
In the event that any charges made under the provisions of section
8.04.100 of this chapter are not promptly paid when due, the city may sue
thereon in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-12)
8.04.120: CITY TO REMOVE OBJECTIONABLE GARBAGE AT OWNER'S EXPENSE:
All persons, firms or corporations having accumulation of "garbage" and similar
wastes as defined in this chapter are charged with the obligation of placing
the same in proper containers and placing the same in proper locations for
collection as is provided in this chapter and as may be determined by the city
council; provided, however, that commercial or industrial establishment shall
make suitable arrangements to have their accumulated garbage and similar wastes
removed, at the owner's expense, at such intervals as shall be determined by
the city council, but at least once a week; in the event this is not done, the
city may, at its discretion, arrange for the removal of any accumulated garbage
or similar wastes from the premises, and may charge the costs of such removal
to the owner or occupant of the premises on which such accumulation is
permitted, such charge to be a debt due to Farr West City, and the city may
proceed to collect the same by legal action in any court of competent
jurisdiction, if the same is not paid promptly on demand. (Ord. 81-2 § 2-1-13)
8.04.130: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who is in violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 97-15 § 1: Ord. 81-2 §
2-1-14)
CHAPTER 8.08
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8.08.010: Nuisances Generally
8.08.020: Restrictions On Blocking Water
8.08.030: Abatement Of Weeds And Deleterious Objects
8.08.040: Abandoned Or Unattended Vehicles
8.08.050: Dangerous Buildings
8.08.060: Enforcement, Administrative Notice; Hearings; Disposal Of Nuisance;
Lien
8.08.070: Violation; Penalty; Recovery Of Costs
8.08.010: NUISANCES GENERALLY:
   A.   Adopted: Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly
impractical or inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as
provided, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions,
provisions, penalties and sections of the state nuisance provisions, Utah Code
Annotated section 76-10-801 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the
city.
   B.   Nuisances Defined: Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and
whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome is declared to
be a nuisance and unlawful. It is unlawful for any person either as an owner,
agent, tenant or occupant to create, or aid in creating or contributing to or
maintaining, a nuisance.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any real property
or estate, or its agent, to cause or permit upon such property, or right of way
adjacent thereto, the accumulation of, or, after notice as provided in this
chapter, to fail to eradicate or remove any injurious and noxious weeds,
garbage, refuse, dead trees, tree stumps, or abandoned vehicles, boats or
trailers, or deleterious objects or structures pursuant to the powers granted
to the city by Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 11.
      2.   It is declared that the above listed objects shall constitute a
public nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of pollution to water,
air or land, or they create a breeding place or habitation for insects, rodents
or other forms of life deleterious to human habitation, or deleterious to their
surroundings.
   C.   Responsible Party Defined: Where a nuisance exists upon property and is
the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the
landlord or his or her agent, the tenant or his or her agent, and all other
persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists shall be
deemed to be the party responsible for the nuisance condition and shall be
equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance shall arise from the
unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business thereon
conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the
continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the responsible parties. (Ord. 09-
02 § 2)
8.08.020: RESTRICTIONS ON BLOCKING WATER:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or persons to permit any drainage system,
canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to backup and
overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
   B.   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute
a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (Ord. 09-02 § 2)
8.08.030: ABATEMENT OF WEEDS AND DELETERIOUS OBJECTS:
   A.   Real Property To Be Kept Clean: It shall be unlawful for any person
owning or occupying real property to allow weeds to grow higher on such
property than is permitted by this part or not to remove from such property any
cuttings of such weeds or any refuse, or deleterious objects after having been
given notice from the nuisance inspector as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Weeds Defined: "Weeds" are any vegetation designated as a noxious weed
by the Utah commissioner of agriculture or any overgrown vegetation that
creates a nuisance as defined in subsection C1 of this section.
   C.   Standards Of Weed Control:
      1.   It is declared that the above stated weeds constitute a nuisance
when they create a fire hazard, a source of contamination, or pollution of the
water, air or property, a danger to health, a breeding place or habitation for
insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to humans or are
deleterious to their surroundings. (Ord. 09-02 § 2)
8.08.040: ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle, boat,
recreational vehicle or trailer shall be deemed abandoned if it: 1) remains in
substantially the same location on public property for more than seven (7)
consecutive days; and 2) it has not been registered and inspected within thirty
(30) days after the date on which such registration and inspection is required
by the laws of the state of Utah.
   B.   Vehicle Nuisance: Or a vehicle is stored on private property and poses
a nuisance (see subsection
 8.08.010B of this chapter). (Ord. 09-02 § 2)
8.08.050: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
   A.   Adoption Of A Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings: The
uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings (current edition), as
published by the International Conference of Building Officials is approved and
adopted as the abatement of dangerous buildings code of Farr West City.
   B.   Application: The provisions of the abatement of dangerous buildings
code shall apply to all dangerous buildings as therein defined, which now exist
or which may exist or hereafter be constructed in this municipality.
   C.   Alterations, Additions And Repairs: All buildings or structures which
are required to be repaired under the provisions of the abatement of dangerous
buildings code shall be subject to all zoning and permitting requirements of
the city.
   D.   Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings: All buildings or portions thereof
which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous,
as defined in the abatement of dangerous buildings code, are declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or
removal in accordance with procedures specified in section 401 of the abatement
of dangerous buildings code.
   E.   Establishment Of Board Of Appeals: In order to interpret provisions of
the abatement of dangerous buildings code and to hear appeals provided for
thereunder, there is established an abatement of dangerous buildings board of
appeals consisting of five (5) members who shall not be employees of the
municipality. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall
act as secretary to the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the applicant with a copy to the building official.
Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions
contained in the adopted codes. Copies of all rules and regulations adopted by
the board shall be delivered to the building official who shall make them
accessible to the public without cost.
   F.   Dangerous Buildings; Nuisances: All dangerous buildings within the
terms of this section are declared to be public nuisances and shall be vacated
or demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. (Ord. 09-02 § 2)
8.08.060: ENFORCEMENT, ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE; HEARINGS; DISPOSAL OF NUISANCE;
LIEN:
   A.   Appointment And Duties Of Code Enforcement Officer:
      1.   There is established the position of code enforcement officer whose
duties it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. An authorized
peace officer may also enforce the provisions of this chapter. More than one
person may be appointed to act as code enforcement officer under this section.
      2.   The code enforcement officer is authorized to:
         a.   From any vantage point available to the general public, inspect
and examine real property situated within the corporate limits of the city for
the purpose of determining whether it contains objects or conditions of the
kind and nature described in this chapter. If it is determined that the objects
or conditions constitute a "nuisance", as defined in this chapter, the code
enforcement officer, or his designee, shall perform all functions necessary to
enforce the provisions of this chapter;
         b.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions
of the premises where such objects and conditions exist;
         c.   Serve notice, in writing, upon the owners and occupants of the
premises, either personally or by mailing the notice, postage prepaid,
addressed to the owners and/or occupants at their last known addresses, as
disclosed by the records of the county assessor, or as otherwise ascertained.
         d.   The written notice shall require the owners and/or occupants to:
            (1)   Correct, eradicate, or destroy and remove the items that are
found to be in violation of this chapter within such time as the code
enforcement officer may designate, which shall not be less than ten (10) days
and no more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice. If
the service is mailed, then the service shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
            (2)   Or require the responsible party to appear in the Farr West
municipal justice court within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the
citation.
         e.   The notice shall:
            (1)   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation
and generally describe the premises on which the violation exists.
            (2)   Inform the responsible party that in the event the condition
causing the violation is corrected in the allotted time, then the responsible
party shall notify the code enforcement officer for a reinspection. If the
condition has not been corrected, then a court appearance is required.
            (3)   Contain an explanation of the potential fines and penalties.
            (4)   Include a statement that if the responsible party fails to
correct the violation as may be ordered by the court, then the city may correct
the violation at the expense of the responsible party by way of a lien on the
property and/or a charge to the water/garbage bill or tax bill. (Ord. 09-02 §
2)
8.08.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY; RECOVERY OF COSTS:
   A.   Any owner, occupant or person having an interest in property subject to
this chapter who fails to comply with any order or notice given pursuant to
this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor for each offense and for
each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance.
   B.   If the responsible party described in the written notice of the code
enforcement officer or the modified decision of the code enforcement officer
shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements thereof, relating to the
eradication or removal of such objects and/or conditions, the code enforcement
officer shall employ all necessary assistance to cause such materials or
conditions to be eradicated or removed at the initial expense of the city.
   C.   Upon completion of the eradication and removal, the city treasurer
shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred and shall mail a
copy thereof to the owners and/or occupants demanding payment within twenty
(20) days from the date of mailing.
   D.   In the event the owner and/or occupant fails to make payment of the
amount set forth in the statement from the city treasurer within twenty (20)
days, the city treasurer or code enforcement officer may refer the matter to
the county treasurer, or, with the mayor's approval, may cause suit to be
brought in an appropriate court of law.
   E.   In the event that the expenses for eradication or removal is referred
to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner,
an itemized statement in triplicate of all expenses incurred in the eradication
or removal of the same shall be delivered to the county treasurer. The expenses
incurred will then be pursued by the county treasurer in accordance with the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-4.
   F.   Compliance by any owner, occupant or person to whom a notice has been
given as provided in this chapter shall not be a defense in any criminal
proceeding brought pursuant to this section. (Ord. 09-02 § 2)
CHAPTER 8.12
NOISE
SECTION:
8.12.010: Prohibited Acts Generally
8.12.020: Prohibited Acts Specifically
8.12.030: Exceptions
8.12.040: Application For Special Permit For Relief From Noise Level Designated
8.12.050: Enforcement
8.12.060: Additional Remedy; Injunction
8.12.010: PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusual loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others within the limits of Farr West City. (Ord. 00-04)
8.12.020: PROHIBITED ACTS SPECIFICALLY:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing or
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but the enumeration in this
section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   A.   Horns, Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling device
on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle, except as a danger warning;
the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time;
   B.   Radios, Phonographs, Musical Instruments: The using, operating, or
permitting to be played, used or operated in residential areas any television,
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who
are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated
and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of forty feet (40') from the building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
chapter;
   C.   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers And Other Sound Devices For Advertising: The
using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound upon the
public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building, structure or event without or in
violation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in violation of
this chapter;
   D.   Dogs: The keeping of any dog(s) which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity;
   E.   Roosters, Peacocks, Or Other Fowl: The keeping of any rooster(s),
peacock(s), or other fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise
shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity;
   F.   Construction Or Repairing Of Buildings: The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building shall be
prohibited between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00)
A.M., local prevailing time, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with permit from the city;
   G.   Schools, Courts, Churches, Parks: The creation of any excessive noise
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same
are in use, or which disturbs or unduly annoys individual groups in any park,
school, court or church;
   H.   Pile Drivers, Hammers, Electric Hoist: The operation between the hours
of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of any pile driver,
steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other
appliance, the use of which is usually attended by loud or unusual noise;
   I.   Power Lawn Mowers: The operation of any power mower, cultivator, or
like or related device (except snow blowers) in an area zoned residential
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord.
2023-07; Ord. 00-04)
8.12.030: EXCEPTIONS:
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations:
   A.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves;
   B.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency;
   C.   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the
city;
   D.   Noises directly related to parades, celebrations, etc., associated with
state or nationally recognized holidays, or with the announcement of such
events via loudspeakers from vehicles on public streets;
   E.   Noises resulting from the operation of agriculture equipment or
activities. (Ord. 00-04)
8.12.040: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT FOR RELIEF FROM NOISE LEVEL
DESIGNATED:
   A.   Justification: Applications for a permit for relief from the noise
level designated in this chapter on the basis of undue hardship may be made to
the city council or duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the
council hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been
granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
The city council or duly authorized representative may grant a relief as
applied for if they find:
      1.   That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or
modify the activity or operation to comply with this chapter; or
      2.   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this chapter;
and
      3.   That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
   B.   Conditions Possible: The city council, in granting such a special
permit, may prescribe any conditions or requirements they deem necessary to
minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 00-04)
8.12.050: ENFORCEMENT:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced any means available to the City
including by criminal prosecution and/or civil citation.
   A.   Criminal Penalty: Violations of this chapter shall constitute a class
"C" misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
   B.   Civil Penalty: The maximum civil penalty and fine that may be imposed
by the City for a violation of this chapter shall not exceed the amount
established in state law for a class "C" misdemeanor. Each day a civil
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2024-08: Ord.
00-04)
8.12.060: ADDITIONAL REMEDY; INJUNCTION:
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions hereof or which
causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or
which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area
shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to
abatement as prescribed by law. (Ord. 00-04)
CHAPTER 8.16
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
8.16.010: Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code; Amendments
8.16.020: Place Where Filed
8.16.030: Enforcement
8.16.040: Penalty
8.16.010: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Adoption: The international fire code, 2003 edition, as adopted by the
state of Utah (hereinafter "the code") published by the International Fire Code
Institute including the appendices and printed as a code in book form is hereby
adopted as the fire prevention code of Farr West City and by this reference is
made a part of this chapter to the same extent and effect as though the code
were set forth herein in full with the additions, deletions and changes
preserved in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Amendments: The following sections of appendices A and B of the
international fire code are revised as follows:
Section A101 General:
A101 Scope. The board of appeals established within the Weber fire district
jurisdiction for the purpose of hearing applications for modification to the
international fire code pursuant to provisions of section 108 shall be the
Weber fire district-board of trustees.
Subsections A101.1 through A101.10 are deleted in their entirety,
Section B104 Fire Area:
B104.1 General. The fire area shall be the total floor area of all floor levels
within the exterior walls or building used to protect storage or use areas,
except as modified in section B104.2 and B104.3.
B104.2 Area Separation. Portions of buildings which are separated by firewalls
constructed in accordance with the international building code or the
international residential code where applicable, are allowed to be considered
as separate fire areas.
Section B105 Fire Flow Requirements For Buildings:
B105.1 One and two family dwellings. The minimum fire flow requirements for one
and two family dwellings having a fire area which does not exceed 5000 square
feet shall be supplied by the available fire flow and augments by the fire
department. Fire flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire area in
excess of 5000 square feet shall not be less than that specified in table
B105.1.
Exception: Group "U" occupancies.
B105.1.1 When water mains or other fixed systems, capable of supplying fire
hydrants are available, fire hydrants shall be installed and spaced per
appendix C and section 508 of the international fire code.
(Ord. 04-01 §§ 1, 2: Ord. 03-02 §§ 1, 2: Ord. 02-07 § 1)
8.16.020: PLACE WHERE FILED:
A copy of the code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the
office of city recorder of Farr West City. (Ord. 02-07 § 1)
8.16.030: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Weber fire district shall be the enforcement authority for the
purpose of this chapter, and the chief of the Weber County fire district is
hereby designated as the fire chief for Farr West City.
   B.   The fire chief or his deputies shall execute the provisions of this
chapter and are authorized to issue any and all citations or orders they may
deem appropriate for any violation of this chapter under the code.
   C.   The Weber County sheriff or any deputy, with the advice and consent of
the fire chief, may issue citations for any violation of this chapter. (Ord.
02-07 § 1)
8.16.040: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter without a prescribed penalty in the code shall be
a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 02-07 § 1)
CHAPTER 8.20
COST RECOVERY; HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
8.20.010: Purpose
8.20.020: Definitions
8.20.030: Recovery Authorization And Procedures
8.20.040: No Admission Of Liability
8.20.050: Action To Recover Expenses
8.20.060: Saving Clause
8.20.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by the
city, or any state, county or local governmental agency rendering assistance to
the city in responding to hazardous materials and/or aggravated fire emergency
responses pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 53-2-105 or any other
applicable law. (Ord. 02-10 § 1)
8.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
   AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY: One or more of the following:
   A.   A fire caused by the owner or occupier of property or other determined
responsible party, which presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat, and the fire is
either:
      1.   Caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an order from
any state, city, county or local agency, department or official; or
      2.   Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of state
law or the ordinances or regulations of the city, county, or other local
agency.
   B.   A fire that constitutes arson or reckless burning as defined by the
Utah Code.
   C.   An alarm that results in a city, county or local fire unit being
dispatched, and the person transmitting, or causing the transmission of the
alarm, knows at the time of said transmission that no fire or related emergency
exits.
   EXPENSES: The actual costs of city, county or local government and volunteer
personnel, including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation,
costs of materials, costs of disposal and the cost of any contract labor and
materials.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: Any sudden or unexpected release of any
substance that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or biological characteristics, presents a direct or immediate threat to public
safety or the environment and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
(Ord. 02-10 § 1)
8.20.030: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURES:
The city is hereby empowered to recover expenses incurred by virtue of the
city's, county's or other local governmental agencies' response to a hazardous
materials emergency or aggravated fire emergency from any person, corporation,
partnership or other individual or entity whose negligent or intentional act
caused such an emergency, pursuant to the following procedure:
   A.   The Weber County sheriff's department and/or the Weber fire district
shall investigate and submit a report of the findings to the Farr West City
mayor. The mayor shall, based upon the report of findings and other available
evidence and information, determine responsibility for the emergency or
response as defined above and notify the responsible party by mail of the
department's determination of responsibility and the expenses to be recovered.
   B.   The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may
appeal the mayor's decision to the Farr West City council, who may hear the
appeal or designate a hearing officer to hear the appeal. Any appeal shall be
filed in writing with the Farr West City recorder not more than thirty (30)
days from the date of service of the notice. The date of service of notice
shall be the date of personal service or three (3) days after the date of
mailing.
   C.   In the event the determined responsible party appeals the
determination, the city council or designated hearing officer shall hold a
hearing to consider any issues raised in the appeal, at which hearing the
appealing party and the sheriff's department, the Weber County fire district,
and/or other local government shall be entitled to present evidence in support
of their respective positions.
   D.   After the hearing, the city council or hearing officer shall make a
recommendation to the mayor who shall issue a final decision determining
responsibility and assessing expenses. The mayor may adopt, modify, or remand
the recommendation of the hearing officer or city council for further
proceedings. The mayor may, in his or her sole discretion, hear additional
evidence prior to issuing a final decision. (Ord. 02-10 § 1)
8.20.040: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this chapter does not constitute
either an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for damages
or a criminal fine. (Ord. 02-10 § 1)
8.20.050: ACTION TO RECOVER EXPENSES:
In the event the party or parties determined to be responsible for the
repayment of expenses incurred due to the city's, county's or other local
agencies' response to such an emergency fail to make payment to the city and/or
other governmental agencies within thirty (30) days after a final
administrative determination of any appeal to the city council, or thirty (30)
days from the deadline for such an appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the
city may initiate legal action to recover the expenses determined to be owing,
including the city's reasonable attorney fees, court costs and costs of such
recovery from the determined responsible party. (Ord. 02-10 § 1)
8.20.060: SAVING CLAUSE:
In the event any word, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be
found to be unconstitutional, it shall not affect the constitutionality or
enforceability of the remainder of this chapter which is not specifically found
unconstitutional. (Ord. 02-10 § 1)
CHAPTER 8.24
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
8.24.010: Purpose
8.24.020: Definitions
8.24.030: City Emergency Operations Plan
8.24.040: Authority Of Governing Body
8.24.050: Emergency Declarations
8.24.060: Emergency Orders, Rules And Regulations
8.24.070: Mutual Aid Agreements
8.24.080: Emergency Expenditures Authorized
8.24.090: Additional Emergency Authority
8.24.100: Emergency Interim Succession
8.24.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to enable the City to effectively provide
emergency disaster response and recovery assistance in order to protect the
lives and property of its citizens. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different
meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and
more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
   ABSENT: Not physically present or not able to be communicated with for two
(2) hours. "Absent" does not include a person who can be communicated with via
telephone, radio or telecommunications.
   CITY EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: A plan adopted by the City for providing
emergency management functions during a disaster or local emergency.
   DISASTER: A situation causing, or threatening to cause, widespread damage,
social disruption, injury or loss of life or property, whether publicly or
privately owned, resulting from attack, internal disturbance, material
phenomena, weather phenomena, geological phenomena, or technological hazard.
   EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR: A person designated in accordance with this
chapter to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office when the
person legally exercising the powers and duties of that office is unavailable.
   LOCAL EMERGENCY: A condition in any political subdivision of the State which
requires that emergency assistance be provided by the affected political
subdivision to save lives and protect property within its jurisdiction in
response to a disaster, or to avoid or reduce the threat of a disaster.
   OFFICE: All State and local offices, the powers and duties of which are
defined by constitution, statutes, charters, optional plans, ordinances,
articles or bylaws.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Counties, cities, towns, metro townships, districts,
authorities, and other public corporations and entities whether organized and
existing under charter or general law.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OFFICER: A person holding an office in a political
subdivision.
   UNAVAILABLE: Absent from the place of governance during a disaster that
seriously disrupts normal governmental operations, whether or not that absence
or inability would give rise to a vacancy under existing constitutional or
statutory provisions. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.030: CITY EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN:
There is hereby adopted by the Farr West City Council for the purpose of
providing emergency management functions during a disaster or local emergency,
the City Emergency Operations Plan, which is attached to the ordinance codified
herein and is incorporated hereby and is on file in the City office. (Ord. 17-
09)
8.24.040: AUTHORITY OF GOVERNING BODY:
In order to protect life and property, the Farr West City Council is authorized
to carry out in its jurisdiction any measures as may be ordered by the Governor
under the Utah State Emergency Management Statutes and any additional measures
the City Council may deem necessary, subject to the limitations and provisions
of the Emergency Management Statutes; provided, that no such action shall be
inconsistent with any order, rule, regulation or action of the Governor or
State or Federal law. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.050: EMERGENCY DECLARATIONS:
   A.   A local emergency may be declared by proclamation by the Mayor. It
shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of thirty (30) days
except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing or terminating a local emergency shall be filed promptly
with the City Recorder.
   B.   A declaration of a local emergency is an official recognition that a
disaster situation exists within the City and provides a legal basis for
requesting and obtaining State or Federal government disaster assistance. The
declaration activates the response and recovery aspects of the City Emergency
Operations Plan and authorizes the furnishing of aid and assistance.
   C.   The City Emergency Operations Plan shall be activated whenever a
disaster occurs, or is about to occur, regardless of whether or not an
emergency declaration is made, or will be made. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.060: EMERGENCY ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
All orders, rules and regulations promulgated by the Governor or by the City,
or other agency authorized to make such orders, rules and regulations, shall
have the full force and effect of law during the state of emergency when filed
in the Office of the City Recorder or agency promulgating the same. (Ord. 17-
09)
8.24.070: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The City shall be authorized to enter into mutual aid compacts with other
political subdivisions within the State concerning matters involving
cooperative disaster response and recovery assistance support, consistent with
this chapter and pursuant to State law. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.080: EMERGENCY EXPENDITURES AUTHORIZED:
The Mayor, or authorized designee, may authorize the expenditure of funds in
support of the City Emergency Operations Plan as deemed necessary to protect
lives and property within the City. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.090: ADDITIONAL EMERGENCY AUTHORITY:
The special disaster emergency authority vested in the Governor and political
subdivisions of the State pursuant to Utah State Emergency Management Statutes
shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other emergency authority
otherwise constitutionally or statutorily vested in the Governor and political
subdivisions of the State. (Ord. 17-09)
8.24.100: EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSION:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to adopt procedures for the
emergency interim succession of elected and appointed officials, department
heads and employees in the event of a declared emergency.
   B.   Compliance With Statute: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 53-2a-
807, by July 1 of each year, the City shall:
      1.   Designate three (3) emergency interim successors;
      2.   Specify their order of succession; and
      3.   Provide a list of those designated successors to the Utah State
Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management.
   C.   Unavailability: Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if any
political subdivision officer or their legal deputy, if any, is unavailable, a
designated emergency interim successor shall exercise the powers and duties of
the office according to the order of succession specified by the City Council.
(Ord. 17-09)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
CHAPTER 9.04
CRIMINAL CODE
SECTION:
9.04.010: Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
9.04.010: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   Adoption: The provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 76, as amended
(criminal code), are adopted and incorporated by reference as ordinances of the
city of Farr West, with the exclusion stated in subsection C of this section.
   B.   Numbering Of Chapters And Sections: The title, chapter and section
numbers of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, for the above provisions are
adopted as the corresponding title, chapter and section numbers of the
ordinances of the city of Farr West City.
   C.   Exclusion: Those provisions of Utah Code Annotated titles 76 and 41, as
amended, which are reserved exclusively to the state of Utah, counties of the
state of Utah or cities of first or second class are not adopted. Specifically,
only those provisions which come within the jurisdiction of cities of the third
class of the jurisdiction of the justice of the peace court of Farr West City
are adopted and incorporated by reference. All definitions and general
provisions are adopted and incorporated by reference.
   D.   Word Substitutions: The city of Farr West City shall be substituted for
other governmental entities named in said provisions as may be applicable.
(Ord. 81-7 §§ 1, 3, 4, 5)
CHAPTER 9.08
JUVENILE CURFEWS
SECTION:
9.08.010: Purpose
9.08.020: Definitions
9.08.030: Daytime Curfew For Juveniles Under Eighteen Years Of Age
9.08.040: Nighttime Curfew For Juveniles Under Sixteen Years Of Age
9.08.050: Nighttime Curfew For Juveniles Sixteen And Seventeen Years Of Age
9.08.060: Parental Liability
9.08.070: Business Liability
9.08.080: Exceptions
9.08.090: Enforcement
9.08.100: Penalty
9.08.010: PURPOSE:
The Farr West City council finds, due to a seemingly ever increasing incidence
of violence and other crime among juveniles within the city, that such crimes
may be significantly inhibited and reduced by the enactment and enforcement of
local laws establishing a curfew prohibiting juveniles from remaining idly and
purposelessly on the public streets late at night or during regularly scheduled
school hours. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.020: DEFINITIONS:
   CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise
or otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from
such parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor.
   EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and
immediately seek to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury,
criminal or potentially criminal activity, fire, or other accident and shall
include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response
personnel or the purchase of medications.
   MINOR: Any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed
forces of the United States who is under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PUBLIC PLACES: Any place open to the public, whether publicly or privately
owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and
exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores, or places
of entertainment. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.030: DAYTIME CURFEW FOR JUVENILES UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under eighteen (18) years of age, who is
enrolled in any public or private school, alternative education program or is
otherwise subject to compulsory education, to loiter on, remain upon, or wander
in or upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys, roads, highways, parks,
playgrounds, public buildings, public places, or any dwelling not their current
residence within Farr West City, between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:
30) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on any day that school is in session for
that juvenile or any day that juvenile would otherwise be required to attend
that school or other educational program. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.040: NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR JUVENILES UNDER SIXTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under sixteen (16) years of age to loiter
on, remain upon, or wander in or upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys,
roads, highways, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, public places, or any
dwelling not their current residence within Farr West City, between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following
morning. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.050: NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR JUVENILES SIXTEEN AND SEVENTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
It shall be unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age
to loiter on, remain upon, or wander in or upon any of the sidewalks, streets,
alleys, roads, highways, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, public places,
or any dwelling not their current residence within Farr West City, between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. (Ord.
2016-08)
9.08.060: PARENTAL LIABILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having care and
custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.070: BUSINESS LIABILITY:
No person owning or operating a "business", as defined by this code, shall
knowingly permit any minor to remain on the premises of such business in
violation of the provisions of this chapter. This section, however, shall not
apply to any minor who is lawfully employed on the premises. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.080: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstance in which the
minor is:
   A.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult having
care and custody of such minor;
   B.   Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment, or occupation, which
requires the minor's presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys, or
public places while working at or traveling to or from such employment;
   C.   Permitted to leave the school campus for lunch, a school sponsored
activity or has in their possession a valid, school issued, off campus permit;
   D.   Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent,
guardian, or other responsible person having care and custody of such minor;
   E.   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in,
traveling through, or ending in Farr West City;
   F.   Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of
residence and a place where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment,
sporting, political, library, or school function is occurring; or
   G.   Within three hundred feet (300') of the minor's place of residence.
(Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.090: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to arrest and/or citation.
   B.   Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent,
guardian, or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person charged
with the care and custody of a minor who is in violation of this chapter to
knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor within a reasonable
time after being ordered to do so by a peace officer. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
9.08.100: PENALTY:
   A.   A person convicted of a first time violation of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction.
   B.   A person who has previously been convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 01-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 9.12
PUBLIC NUDITY
SECTION:
9.12.010: Purpose
9.12.020: Definitions
9.12.030: Unlawful Acts
9.12.040: Saving Clause
9.12.050: Penalty
9.12.010: PURPOSE:
The Farr West City council finds that public nudity is detrimental to the
health, welfare and morals of the city and seeks to inhibit and reduce those
detrimental effects by the enactment and enforcement of local ordinances
prohibiting public nudity. (Ord. 02-05 § 1)
9.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words will have the following meanings,
unless the context requires otherwise:
   KNOWINGLY: To have actual or constructive knowledge of the contents of the
subject matter. A person has constructive knowledge if a reasonable inspection
under the circumstances would have disclosed the nature of the subject matter
and if the failure to inspect is for the purpose of avoiding such disclosure.
Knowledge of the obscene nature of material shall be presumed when a person
fails to inspect materials after receiving a complaint as to the obscene nature
thereof.
   NUDE OR NUDITY: Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered buttocks, human
genitals, pubic areas, the human female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state or in a condition of sexual excitement. For purposes of this
definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple and the
areola only are covered.
   PERSON: Shall not be limited to individuals only but shall include public
and private corporations, firms, joint associations, partnerships and the like.
The word "person" as used herein, shall apply to a natural person and shall
apply equally to the male and female genders.
   PUBLIC PLACE: A place accessible or visible to any member of the public or
to casual passersby; or any place where a fee or charge is made for entrance or
membership, however designated, notwithstanding its designation as a private
club or by words of like import.
   WILFULLY: Simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or to omit an
act referred to herein. (Ord. 02-05 § 1)
9.12.030: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
The following acts are hereby declared to be unlawful if done in any public
place:
   A.   To knowingly or wilfully appear in the nude in public or in such a
manner that the nude body is exposed to the view of other persons.
   B.   To expose one's private parts or go nude, or topless (if female) or
bottomless in any public place or to procure, counsel, or assist any other
person to so expose themselves. (Ord. 02-05 § 1)
9.12.040: SAVING CLAUSE:
In the event any word, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be
found to be unconstitutional, it shall not affect the constitutionality or
enforceability of the remainder of this chapter which is not specifically found
unconstitutional. (Ord. 02-05 § 1)
9.12.050: PENALTY:
   A.   A person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction.
   B.   A person who has previously been convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 02-05 § 1)
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 10.04
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
SECTION:
10.04.010: Definitions
10.04.020: Traffic Code Adopted
10.04.030: Citation To Code
10.04.040: Prima Facie Speed; Posted Streets
10.04.050: Negligently Colliding
10.04.060: Duty To Keep Proper Lookout
10.04.070: Traffic Control
10.04.080: Unlawful Parking; Impoundment
10.04.090: Prohibited Maintenance On Street
10.04.100: Vehicles For Sale
10.04.110: Registration Of Vehicle Required
10.04.120: Loading Zone
10.04.130: Parking Of Heavy Duty Vehicles
10.04.140: Persons Blocking Streets Or Highways
10.04.150: Use Of Dynamic Braking Devices Prohibited
10.04.160: Littering
10.04.170: Violation; Penalty
10.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
   HIGHWAY OR STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part of it is open to the public, as a matter
of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: A self-propelled vehicle intended primarily for use and
operation on the highways.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   OPERATE: To drive or to be in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street, in
which structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses are situated
at intervals of one hundred feet (100') or less, for a distance of a quarter of
a mile or more.
   VEHICLE: Includes any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, off highway
vehicle, watercraft, manufactured home, and mobile home. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.020: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   The provisions of title 41 entitled, "Motor Vehicles", as set forth in
the "Utah criminal and traffic code", 1998 edition, and subsequent editions, as
compiled, prepared and published in book form by the Utah department of public
safety, are approved and adopted as the traffic code for Farr West City.
   B.   Whenever the context so indicates or requires, the name of Farr West
City or any of its agencies or offices shall be used in place of any state
agencies or offices used in the "Utah criminal and traffic code", 1998 edition,
to the extent necessary to implement the intent of adopting the traffic code as
referred to herein. Those provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 41, as
amended, which are reserved exclusively to the state of Utah, counties of the
state of Utah or cities of the first or second class of the state of Utah are
not adopted. Only those provisions which come within the jurisdiction of cities
of the third class or the jurisdiction of the justice court of Farr West City
are adopted and incorporated by reference. All general definitions and general
provisions, which are not contrary to other parts of this chapter, are adopted
and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.030: CITATION TO CODE:
Where a citation, complaint or information is issued, it shall be sufficient to
use the number of the Utah code. Citations, complaints or information issued
for violations of this chapter which are not contained in Utah Code Annotated
title 41, as amended, shall reference the section of this chapter which has
been violated. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.040: PRIMA FACIE SPEED; POSTED STREETS:
   A.   When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs giving notice of
speeds are posted, the prima facie maximum speed limits designated upon such
signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions of streets so posted.
   B.   In the absence of any speed limit sign in an urban district designating
a speed limit applicable thereto, the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty
five (25) miles per hour. In the absence of any speed limit signposted in any
other city street, the prima facie speed limit shall be thirty five (35) miles
per hour.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in excess of the
posted speed limits or, in the absence of posted speed limits, in excess of the
prima facie speed limits established by this chapter. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.050: NEGLIGENTLY COLLIDING:
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care and in such
negligent manner as to cause the same to collide with any vehicle, person or
object. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.060: DUTY TO KEEP PROPER LOOKOUT:
No person shall drive a vehicle on the streets of this city without keeping a
reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic, people, objects, fixtures or
property thereon or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.070: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Compliance With State Traffic Manual: The traffic control and
regulation of all public streets under the authority and control of the city
shall be as posted, regulated or controlled by appropriate traffic control
devices, signs or other regulatory devices or controls. All traffic control
devices, signs or other regulatory devices shall conform with latest edition of
the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways" as
promulgated or adopted by the state of Utah.
   B.   City To Place Traffic Control Devices: The city shall place and
maintain all traffic control devices required to implement the provisions of
this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as the city may deem necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic under
the ordinances of this city. In addition to such traffic control devices, the
city is authorized, subject to provisions and limitations of this chapter and
after a comprehensive study, to place and maintain appropriate signs or traffic
markings to indicate standing or parking regulations.
   C.   Obedience To Traffic Signs And Signals: These traffic markings shall
designate the zones and shall have the meanings herein set forth:
      1.   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time.
      2.   Yellow, with the words "Restricted Zone" stenciled thereon, shall
mean no stopping, standing or parking except as stated on the signs or markings
giving notice thereof, except that this provision shall not apply on Sundays
and legal holidays.
   D.   Obedience To Curb Markings And Posted Signs: When appropriate signs or
traffic curb markings have been erected or placed according to this section, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any zone in violation of any of
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.080: UNLAWFUL PARKING; IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Parking At Curb: No vehicle trailer shall be parked with the left side
of the vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It is unlawful to
stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and
with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the
regularly established curb line except on those streets which have been marked
for angle parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks.
   B.   Parking Limit; Impoundment Authorized: It is unlawful for any person to
park or leave standing on any public road, street or municipal property any
vehicle for forty eight (48) or more consecutive hours. The owner of any such
vehicle may be cited for a violation of this section and the vehicle may be
removed or impounded. For the purposes of impoundment or removal, the city,
after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner of the vehicle, may cause
the vehicle to be removed or impounded. The cost for removal or impoundment
shall be charged to the owner or any person claiming the vehicle.
   C.   Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such manner
or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet (10') of the width of
the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   D.   Prohibited Times: It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on
any public street in the city between December 1 and March 1 between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. the following day,
or until the street has been plowed after a measurable snowfall.
   E.   Restricted Parking: It is unlawful for any person, except physicians on
emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles when properly posted, to park
any vehicle on any street in violation of the posted restrictions. It is
unlawful to park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to any fire
station or other place where fire apparatus is stored, or within five feet (5')
of any fire hydrant or cistern.
   F.   Traffic Allowance: It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle
upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than twenty feet (20') of the width of the roadway for free movement of
vehicular traffic. (Ord. 10-05: Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.090: PROHIBITED MAINTENANCE ON STREET:
It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any public street for the
purpose of repairing, painting, lubricating or performing any type of routine
or preventative maintenance on such vehicle. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.100: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
   A.   Public Street Or Property: It shall be unlawful to leave or park a
motor vehicle, boat, and/or trailer upon any public street or public property
for the purpose of: 1) displaying such vehicle, boat and/or trailer for sale or
2) using such vehicle and/or trailer to sell merchandise or services or
advertise items for sale.
   B.   Private Property: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor
vehicle, boat, and/or trailer to park it, or allow it to be parked, on property
owned by another person for the purpose of displaying it for sale, unless the
owner of the vehicle has written permission from the landowner. It shall also
be unlawful for the owner or lessee of such property to have or allow more than
two (2) vehicles, boats, and/or trailers at a time on his/her property for the
purpose of displaying them for sale. Vehicles for sale, other than those owned
by the property owner, shall not be parked on any private property for more
than one week. (Ord. 2016-09)
10.04.110: REGISTRATION OF VEHICLE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any public street unless
the vehicle is properly registered and the current plate decal is properly
displayed. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.120: LOADING ZONE:
When so posted, it is unlawful for the driver of a passenger vehicle to stand
or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is permitted by the
posted sign for the loading or unloading of passengers, or for the driver to
stand or park any freight carrying motor vehicle for a period of time longer
than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials in any place designated
as a loading zone and marked as such. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.130: PARKING OF HEAVY DUTY VEHICLES:
   A.   Weight, Length And Time Restrictions: The driver of a vehicle having a
total gross weight, loaded or unloaded, in excess of fifty thousand (50,000)
pounds or having a total length in excess of twenty four feet (24') from the
most forward point of the vehicle or its load to the most rear point of said
vehicle or its load, shall not park such vehicle or allow it to stand upon the
city streets for longer than two (2) hours.
   B.   Determination Of Weight And/Or Length: In determining the total gross
weight or total length as provided in subsection A of this section, the length
or weight of the trailer connected or attached to or in tandem with the motor
vehicle, shall also be included in making such determination. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.140: PERSONS BLOCKING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
In addition to the parking provisions contained in the Utah traffic code, as
adopted by this municipality, it is unlawful for any person to: a) remain
standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a manner as to
obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon; b)
wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such
manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any police
officer; or c) wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to
obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property
having access to such street or highway. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.150: USE OF DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   "Dynamic braking device" (commonly referred to as a jacob or jacob's
brake, engine brake or compression brake), means a device used primarily on
trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to
an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle with a dynamic
braking device engaged, except for the aversion of imminent danger, within the
Farr West City limits. Firetrucks and other emergency vehicles shall be exempt
from the prohibitions of this section. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.160: LITTERING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or discard, or to
permit to be dropped, thrown, deposited or discarded upon any public highway,
street, park, waterway or other public or private land, any glass, metal,
paper, trash, debris, garbage, refuse or any other injurious, destructive or
unsightly material without the permission of the landowner or person having
control or custody of the land.
   B.   Any person who throws, deposits or discards, or permits to be dropped,
thrown, deposited or discarded upon any public highway, street, park, waterway
or other public or private land, any glass, metal, paper, trash, debris,
garbage, refuse or any other injurious, destructive or unsightly material
shall:
      1.   Immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed; and
      2.   Deposit the material in a receptacle or area designed to receive the
material. (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
10.04.170: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of Utah Code Annotated title 41,
as amended, except for the provisions in article 6 of chapter 6, shall be
guilty of the offenses as described therein.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision
of Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 6, article 6, as amended, is guilty of
an infraction and is subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 98-15 § 2)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 12.04
EXCAVATIONS AND TUNNELS
SECTION:
12.04.010: Purpose
12.04.020: Scope
12.04.030: Permit Application
12.04.040: Plans And Drawings
12.04.050: Bonding And Permit Fee
12.04.060: Permit Issuance
12.04.070: Site Inspection
12.04.080: Commencement Of Work
12.04.090: Transfer Of Work
12.04.100: Successors And Assigns
12.04.110: Liability For Damages
12.04.120: Time Limitations
12.04.130: Protection Of The Public
12.04.140: Removal Of Roadway Materials
12.04.150: Protection Of Paved Surfaces
12.04.160: Backfill
12.04.170: Restoration Of Road Surfaces
12.04.180: Cleanup
12.04.190: Inspections
12.04.200: Existing Utilities
12.04.210: Enforcement
12.04.220: Violation; Penalty
12.04.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these specifications is to provide for the proper repair and
replacement of excavations across and/or along city street rights of way where
necessary crossings must be made, thus promoting the safety and health of those
persons using and traveling the rights of way. (Ord. 81-6 § 1)
12.04.020: SCOPE:
These specifications are intended to cover all excavation permits issued by the
city of Farr West for such items as gas mains and lateral connections, sewer
mains and lateral connections, water mains and lateral connections, underground
power and/or communication cables, irrigation facilities and storm drain or
subdrain systems. (Ord. 81-6 § 2)
12.04.030: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Any and all applications for excavation permits shall be made with the city
recorder, on standard forms prepared by her. The building inspector will have
authority to grant or deny the application of any person or contractor in all
instances where it would not be in the best interest of Farr West City, and the
highways thereof, if such excavation is made, and in all instances where the
applicant has at any prior time failed and refused to comply with these
specifications placed into effect by Farr West City. (Ord. 81-6 § 3)
12.04.040: PLANS AND DRAWINGS:
As a part of the permit application and prior to the issuing of the permit,
adequate engineering drawings shall be submitted to the building inspector for
determining the extent of work to be done. These drawings should be prepared by
a competent engineer and should show the following information:
   A.   Plans and profiles, where gradient lines are involved;
   B.   Elevations (assumed or local sea level datum) showing depth of
pipelines, and in the case of irrigation and drainage facilities, relationship
of existing flow lines, etc.;
   C.   Scale of drawings;
   D.   Location of excavation from nearest street intersection and street
numbers thereof;
   E.   Title block;
   F.   Applicant's name;
   G.   Name of person preparing the drawings;
   H.   Pipeline sizes and dimensions of structures. (Ord. 81-6 § 4)
12.04.050: BONDING AND PERMIT FEE:
   A.   Bond; Amount: The applicant and/or his contractor, if any, will present
a bond, as prescribed in the fee schedule (see title 3, chapter 3.30 of this
code), to the building inspector as a guarantee that work will be done in
accordance with these specifications. Each bond will be kept in escrow for the
duration of the maintenance period (1 year) as provided by this chapter, at
which time it shall be returned to the proper person or persons, less any
necessary claims made against the bond during this period.
   B.   Franchises Excepted: Any public utility operating or using any of the
streets under a franchise from the city will not be required to furnish such
bond, providing such franchise obligates the holder thereof to restore the
streets and to hold the city harmless in the event of an injury to any person
or damage to any property due to negligence of such holder in conducting
excavation operations under such franchise.
   C.   Fee: A permit fee as prescribed in the fee schedule will be collected
for each permit, and receipt for same given by the building inspector. (Ord.
2012-02: Ord. 81-6 § 5)
12.04.060: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   The excavation permit will be issued following the approval of the
plans and drawings and the posting of the bond, if required.
   B.   The permit will be made in duplicate on standard form prepared by the
building inspector, with the original going to the applicant, and one copy
retained by the building inspector. (Ord. 81-6 § 6)
12.04.070: SITE INSPECTION:
Prior to commencement of any work, as provided in the excavation permit, a
preappointed site inspection shall be made by the applicant and/or his
contractor and the building inspector. (Ord. 81-6 § 7)
12.04.080: COMMENCEMENT OF WORK:
No work shall begin until the site inspection has been made and authority to
proceed has been granted by a duly authorized agent of the city. The applicant
and/or his contractor shall be familiar with the specifications and shall have
his copy of the excavation permit available at the job site at all times during
construction. (Ord. 81-6 § 8)
12.04.090: TRANSFER OF WORK:
The work described in the application and authorized by the permit will not be
transferable by the originator to any others, by means of subcontractors,
without prior approval of the building inspector. (Ord. 81-6 § 9)
12.04.100: SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS:
All covenants and agreements to these specifications, herein made a part of the
excavation permit, shall be binding upon the parties thereto, their successors
and assigns. (Ord. 81-6 § 10)
12.04.110: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
   A.   City Held Harmless: Farr West City and its employees and the Farr West
City council shall be free and harmless from any and all damages that may occur
during the operations under any and all permits. The applicant and/or his or
her contractor by signing the application, agrees to assume any and all civil
liability which may arise as a result of any operations under the permit, and
will assume full responsibility for any injury caused to the city or to third
persons as a result of a rise or settling in that portion of the roadway which
they worked on.
   B.   Bond Approval: No permit shall be issued to a person or contractor who
is unable to furnish the proper and necessary bond to cover the cost of
construction, replacement, maintenance, and liabilities which might occur as a
result of the work authorized by the permit.
   C.   Adherence To Permit Terms: In no case will any work be performed other
than that specified in the application and permit.
   D.   Costs Related To Pipeline Disturbances: Pipelines installed under the
permit shall at all times be maintained, repaired, renewed and operated by and
at the expense of the applicant in such a manner as shall most suitably protect
the city street and the traffic thereon. If the applicant, upon notification by
the city fails to reconstruct or make necessary repairs to the pipelines as may
be considered necessary by the city, the city reserves the right to contract a
third party to do the necessary repairs and/or reconstruction. The applicant
will make reimbursement to the city for such repairs and/or reconstruction.
   E.   City Right And Responsibility: The city shall have the right to cross
any pipelines at any point, if necessary, in the future construction and
expansion of the city street system. The city, however, shall use due care and
diligence in the protection of the pipelines in making such crossings. (Ord.
81-6 § 11)
12.04.120: TIME LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Completion Period: The completion time will be specified on the permit
by the building inspector, and in all events shall be completed within thirty
(30) days from the issuance date of the permit. Requests for extension of time,
together with reasons therefor, will be submitted to the building inspector for
approval.
   B.   Maintenance Period: The applicant will maintain and be responsible for
the place of excavation for a period of two (2) years from date of completion.
Should the applicant within two (2) years receive notice from the city that the
place of excavation needs attention, he or she shall immediately place
necessary barricades and warnings to protect the traveling public, and shall
within seven (7) days' time make the necessary repairs. Failure to do so will
cause the city to employ a third party contractor to make the repairs, and the
building inspector will be authorized to submit a claim for payment of the
repairs on the applicant's bond, unless inclement weather or unavailability of
materials prevents so doing. (Ord. 81-6 § 12)
12.04.130: PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC:
   A.   Signs: Information and warning signs, portable or semiportable, will be
provided at the place of excavation to inform and warn the public. The name of
the applicant and/or his or her contractor shall appear on the signs, together
with telephone numbers, to permit sheriff's patrols, inspectors and others to
call responsible individuals in cases of accidents, injuries, malfunction of
lights, or similar reasons.
   B.   Barricades: All barricades, obstructions and soft shoulders shall be
marked in a conspicuous manner.
   C.   Lights: Adequate warning lights will be used between sunset and
sunrise.
   D.   Detours: Safe and proper detours will be provided and maintained during
construction. If detours are necessary, notification at least twenty four (24)
hours in advance will be given to the building inspector, who in turn will
notify all local agencies using the city streets.
   E.   Flaggers: Flaggers will be provided where free flow of traffic is
interfered with. On major city streets advance warning signs advising of the
presence of flagmen will be posted in both directions. The flaggers will be
equipped with plainly visible flags.
   F.   Notification Of Road Closure: Where it becomes necessary to close a
road for any period of time, the applicant will notify the building inspector
at least twenty four (24) hours in advance, who in turn will notify the city
police, fire department, school buses, postal department, and other local
agencies using the road.
   G.   Maintenance: The place of excavation shall be maintained at all times
in such a manner as to cause the least amount of inconvenience to the public.
(Ord. 81-6 § 13)
12.04.140: REMOVAL OF ROADWAY MATERIALS:
   A.   Work Standards And Materials: Roadway materials will consist of
concrete, bituminous asphalt, or base and surface gravel. All solid materials
shall be cut vertically along the lines forming the trench in such a manner as
to not damage the adjoining pavement. The portion to be removed shall be broken
up in a manner that will not cause damage to the pavement outside the limits of
the trench; however, any pavement, damaged by operations outside the limits of
the trench shall be replaced in kind.
   B.   Recycling Allowed: All road base and surface gravel may be set aside
and reused, but in all cases must be replaced in kind. (Ord. 81-6 § 14)
12.04.150: PROTECTION OF PAVED SURFACES:
No cleated track equipment will be allowed to operate on, or across, paved
surfaces unless protective padding is used. Street padded or rubber tired
equipment may be used for excavating and backfilling. The applicant, and/or his
or her contractor will be fully responsible for any damage to seal coats, or
other wearing surfaces. (Ord. 81-6 § 15)
12.04.160: BACKFILL:
Materials for backfill will be of select nature. All broken concrete, asphalt,
peat, brush, weeds, roots, wood or similar unsuitable materials obtained from
excavation will not be used as backfill material. All material immediately
below, around and one foot (1') above any pipeline shall be free from rocks,
boulders or other foreign materials. All trenches within shoulders or traveled
sections of the roadway will be thoroughly compacted in layers not over twelve
inches (12") loose measure in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by
mechanical tampers or similar means. Backfill materials will have the correct
moisture content to ensure proper compaction. Jetting or internal vibrating
methods of compacting sand fill, or similar methods of compacting sand or other
granular free draining materials will be permitted. (Ord. 81-6 § 16)
12.04.170: RESTORATION OF ROAD SURFACES:
All road surfacing which is removed in the performance of the work as
authorized under the permit must be restored in kind by the applicant and/or
his or her contractor, unless otherwise directed, in accordance with these
specifications governing the various types of surfaces involved. Restoration of
concrete and asphalt surface excavations shall be completed as soon as
practicable, and in the manner specified herein:
   A.   Concrete Surfacing: After thorough compaction of the backfill materials
in the trench, a twelve inch (12") minimum compact thickness, of approved
crushed gravel or rock will be provided as a base for the concrete replacement.
The gravel subbase shall be sprinkled just before placing the concrete. Joints
and surfaces shall be made to match the original surfaces. The thickness of
concrete shall be equal to the adjacent concrete but in no case less than six
inches (6") thick. Concrete will meet specifications of a six (6) bag mix with
from three percent (3%) to five percent (5%) air entrainment. The replaced
concrete shall be allowed a twelve (12) hour minimum setting and airing period.
During this time the newly placed concrete will be barricaded and traffic
detoured around the site. If no side areas are available for detours, the above
procedure may be applied to half the width of the street at a time.
   B.   Asphalt Surfacing: After compacting to ninety five percent (95%) of the
backfill materials in the trench, a twelve inch (12") minimum compacted
thickness of approved crushed gravel will be provided as a base in all
excavations larger than eighteen inches (18") in width and thirty six inches
(36") in depth. An additional three inches (3"), compacted thickness, of
asphalt hot plant mix will be used as specified in the city standard.
   C.   Gravel: Trenches excavated through gravel surfaced areas (e.g.,
traveled roads, driveways, shoulders, etc.) shall have the gravel surface
restored to the original thickness, and in no case less than twelve inches
(12"). (Ord. 81-6 § 17)
12.04.180: CLEANUP:
   A.   At the completion of work at the place of excavation all equipment,
barricades, signs an similar items will be removed from the right of way. All
excess materials such as rocks, boulders, brush, trees, dirt, gravel, etc.,
will be removed. Adjacent borrow pits and road shoulders shall be smoothed and
raked to original ground lines.
   B.   Any city street facility such as signs, culverts, fences, etc.,
disturbed or damaged during progress of the work shall be properly restored to
their original condition. (Ord. 81-6 § 18)
12.04.190: INSPECTIONS:
Inspections will be made to ensure that all work done under the permit is
performed in a good, workmanlike manner. Inspections will be made by the
building inspector or his or her duly authorized representative.
   A.   Preconstruction Inspection: Prior to commencement of work, no work
shall begin until the city representative has inspected the place of
excavation. When application of permit is filed the applicant and/or his or her
contractor will make an appointment for this inspection.
   B.   Periodic Inspections: The building inspector, or his or her duly
authorized representative may make inspections at any time during the
construction period. If the work is not progressing satisfactorily for the
protection of the city and the people of the city, or if any part of the work
is found to be substandard and not in accordance with the specifications, then
the inspector will notify the person or persons responsible. If corrective
action is not taken, the building inspector shall be authorized to employ a
third party contractor to finish the work in a good, workmanlike manner, and
any and all costs and expenses for same shall be immediately paid by the
applicant to Farr West City, or a claim will be made on the applicant's bond,
at the building inspector's option.
   C.   Final Inspection: The applicant and/or his or her contractor will
notify the building inspector when he or she has completed his or her work. He
or she will request a final inspection of the place of excavation. Such final
inspection will be made by the building inspector, or his or her duly
authorized representative. (Ord. 81-6 § 19)
12.04.200: EXISTING UTILITIES:
   A.   General:
      1.   A "utility" is defined as an irrigation canal, irrigation ditch,
drain ditch, pipeline, culvert, easement, franchise or right of way owned by
any person, group of persons, religious orders, corporations, municipalities or
towns, which crosses or parallels, over or under a city street right of way,
said right of way being established by formal conveyance or as a result of long
accustomed use.
      2.   Existing utilities shall apply to all public and privately owned
utilities.
   B.   Crossing Over Or Under: Any changes in designed grades made necessary
by having to cross over or under an existing utility will be approved by the
building inspector. The applicant will assume perpetual responsibility for
maintenance of outfall ditches or other problems which may be caused by
irregular crossings over and/or under existing utilities.
   C.   Relocation:
      1.   Any person owning, managing or operating a utility within, under,
along, over or across a city street right of way, shall hereafter have full
responsibility for the repair, replacement or relocation of the utility where
same is damaged, or a relocation is needed as a result of reconstruction or
realignment of the city street, by the city road department.
      2.   Any relocation of existing facilities made necessary by work
performed under an authorized excavation permit, shall be done at the sole
expense of the applicant and/or his or her contractor. The owner of the utility
to be relocated will be contacted by the applicant and/or his or her
contractor, and approval of the owner must be obtained before any relocation
work is performed.
   D.   Damage And Repair: Damages may be caused accidentally or of necessity.
All repairs to the damages will be made by the applicant and/or his or her
contractor in a good workmanlike manner, and the utility shall be restored to
its original state of serviceability at no expense to the owner of the utility
or to Farr West City. All repairs are subject to final approval of the utility,
and the approval shall be given before backfilling or covering of the repaired
section is accomplished. (Ord. 81-6 § 20)
   E.   Prior to work beginning, the applicant must locate and inspect, or
cause to be inspected, all sewer laterals and storm drains in the work area.
The applicant must document the condition of the condition of the sewer
laterals and storm drains in a manner that is acceptable to the City. The
manner of proof required by the City may include video camera footage, verified
photos, visual inspection, or other means of proof as determined by the City.
   F.   The applicant and/or his or her contractor shall provide proof to the
City in a manner satisfactory to the City that no other utilities were damaged,
impaired, or compromised during any activity of the applicant and/or his or her
contractor or that any damage has been appropriately repaired. The manner of
proof required by the City may include video camera footage, verified photos,
visual inspection, or other means of proof as determined by the City. (Ord.
2023-10; Ord. 81-6 § 20)
12.04.210: ENFORCEMENT:
The offices of the Farr West building inspector, city marshal, and city
attorney are each authorized, individually or collectively, to take any and all
action as may be necessary to ensure and enforce compliance with these
specifications. (Ord. 81-6 § 21)
12.04.220: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as is
prescribed by law. (Ord. 81-6 § 22)
CHAPTER 12.08
CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
12.08.010: Determination Of Necessity For Repairs
12.08.020: Responsibilities
12.08.030: Cost
12.08.040: Maintenance Responsibility
12.08.050: Unpaid Assessments
12.08.010: DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY FOR REPAIRS:
The mayor, building inspector, and maintenance personnel in consultation with
the council member in charge of the street department, shall determine when
curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk situated anywhere within the corporate limits of
Farr West City is unsafe, unsightly, or in general need of repair and whether
there is a "responsible party", which means a property owner, a utility
company, or any contractor or subcontractor or their agents. No repairs or
replacement of curb, gutter, or sidewalks shall be made without city approval.
(Ord. 2014-01)
12.08.020: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   After a determination has been made that repairs to curb, gutter or
sidewalk are required due to damage caused by a responsible party, the city
shall notify the responsible party of the required repairs. The responsible
party may make the necessary repairs or request that the city supply the labor
and materials to make the repairs. The city shall repair or patch any asphalt
road surface adjacent to the curb, gutter, and sidewalk.
   B.   Before any repair or replacement of curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk is
made, the responsible party shall contact the city for an inspection. The
repair or replacement shall be completed or a planned date approved by the city
within thirty (30) calendar days of the inspection. If the city determines a
hazardous condition exists, the repairs shall be made immediately. After thirty
(30) calendar days, if the city has determined that an unsafe or unsightly
condition exists, the city may repair or replace the curb, gutter, and/or
sidewalk and assess the responsible party. (Ord. 2014-01)
12.08.030: COST:
   A.   A responsible party who causes damage to curbs, gutters and sidewalks,
including damage caused by any shrubs or trees, shall be responsible for all
costs of repair or replacement due to said damage.
   B.   Damage caused by neglect, age or normal wear and tear shall be the
responsibility of the city. (Ord. 2014-01)
12.08.040: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property abutting a
street to clean and maintain sidewalks, and curb and gutter.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor, or agent of any
property abutting a street to fail to remove, or have removed from such
sidewalk, all hail, snow, or sleet thereon within twenty four (24) hours after
such snow, hail, or sleet has fallen.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person removing snow from the sidewalk or
driveway or other areas, to deposit or blow snow, dirt, leaves, or any other
material into the street. Nor shall any of these materials be deposited in the
gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of water.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying, or having control of
any premises to place, or permit to be placed upon any sidewalk, parking area
or gutter any material which could be considered hazardous to pedestrians,
animals, or vehicle traffic, or in any way obstruct the flow of traffic or
drainage. Sidewalk maintenance shall include maintaining clearances of seven
feet (7') overhead and one foot (1') to either side of a paved sidewalk,
including sprinkler heads or other permanent objects above the sidewalk surface
level.
   E.   Failure to comply with this section and the city determines an unsafe
condition exists, the city may take remedial action and assess the property
owner.
   F.   Residents and business owners who have a fire hydrant on or near their
property are encouraged to keep the hydrant free from accumulations of snow,
ice and other debris which might interfere with the access to or use of the
hydrant. (Ord. 2014-01)
12.08.050: UNPAID ASSESSMENTS:
All costs assessed by Farr West City for curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk repair,
replacement or maintenance shall be paid by December 31 of the year assessed.
Any unpaid assessments may be attached to the property owner's tax assessment
in the following year. (Ord. 2014-01)
CHAPTER 12.12
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CITY PARKS
SECTION:
12.12.010: Applicability Of Provisions
12.12.020: Hours Designated
12.12.030: Riding Or Driving Off Roadways Prohibited
12.12.040: Trailer Parking Prohibited
12.12.050: Overnight Camping Or Sleeping In Park Prohibited
12.12.060: Going Barefoot Prohibited
12.12.070: Hitching Horse Prohibited
12.12.080: Damaging Or Picking Grass Or Plants Prohibited
12.12.090: Alcohol; Vandalism; Animals Running At Large
12.12.100: Meeting Or Entertainment; Permit Required
12.12.110: Fireworks
12.12.120: Littering Prohibited
12.12.130: Violation; Penalty
12.12.140: Additional Rules Applicable To Smith Family Park
12.12.010: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any public
officer or employee while acting within the scope of his/her employment.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public parks,
cemeteries and other public grounds within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.020: HOURS DESIGNATED:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer
on duty, or a public employee or City officer in the discharge of official
duties, to be in or about any park within the corporate limits of the City
between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise.
   B.   Exception: Participation in, or attendance at a City authorized
sporting event or other City authorized event, or in connection with a City
approved reservation of park facilities by an individual or group. (Ord. 18-08)
12.12.030: RIDING OR DRIVING OFF ROADWAYS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any motorized vehicle or
similar device, or any horse or animal in or about any park within the
corporate limits of the City, except upon roadways and/or other designated
areas lawfully established for that purpose. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.040: TRAILER PARKING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to park or stop any trailer at any place within a park except
for such time as may be reasonably required to load or unload any property from
such trailer. Stock trailers are allowed in designated areas only. (Ord. 2015-
11)
12.12.050: OVERNIGHT CAMPING OR SLEEPING IN PARK PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to camp or sleep overnight in any park, cemetery
or other public area. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.060: GOING BAREFOOT PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to be in or about any park unless such person is
wearing shoes or similar foot covering. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.070: HITCHING HORSE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to hitch or fasten any horse or other animal to
any tree, shrub, fountain, monument lamppost or any other ornament situated in
any park. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.080: DAMAGING OR PICKING GRASS OR PLANTS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully damage or injure any grass, plant,
tree or shrub within any park, or to play or practice golf or similar game on
any such park. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.090: ALCOHOL; VANDALISM; ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession or to consume any
alcohol or alcoholic beverage, or to scratch, cut, injure or deface, or write
upon any of the buildings, fences or structures or to befoul any of the
fountains, streams or improvements within such parks, or for the owners or
person in charge of any dog or other animal to permit such dog or other animal
to run at large within such park. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.100: MEETING OR ENTERTAINMENT; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person or organization to hold a meeting, gathering,
musical, theatrical or other entertainment in any park without first obtaining
a permit therefor which shall set forth the name, address, telephone number,
length of the proposed event and such other information and uniform regulation
as the City shall from time to time prescribe. Groups of seventy five (75) or
more will be required to pay a nonrefundable fee. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.110: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any
firearm, firecracker, fireworks or explosives within any park.
   B.   Exception: In the case of a City sponsored event, the City shall have
the right to have fireworks as long as the proper steps have been taken and the
fire protection providers have been notified. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.120: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to litter any park, or to leave or deposit any
garbage, junk or refuse of any kind, other than in receptacles provided for
that purpose. Except in arenas and pens where horses and other livestock are
permitted, animal owners must clean up and remove any animal waste. (Ord. 2015-
11)
12.12.130: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor and may
be punished as provided by law. (Ord. 2015-11)
12.12.140: ADDITIONAL RULES APPLICABLE TO SMITH FAMILY PARK:
   A.   Rules And Regulations: In addition to the rules in sections
12.12.010 through
12.12.130 of this chapter which are applicable to all City parks, the following
rules and regulations in this section shall apply to the Smith Family Park:
      1.   No golfing permitted anywhere in the Smith Family Park.
      2.   No horses or motorized vehicles permitted on trails.
      3.   Horses must be kept in designated areas only.
      4.   Dogs must be kept on a leash.
      5.   No skateboarding.
   B.   Riding Arena:
      1.   No keeping livestock overnight.
      2.   Horses must be kept in designated areas only and may not be left
unattended.
      3.   No climbing on or hitching animals to fencing.
      4.   No horses in arena while tractor is in use.
      5.   No glass containers permitted in the arena.
      6.   No horses or motorized vehicles except in designated areas.
      7.   Cleaning of livestock trailers anywhere in the park is prohibited.
      8.   Only authorized personnel allowed in announcer's booth.
      9.   Only authorized City personnel permitted to groom arena.
      10.   No rough stock permitted.
   C.   Fishing Pond:
      1.   Fishing must be done from the shore in designated areas only.
      2.   Fishing permitted in accordance with Utah Division of Wildlife
Resources rules and regulations.
      3.   Fishing permitted during park hours only.
      4.   No cleaning of fish in restrooms or other areas of the park.
      5.   No swimming or wading.
      6.   No boats, float tubes, flotation devices or other watercraft are
permitted on the fishing pond.
      7.   No ice skating or ice fishing.
      8.   Radio controlled watercraft are permitted on the pond subject to the
following rules:
         a.   Only watercraft less than four feet (4') in length are permitted
on the fishing pond.
         b.   Motors must be 2-stroke gasoline, 4-stroke gasoline or electric.
Internal combustion motors that are primarily designed to burn Methyl Alcohol
(Methanol) and/or Nitromethane (commonly referred to as "Nitro" motors), are
prohibited.
         c.   Radio controlled watercraft are permitted on the pond during the
hours between 12:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. each day the park is open.
         d.   All persons, including persons operating radio controlled boats
must remain on shore and are not permitted to enter the water for any reason,
including to retrieve a disabled watercraft. Disabled watercraft may only be
retrieved using permitted radio controlled watercraft or other methods which
allow retrieval from shore.
         e.   No city equipment or personnel shall be used to retrieve disabled
watercraft. (Ord. 19-06: Ord. 2019-02)
CHAPTER 12.16
SENIOR CITIZEN CENTER
SECTION:
12.16.010: Rental Fees; Security Deposit
12.16.020: Policies And Rules
12.16.010: RENTAL FEES; SECURITY DEPOSIT:
   A.   Costs Incurred:
      1.   Farr West City provides the ability to rent the Senior Citizen
Center for family type gatherings, nonprofit organizations and youth groups and
the organized senior citizen groups.
      2.   In providing such space for rent the city incurs costs both for the
utilities provided and the cleaning and maintaining of the facilities.
      3.   The city will require a rental fee and cleaning and security deposit
for any person(s) reserving the senior center or any part of it.
   B.   Fees And Deposit:
      1.   The city council deems it necessary to charge the responsible party
a nonrefundable rental fee and deposit as prescribed in the fee schedule (see
title 3, chapter 3.30 of this code).
      2.   The rental fees shall be payable to the city at the time of making
the reservation and the reservation will not be complete until the fee is paid.
      3.   The cleaning and security deposit shall be payable to the city by a
separate form of payment from the rental fees and shall be payable upon picking
up the keys to the facilities.
   C.   Cleaning And Security Deposit Refund:
      1.   The cleaning and security deposit shall be promptly refunded the
next business day, contingent that the facilities are left clean and neat,
garbage has been taken out, items used have been put back in place or returned,
no damages have occurred, refrigerator has been emptied, nothing has been lost
or stolen and all keys have been returned.
      2.   Any costs exceeding the cleaning and security deposit shall be
payable by the responsible party including legal and collection fees.
   D.   Time Limit; Additional Charge:
      1.   The city council deems it necessary to allow a maximum hours of
occupancy for rental of any of the facilities not to exceed eight (8) hours and
the facilities must be vacant no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
      2.   The city council deems it necessary to charge an additional amount
(see fee schedule) for every hour that exceeds the eight (8) hour maximum
limit. (Ord. 2012-02: Res. 04-02)
12.16.020: POLICIES AND RULES:
   A.   The Farr West City Senior Center is available for rent to adults age
twenty one (21) years and older. Farr West City reserves the right to deny the
use of the facility to any applicant. In the event that any applicant has paid
the required fees and deposits and the city later revokes the use of the
facility, all fees shall be refunded to the applicant.
   B.   1. Reservations must be made in person by the applicant or by mail. No
telephone reservations will be accepted. All rental fees must be paid when the
application for reservations is submitted to the city recorder. Cleaning and
security deposits must be made at the time of picking up the keys for the
facilities. No reservation will be valid until all rental fees are paid.
Duplicate requests will be given priority on a first come, first fees paid,
basis.
      2.   No individual, group or organization shall be permitted to reserve
and/or use the Farr West City senior center more frequently than two (2)
separate occasions during any calendar month.
   C.   Rental fees for the facility are listed in section
12.16.010 of this chapter and on the application form.
   D.   Cancellations made up to seven (7) days before the reserved date will
entitle the applicant to a full refund of all fees and deposits. For
cancellations made less than seven (7) days before the reserved date, the
applicant will receive a refund of only the cleaning and security deposit.
   E.   1. The building shall be closed and locked, including all doors and
windows, at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. No activities of any kind,
including cleanup, shall be allowed after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
      2.   The Farr West City senior center shall not be available for rent or
use anytime between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Saturday and
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Monday.
   F.   All keys must be returned the next business day following the last
reserved date.
   G.   The facility shall be used as is. Nothing shall be attached in any
manner to the floors, walls, ceilings, windows or doors. The use of pins,
nails, tape or adhesive of any kind on the floors, walls, ceilings, windows or
doors is strictly prohibited. Lighting in the facility shall not be altered in
any way.
   H.   The use of any flammable, toxic or otherwise dangerous or hazardous
materials in the building (other than cleaning chemicals) is strictly
prohibited.
   I.   Smoking and alcoholic beverages in the building are strictly
prohibited. "Red punch" based beverages shall not be allowed in the facility.
   J.   If music or microphones are used, the volume controls must not be
tampered with. They are set at a low level that will not disturb the
neighboring residents. If there are complaints, the music will cease
immediately. Any outside music will cease at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   K.   No furnishings, including, but not limited to, tables and chairs,
microphones and decor shall be removed from the building for any reason.
   L.   The items you might find in the kitchen are not available for your use.
They are for the staff only. You must furnish your own paper goods and
condiments. You must furnish your own tablecloths, dishtowels, kitchen utensils
and serving items, dish soap and any cleaning supplies you may need.
   M.   An adult, at least twenty one (21) years of age or older, shall be
present for all activities.
   N.   All nonprofit organizations, youth groups, etc., must be presented to
the city council for consideration of a reduced rate and will be decided on a
case by case basis.
   O.   The facility shall be cleaned in accordance with the attached cleaning
checklist in order to have the cleaning deposit returned.
   P.   Any problems should be reported immediately to the city office.
   Q.   The applicant shall be personally liable for any damage caused to the
building or surrounding grounds as a result of applicant's activities. The
applicant shall pay for all damages for which the repair and/or cleaning cost
exceeds the amount of the security and/or cleaning deposit as well as legal and
collection fees. (Res. 2004-07: Res. 2004-06: Res. 04-03)
CHAPTER 12.20
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
12.20.010: Purpose
12.20.020: Definitions
12.20.030: Permit Required
12.20.040: Application Requirements and Procedures
12.20.050: Insurance Requirement
12.20.060: Fees
12.20.070: Application Review, Approval and Issuance
12.20.080: Grounds for Denial
12.20.090: Appeal Procedures
12.20.100: Violation
12.20.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the authorization and approval of
temporary Special Events within the city which will enhance the quality of life
for city residents. It is also the city's intent to promote, protect and assure
the safety, public health and convenience of residents and visitors by
regulating large gatherings sufficient to address potential problems which may
occur as a result of the Special Event. It is intended that Special Events do
not create disturbances, become a nuisance, threaten life, health, and
property, disrupt traffic, or threaten or damage public or private property. It
is not the intent of this chapter to regulate in any manner the content of
speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for time, place and
manner regulations. (Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
           The individual event organizer responsible for the event and the payment of fees. If
APPLICANT: an organization, the individual authorized by the organization who is responsible
           for the event and the payment of fees.
ATHLETIC   An organized competitive or recreational event or tournament, in which a group of
EVENT:     people collectively engage in a sport or variety of sports.
CITY       A Special Event that is organized and operated by the city, whether directly or by
EVENT:     contract with a third-party operator. A City Event is not a Special Event.
FILMING    Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news purposes), filming of a motion
EVENT:     picture, television broadcast and other digital media production.
LARGE
SCALE      An event with anticipated attendance of 500 or more people.
EVENT:
OUTDOOR    An organized event in which an individual, group of individuals, or an organization
SALES      engages in the sale of products including, but not limited to, displays and
EVENT:     exhibitions, farmers' markets, craft fairs, boutiques, outdoor sales, tent sales and
           other similar activities.
           A Temporary Event of any of the following or a combination of the following acts:
           A.   Any Athletic Event, entertainment event, fair, parade, carnival, circus, dance,
           musical event, rodeo event, animal event, racing event, live show, fair, concert,
           block party, Filming Event, or Outdoor Sales Event, whether held for profit,
           nonprofit or charitable purposes which is held entirely or partially on public
           property within the city.
           B.   Any organized assemblage at any city park, city facility or other city property
           which gathers for a common purpose or event under the direction and control of a
           person, persons or entity and which uses more services, whether provided by the city
           or a third party, than normally provided to groups which reserve city parks or other
           city-owned facilities.
SPECIAL    C.   Any organized event that will sell merchandise, food or beverage on City
EVENT:     property, will use amplified sound, utilize temporary structures, stages, tents,
           bounce houses, or amusements or requires traffic mitigation or security including
           the placement of "no parking" signs in a public right-of-way.
           D.   Events held at the following are not Special Events under this chapter:
              1.   A building that has a business located in it that has a current annual
           business license as an event business;
              2.   A building with an assembly group classification under the International
           Building Code, as adopted by the city, so long as the event does not exceed the
           posted occupant load as approved by the city and has a current annual business
           license, if required; and
              3.   A government owned facility.
           E.   For purposes of this chapter, City Events are not Special Events, however
           events sponsored by the city may be Special Events.
SPECIAL    A city-issued permit authorizing the applicant to use city-owned property and
EVENT      facilities in connection with a Special Event.
PERMIT:
STANDARD   A Special Event with anticipated attendance of less than 500 people.
EVENT:
TEMPORARY  Any event which occurs on a temporary basis of less than one (1) year at a location
EVENT:     where the applicant does not have an annual business license for the specific
           activities being held. (Ord. 2022-10)
 
12.20.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a Special Event
without first obtaining a Special Event Permit. (Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.040: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application Submission: A completed application on city forms must be
submitted to the city at least sixty (60) calendar days before an event with
expected attendance of less than 500 people; or ninety (90) calendar days
before an event with expected attendance of 500 people or more. Applications
for new events or reoccurring events with changes that are submitted less than
the time limits above shall not be accepted. Applications are not considered
complete until all required information has been submitted to the city and all
appropriate fees have been paid.
   B.   Along with the Application, applicants must submit all applicable
Special Event documentation (for example: Certificate of Insurance, Additional
insured endorsement, Weber-Morgan Health Dept. Mass Gathering Permit (if
required), Utah Tax Commission Special Event Registration, and UDOT Special
Event Permit (if required).
   C.   Applicants must attend a Special Event approval meeting with Farr West
City Parks Committee.
   D.   Fees for damage deposit, Special Event fee, and facility rental must be
paid in full within fourteen (14) days of the first day of the event.
   E.   Advertising: No advertising of a Special Event shall be permitted
within the city until city approval of the Special Event is granted and a
Special Event permit is issued.
   F.   Inspections: Authorized law enforcement officers, fire control
officers, and other government personnel shall be permitted free access to the
event to make inspections to ensure compliance with all city, state, and
federal laws.
   G.    Only one (1) Special Event Permit per park is available within any
consecutive thirty-day period. (Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.050: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Insurance: The applicant, vendors, exhibitors, and concessionaires of a
Special Event held on city property shall procure and maintain commercial
general liability insurance in the amount of at least two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) per occurrence, with three million dollars ($3,000,000.00)
general aggregate coverage, to protect the city against loss from liability
imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury or property damage
arising from the event. Such insurance shall provide the following and shall be
submitted to the city on an insurance certificate which shall include the
following:
      1.   The name and address of the insured.
      2.   City shall be named as an additional primary insured and
noncontributory on the general liability certificate.
      3.   The location of the operations to which the insurance applies.
      4.   The number of the policy and the type or types of insurance in force
thereunder on the date of the certificate.
      5.   The expiration date of the policy and the limit or limits of
liability thereunder on the date of the certificate.
      6.   A statement that all coverage is on an occurrence basis rather than
a claims basis.
      7.   A provision that the policy or policies will not be canceled, denied
renewal, or reduced in coverage until at least thirty (30) days after written
notice has been received by city.
      8.   Name, address, and telephone number of the insurance company's
agent.
   B.   Workers' Compensation Insurance: Applicant shall procure and maintain
workers' compensation insurance as required by Utah law.
   C.   Certificate of Insurance: No Special Event permit shall be issued until
the applicant and all vendors, exhibitors, or concessionaires participating in
the event submit to the city a certificate of insurance as required in this
chapter at least fourteen (14) business days prior to the proposed Special
Event start date. (Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.060: FEES:
Fees applicable to Special Events shall be assessed according to the Special
Event fees established in the Farr West City Fee Schedule as found in
Chapter 3.30 of the Farr West City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.070: APPLICATION REVIEW, APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
The city council, or the city council's designee, shall review and either
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for a Special Event
permit. (Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.080: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
   A.   A Special Event application may be denied by the city council if:
      1.   The proposed Special Event violates a law, ordinance, policy,
procedure, or regulation or poses a danger or threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, or causes unreasonable inconvenience or cost to the public;
      2.   The proposed Special Event is not consistent with the intended
nature and use of the requested city property;
      3.   The proposed Special Event is scheduled at a place and time that
could disrupt or interfere with an already approved Special Event;
      4.   The proposed location or building is not adequate to accommodate the
proposed Special Event such as parking, sanitation facilities, and health or
safety codes, or the nature of the proposed Special Event is such that the
city, or the applicant does not have sufficient resources available to ensure
the health, safety, and welfare of Special Event participants or the general
public;
      5.   The permit application contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation;
      6.   The applicant has failed to pay a debt to the city including costs
incurred during a prior Special Event;
      7.   The permit application is incomplete; and
      8.   The applicant or any person on whose behalf the application for a
permit was made has on prior occasions:
         a.   Damaged city property, if the applicant is for an event on city
property; or
         b.   Made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of
an event or activity previously permitted; or
         c.   Has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of
the applicant.
   B.   Notice: If a Special Event permit application is denied, the city shall
notify the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for the denial. (Ord.
2022-10)
12.20.090: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any decision made by the city council is final. All appeals shall be in
writing, shall state the specific grounds for the appeal, and shall be
delivered to the city recorder within five (5) calendar days after the date the
applicant received notice of the denial. An applicant may appeal the city
council's decision by seeking judicial review with the district court, which
review shall be limited to a review of the record. The district court shall
presume the city council's decision is valid and shall review the record to
determine whether or not the decision was arbitrary, capricious or illegal.
(Ord. 2022-10)
12.20.100: VIOLATION:
A violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2022-10)
TITLE 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 13.04
SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.04.010: Wastewater Control Rules And Regulations Adopted By Reference
13.04.020: Definitions
13.04.030: Use Of Public Sewers Required; Prohibited Practices
13.04.040: Private Wastewater Disposal (Rep. by Ord. 2012-02)
13.04.050: Sanitary Sewers, Building Sewers And Connections; Rates For Use
13.04.060: Liability For Payment Of Sewer Service Charges
13.04.070: Annual Review Of Operational Costs; Revision Where Required; Debt
Service
13.04.080: Use Of Public Sewers; Prohibited Acts And Discharges
13.04.090: Damage Or Destruction Of Facilities Prohibited
13.04.100: Right Of Entry For Inspection
13.04.110: Hearing Board
13.04.120: Violations; Penalties
13.04.010: WASTEWATER CONTROL RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The wastewater control rules and regulations for the central Weber sewer
improvement district, dated June 1, 1991, together with any addendums or
attachments thereto, a copy of which rules and regulations is attached to
ordinance 91-03 and by this reference made a part of this chapter, is adopted
and enacted as part of this code. (Ord. 91-03 § 1)
13.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
   ADDENDUM: The document appended to the ordinance codified in this chapter
entitled "Service User Charge System". The addendum is incorporated in this
chapter. The service user charge system includes sections A through H and shall
have effect as fixed rates.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in terms of
concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]). Laboratory determinations shall be
made in accordance with approved EPA methods.
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
   BUILDING SEWER OR LATERAL SEWER: A sewer conveying the wastewater from the
building drain to the city's sewer or other place of disposal. A building sewer
is a lateral sewer, also called house connection.
   CESSPOOL: An underground reservoir for liquid waste (as household sewage).
   CITY: Farr West City, Weber County, Utah.
   CLASS: A classification of volume of use as described hereinafter.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   DISTRICT: The central Weber sewer improvement district.
   EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GOVERNING BODY: The mayor and council members of Farr West City.
   HEARING BOARD: That board appointed according to provisions of section
13.04.110 of this chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   MAY: Is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water
or ground water.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
   POLLUTION OR POLLUTANT: The manmade or man induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. Including,
but not limited to, any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
   PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the city's sewer
system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited
by 40 CFR part 403.6(d).
   PRIVY: A small building having a bench with holes through which the user may
defecate or urinate.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
   RESIDENTIAL FLOWS: The assumed average and/or standard flow expected from a
single-family dwelling. A residential flow volume is twelve thousand (12,000)
gallons per month and its strength is two hundred fifty milligrams per liter
(250 mg/l) TSS (total suspended solids; see definition of Total Suspended
Solids) and two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) BOD (biochemical oxygen
demand; see definition of Biochemical Oxygen Demand). Rates for volume and
strength of residential flow are as set out in addendum A.
   RESIDENTIAL, HEAVY AND LIGHT COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL USERS: Any
industrial or commercial user who discharges waste into the system requiring
higher than normal BOD, or greater than normal total suspended solids.
   SANITARY SEWER: The pipe or conduit system and appurtenances, for the
collection, transportation, pumping and treatment of sewage. This definition
shall also include the terms "public sewer", "sewer system" and "sewer".
   SEWAGE: The waterborne wastes discharged to the sanitary sewer from
buildings for residential, commercial, institutional and industrial purposes.
"Wastewater" and "sewage" are synonymous; thus, they are interchangeable.
   SHALL AND WILL: Are mandatory.
   SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
one period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5)
times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during the
normal operation of the user.
   STATE: The state of Utah.
   STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries only storm, surface water and ground water
drainage.
   SYSTEM: The sewer, wastewater or combined wastewater and storm or surface
water facilities of the city.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with approved EPA methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewer and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any infiltrating ground water, surface water, and storm water
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which enters the city's
sewer.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"water pollution control plant".
   WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 92-03 § 1)
13.04.030: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within Farr
West City, or in area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within Farr West
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater.
   D.   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city
or within three hundred feet (300') of the system is required, at the owner's
expense, to install suitable sewer facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so,
provided that the sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the owner's
property line.
   E.   To evidence compliance with the requirements of this subsection the
city adopts this penalty and compensatory sanctions, the violation of which
shall constitute a misdemeanor of the second class: Under the authority of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-8-15, as amended, the city of Farr West exercises a
municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction to protect its culinary water
system and its source from exposure to underground percolation from any
ecological injury, pollution or contamination of the watershed or exposure of
the system and water polluting underground percolation influencing the culinary
waterworks source. The city of Farr West under the authority of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-8-38, as amended, declares that all lands (whether inside
or outside an incorporated municipality) within three hundred feet (300') on
either side of the transmission or interceptor lines and the inlet facilities
of each and all of the collection, interception and inlet facilities or one or
any combination of the same (the "system") are a part of the Farr West City
sewer system, and the city requires that the owner or occupant of any land upon
which any structure is located and on the nearest property line of any kind
within three hundred feet (300') of any lateral, interceptor or collection
portion of the system shall connect to the system, the failure of which shall
constitute a public offense and punishable by law. (Ord. 92-03 § 2)
13.04.040: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-02)
13.04.050: SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS; RATES FOR USE:
   A.   Authorization To Make Connection: No unauthorized person(s) shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof.
   B.   Application; Supplemental Plans/Specifications: For a sewer connection,
the owner(s) or agents shall make application on a form obtained from the city.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.
      1.   A permit and inspection connection fee shall be charged based on the
culinary water meter size.
      2.   A fee shall be set by the governing body upon application to the
city for a connection whose owner has a meter over six inches (6").
   C.   Connection Required: Each person owning, occupying or having an
interest in any structure in the city of Farr West, the property line of which
is within three hundred feet (300') of the sewer line shall connect to the
sewer system upon an application provided by the city.
      1.   Any person who is the occupant, owner or user of any structure whose
outermost property line is within three hundred feet (300') of the sewer system
and who fails to connect to the sewer system shall be guilty of class B
misdemeanor or a misdemeanor as declared by state law and will be subject to a
fine and penalty as established in the fee schedule. Each day of failure to
connect shall be deemed a separate offense.
      2.   Each individual connection to the sewer system shall be executed by
a completed and approved building permit.
      3.   Attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as an addenda is
a document entitled "Service User Charge System", addendum A. Addendum A is
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter and a part of the
ordinances of Farr West City and its title shall be known and it may be
referred to as "addendum A", in any document, pleading, or proceeding
pertaining to the sewer or wastewater system of Farr West City. References to
"addendum A" shall also be made when there is ambiguous declaration or
statement in this or any sewer ordinance of Farr West City, Utah, and any
resolutions or proceeding affecting the Farr West City sewer and wastewater
system. The rates for connecting to and use on monthly or any other basis may
be fixed and amended by resolution or amending ordinance.
      4.   Until otherwise provided by resolution or an amending ordinance, the
minimum rate shall be based on the residential equivalency unit of twelve
thousand (12,000) gallons per month and shall be as prescribed in the fee
schedule (see title 3, chapter 3.30 of this code).
      5.   The governing body may, in its discretion, and to promote equity in
distribution of operation and maintenance costs, and for no other purpose,
establish rates based entirely upon metered winter usage, effluent strength, by
or solely upon the basis of class as defined in this chapter or upon an
equitable combination of any of those so that the costs of operation and
maintenance reflected in rates will be equitably distributed among users based
upon their usage of and benefit received from the system.
   D.   City Indemnified: All costs and expense incidental to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner
(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   E.   Separate Sewer For Each Building; Exception: A separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole system will be considered as one
building sewer. The city does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
   F.   Use Of Old Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are examined and tested by the city building
inspector and found to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Required Standards: The size, slope, alignment, materials or
construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods
to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing and backfilling
the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state of
Utah. In the absence of these code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
   H.   Elevation Of Building Sewer: Whenever possible, the building sewer
shall be brought from the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In
all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Where such
means are necessary, the owner(s) shall be responsible for all installations,
maintenance and operating costs for their operation.
   I.   Surface/Ground Water Connections: No person(s) shall make connection of
roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such
connection is approved by the city and the Utah state department of
environmental quality for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
   J.   Compliance With Applicable Codes: The connection of the building sewer
into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, and the
state of Utah, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
nationally recognized publications of what are known as the ASTM and the WPCF
manual of practice no. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight, and any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the city before installation.
   K.   Owner Liability: Irrespective of the occupant, user, tenant, cotenant,
permissive user, or any other person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity
being in possession of the premises to which a connection is supplied or
service made available, the owner of the premises according to the records of
the Weber County recorder shall be legally responsible for the payment of all
charges, fees, assessments and any other payments, obligations or liability of
a user. If any delinquent sewer connection, sewer user charge, repairs,
maintenance or any other obligation is imposed against any premises, property,
buildings or structures, the obligation shall be deemed by the city of Farr
West as a lien upon all of the real property on which any use is made from a
sewer connection.
   L.   Delinquent Charges; Collection; Lien: The mayor and city council of
Farr West City may, at their discretion and in circumstances that are
equitable, impose the following on all accounts past due over sixty (60) days.
This procedure shall apply to all charges whether for connection fees, user
charges, maintenance, repair or any other charge which is provided for, imposed
or authorized by this chapter.
      1.   A late fee as prescribed in the fee schedule will be added monthly
to all accounts wherein a user is past due over sixty (60) days.
      2.   Those accounts with no payment activity for a one hundred eighty
(180) day period will be sent a letter of demand by the city.
      3.   In the event no response has been made to the city within ten (10)
days from the date of the demand letter, the account will be sent to small
claims court for collection.
      4.   Should it be deemed necessary by the mayor and city council, a lien
will be imposed at that time upon all of the real property on which any use is
made from a sewer connection until all past due accounts of the user are paid
in full.
   M.   Annual Rate Notification: Each user will be notified, at least
annually, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are
attributable to wastewater treatment services (O&M) versus debt service.
   N.   Surcharge; Refund: All nonresidents whose property is contiguous to the
Farr West City boundary and who wish to connect to the sanitary sewer system of
Farr West City shall pay an additional surcharge of one hundred percent (100%)
of the normal connection fee and user fees as established in the fee schedule
(see title 3, chapter 3.30 of this code). The connection fees will be assessed
on the building permit and the user fees will be billed monthly. The connection
fee surcharge only will be refunded if the nonresident annexes his or her
property into the city within two (2) years. (Ord. 2012-02)
13.04.060: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Property owners shall be held liable for payment of their sewer service
and garbage disposal charges for self-occupied homes. Property owners shall be
held liable for payment of sewer service and garbage disposal charges for a
minimum of eight (8) months after a home is left vacant.
   B.   Property owners of rental units have a financial interest in said units
through ownership and shall be held liable for the payment of sewer service and
garbage disposal charges, should the charges not be paid by the renter.
   C.   Property owners either occupying or renting out buildings for business
purposes, shall be held liable for the payment of sewer service fees, garbage
disposal to be provided by the property owner or renter from a private hauler.
   D.   Any property owner violating any of the provisions of this section, or
failing or refusing to make payment of charges herein contained, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as is
provided by law. (Ord. 97-04 §§ 2, 3, 4, 5)
13.04.070: ANNUAL REVIEW OF OPERATIONAL COSTS; REVISION WHERE REQUIRED; DEBT
SERVICE:
   A.   The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and
maintenance, long term debt service relating to the wastewater treatment works,
as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not less often than
every year, and will revise the user charge system as necessary to assure
equity of the system established herein and to assure that sufficient funds are
obtained from the city's user charge system to: 1) adequately operate and
maintain the wastewater treatment works; 2) cover the debt service. The city
will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of
operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and
adjust that rate accordingly.
   B.   The addendum attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and
entitled "Farr West City service user charge system" shall be used for
calculating rates. The addendum shall be used as a formula for calculating
rates, fees, and charges for connection, use and access to the system. The
addendum is adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 92-03 § 5)
13.04.080: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS; PROHIBITED ACTS AND DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall cause to be discharged or make a connection which would
allow any of the following to be discharged into any sanitary sewer:
      1.   Storm water, surface drainage, ground water, dwelling sump pump
discharges, roof runoff, or other water not permitted to be discharged into any
sanitary sewer, nor shall any dwelling sump pump or groundwater collection
device be connected to any sanitary sewer.
      2.   No person shall cause any of the above mentioned waters to be mixed
with that person's sewage in order to dilute the sewage.
      3.   Any person whose residence or other building is found to have a sump
pump or groundwater collection device connected to the sanitary sewer before
January 1, 2020, shall not be subject to the penalties and fines in Section
13.04.120. Beginning January 1, 2020, all violations of this chapter, including
sump pump connections to the sanitary sewer, shall be subject to the fines and
penalties in Section 13.04.120.
   D.   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or wastes to any public sewer:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      2.   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or other
wastes, to contaminate or interrupt any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from
the water treatment plant;
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater system;
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders;
      5.   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, or cause the
temperature at the headworks of the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four
degrees Fahrenheit (104°F), and in no case shall any wastewater be discharged
which has a temperature in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F);
      6.   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference
to the processing plant five (5) times its normal strength);
      7.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotope of such
half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by central Weber
district general manager in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
      8.   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance;
      9.   Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25
mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral
oil origin;
      10.   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease;
      11.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, restaurants or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in commercial
kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises;
      12.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the state for such materials;
      13.   Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the state;
      14.   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes;
      15.   Any substance, liquid or condition described in chapter 2, section
2.2.2 of the central Weber sewer improvement district wastewater control rules
and regulations as adopted by the city on September 5, 1991.
      16.   Any water from any sump pump or groundwater collection device
located in or near any building.
   E.   Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause damage to
the city sewer system shall be liable to the city for such damage and for all
expenses incurred by the city of Farr West for repair.
   F.   If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, or are prohibited
or restricted in chapter 2, section 2.2.2 of the central Weber sewer rules and
regulations, and which are determined by the city or district to have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the city may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions this
chapter;
      4.   Require a plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer
and pretreatment facility location;
      5.   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities;
      6.   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
(Ord. 19-05 §§ 1, 2: Ord. 92-03 § 6)
13.04.090: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF FACILITIES PROHIBITED:
No persons shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment which
is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any persons violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord.
92-03 § 7)
13.04.100: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Duly authorized employees of the city or district bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing
pertinent to discharge to the community sewer system in accordance with the
provision of this chapter.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
herein, duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company.
   C.   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved. (Ord. 92-03 § 8)
13.04.110: HEARING BOARD:
The governing body shall also serve as a hearing board as needed for
arbitration of differences between the city and sewer users on matters
concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this chapter. The
board shall conduct a hearing if requested by the mayor or by the alleged
violator. As the board deems necessary, a qualified attorney may be consulted
by the board to a specific case. (Ord. 92-03 § 9)
13.04.120: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter
may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
of the violation or at the city's sole discretion, the city may issue a
citation immediately for any violation discovered.
   B.   Any person who shall be in violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for the expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation. (Ord 19-05 § 3: Ord. 97-12 § 1: Ord. 92-03 § 10)
CHAPTER 13.08
SECONDARY WATER
SECTION:
13.08.010: Regulations
13.08.010: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Secondary Water Supply: Any and all building lots for the purpose of a
family dwelling shall have a means of secondary water for the purpose of
irrigation of lawns, shrubs, gardens, agricultural products, etc. The secondary
water supply must be separate from any culinary water supply and approved by
the city planning commission.
   B.   Subdivisions:
      1.   A subdivider shall make available to each lot in the subdivision a
pressurized secondary water supply which must be approved by the city engineer.
Each lot must have a minimum of seventy (70) pounds of water pressure in the
service lines. The subdivider shall install water mains and service lines or
laterals from such mains to each lot within the subdivision prior to the
installation of road base, surfacing, curb and gutters, and sidewalks.
      2.   The subdivider must include in the construction plans a drawing for
secondary water which will show:
         a.   Scale (not specified);
         b.   Size and location of water mains and valves;
         c.   Type of pipe;
         d.   Minimum cover. (Ord. 87-004)
TITLE 14
RESERVED
TITLE 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 15.04
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.04.010: Codes And Standards
15.04.020: Additional Requirements
15.04.030: Violation; Penalty
15.04.010: CODES AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 15A-2-103, Farr West City
hereby adopts the following building standards to govern all construction
performed in Farr West City:
      1.   The International Building Code (IBC), promulgated by the
International Code Council, and amended and adopted by the Utah State
Legislature, the International Residential Code (IRC) promulgated by the
International Code Council, and amended and adopted by the Utah State
Legislature;
      2.   The National Electrical Code (NEC) promulgated by the National Fire
Protection Association, and amended and adopted by the Utah State Legislature;
      3.   The International Plumbing Code (IPC) promulgated by the
International Code Council and amended and adopted by the Utah State
Legislature;
      4.   The International Mechanical Code (IMC) as amended and adopted by
the Utah State Legislature;
      5.   The International Fuel Gas Code as amended and adopted by the Utah
State Legislature;
      6.   The International Energy Conservation Code as amended and adopted by
the Utah State Legislature;
      7.   The International Existing Building Code as amended and adopted by
the Utah State Legislature;
      8.   The National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act (HUD Code) as promulgated by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development and published in the Federal Register as set forth in 24 CFR parts
3280 and 3282; and
      9.   The 1994 edition of NCSBCS A225.1 manufactured home installations
promulgated by the National Conference of States on Building Codes and
Standards (NCSBCS).
   B.   Manufactured homes must meet the standards of and be certified under
the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974
or latest amendment (HUD Code) and must prominently display an insignia
approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and
must not have been altered in violation of such codes. (Ord. 2018-03)
15.04.020: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the above codes and standards, the following requirements shall
also be met:
   A.   The dwelling must be permanently connected and attached to a site built
permanent foundation which meets ICBO guidelines, for manufactured housing
installations if a manufactured home. Any running gear shall be removed and
stored out of sight. Any enclosure must be secured to the perimeter of the
dwelling and constructed of materials that are weather resistant and
aesthetically consistent with the concrete and masonry foundation materials.
   B.   The dwelling must be permanently connected to and approved for all
required utilities.
   C.   The dwelling must be taxed as real property. If the dwelling is a
manufactured home, an affidavit must be filed with the State Tax Commission
pursuant to the Utah Code Annotated 59-2-602 and qualified therefor as an
improvement to real estate.
   D.   The dwelling must provide a minimum of seventy two (72) square feet of
enclosed storage in a basement or garage area or in an accessory storage
structure with a minimum height of six feet (6'). Such structure shall conform
to all applicable Building Codes.
   E.   Porches and landscaping for ingress and egress to the dwelling must be
built in accordance with chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Codes as adopted by
the State of Utah.
   F.   At least sixty percent (60%) of the roof must be pitched as a minimum
three to twelve (3:12) pitch and shall have a roof surface of wood shakes,
asphalt, composition, wood shingles, concrete, metal tiles, slate, built up
gravel materials or other materials approved by the Uniform Building Code.
   G.   The dwelling shall have exterior siding consisting of wood, masonry,
concrete, stucco, masonite or metal vinyl lap. The roof overhang, including
rain gutters, shall not be less than one foot (1'), measured from the vertical
side of the building but not including bay windows, nooks, morning rooms, etc.
   H.   The width of the dwelling shall be at least twenty feet (20') at the
narrowest point of its first story for a depth of at least twenty feet (20')
exclusive of any garage area. The width shall be considered the lessor of the
two (2) primary dimensions. Refer to Farr West City zoning ordinance for area
and minimum height and square footage.
   I.   Required off street parking spaces shall be side by side.
   J.   The building inspector, in concert with the Planning Commission, may
approve deviations from one or more of the development or architectural
standards provided herein on the basis of a finding that the architectural
style proposed provides compensating design features and that the proposed
dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the
vicinity.
   K.   All new home building permit applications shall have a restriction that
the lowest finished floor elevation in the dwelling shall not be lower than the
adjacent top back of curb elevation or if curb is not present, no lower than
the existing ground surface. Finished floor is defined as any basement or story
of a dwelling that is or can be made to be living space, as that term is
defined in the current edition of the International Residential Code.
Exceptions:
      1.   New dwellings proposed to have the lowest finished floor elevation
below the adjacent top back of curb elevation will be allowed provided that the
dwelling units have a City-approved subsurface drainage system consisting of a
subsurface ground water collection system as part of the dwelling construction,
a sump pump station and discharge piping to an authorized or approved discharge
location. The maximum finished floor depth in these dwellings shall not be
greater than thirty inches (30") below the adjacent top back of curb elevation.
      2.   If a geotechnical study conducted by a licensed, professional
engineer is provided for any lot or group of lots that shows the existing
ground water level is greater than 8.0 feet below ground surface (bgs), then
that lot or lots shall not be designated as "restricted" and full basements
shall be permitted, provided that the lowest finished floor is not deeper than
six (6.0) feet bgs.
Sump pumps, whether required by subsection K1 of this section or installed
voluntarily, shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer system in any manner.
The City will not issue building permits for dwellings until any proposed
subsurface drainage system design has been reviewed and approved by the City
building official. Final occupancy shall not be granted to any new home owner
until any previously approved subsurface drainage collection system, sump pump
and discharge line connections have been inspected and completed and are
operational. The ownership, operation and maintenance of the entire subsurface
drainage system shall be the total responsibility of the individual property
owner. (Ord. 2017-11: Ord. 17-05: Ord. 99-03)
15.04.030: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor.
   B.   This penalty shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for
violation of other chapters of this Code or other State or Federal clean water
or stormwater regulations.
   C.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed,
continued or permitted by any such person. (Ord. 17-05)
CHAPTER 15.08
PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.08.010: Adoption Of Public Works Standards
15.08.020: Other Codes And Standards
15.08.030: Inconsistency With Other Standards
15.08.010: ADOPTION OF PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS:
Farr West City hereby adopts the public works standards as prepared by Jones &
Associates dated June 2014, as may be amended from time to time, and
incorporates the public works standards into this code by reference.
Specifically included is an amendment to section 6.9 which states:
Imported Granular Backfill Material: Due to the existence of native wet clay
materials in Farr West City, existing native excavated materials shall not be
used as structural backfill or used as any utility trench backfill within the
public right-of-way. The contractor shall furnish and install imported granular
material. This granular material shall be in compliance with type A-1a or A-1b
(AASHTO designation - basically granular soils with limited fines) passing a
maximum 3 inch square sieve and shall not contain more than 15% of material
passing a 200 mesh sieve, and shall be free from sod, vegetation, and other
organic or deleterious materials. All proposed imported backfill materials
shall have the prior approval of the city engineer. All imported granular
backfill materials shall be compacted as specified in section 6.8.
(Ord. 2016-06)
15.08.020: OTHER CODES AND STANDARDS:
All other codes, rules, standards and ordinances shall remain in effect unless
specifically amended or repealed. (Ord. 2016-06)
15.08.030: INCONSISTENCY WITH OTHER STANDARDS:
In the event of any inconsistency or conflicting requirements between the
public works standards and any other codes, rules, standards, or amendments
adopted as part of this code or other provisions of this code, the public works
standards shall govern. (Ord. 2016-06)
CHAPTER 15.22
STORMWATER UTILITY
SECTION:
15.22.010: Findings
15.22.020: Purpose
15.22.030: Definitions
15.22.040: Stormwater Utility
15.22.050: Stormwater Utility Fee
15.22.060: Billing
15.22.010: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings regarding stormwater runoff and
the city's stormwater system:
   A.   Facilities: The city's existing stormwater system consists of a network
of manmade and natural facilities, structures, and conduits, including
groundwater and aquifers that collect and route stormwater runoff.
   B.   Endangerment: Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff
endangers the city's groundwater supply.
   C.   Erosion: Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff
causes erosion and property damage.
   D.   Emergency Services: Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater
runoff hinders the city's ability to provide emergency services to its
residents.
   E.   Traffic: Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff
impedes the regular flow of traffic in the city and poses a risk to the
existing road infrastructure.
   F.   Public Health: Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater
runoff poses health hazards to the citizens of the community.
   G.   Pollution: Stormwater runoff carries concentrations of oil, grease,
nutrients, chemicals, heavy metals, toxic materials and other undesirable
materials that may jeopardize the integrity of groundwaters and receiving
waters, including the city's culinary water supply.
   H.   Impervious Surfaces: All developed properties in the city contribute to
the need for the stormwater system by converting natural ground cover into
impervious surfaces.
   I.   Maintenance: All developed properties in the city make use of or
benefit from the city's operation and maintenance of the stormwater system.
   J.   Regulations: The environmental protection agency (EPA) and the Utah
department of environmental quality (DEQ) will develop further stormwater
permitting regulations that will apply to local government as unfunded mandated
and otherwise.
   K.   General Operation: Absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation
and control of existing stormwater drainage conditions in the city constitute a
potential hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the city, its
residents, and its businesses.
   L.   Utility Fees: A stormwater utility fee is the most equitable and
efficient method of managing stormwater in the city and ensuring that each
property in the city pays its fair prorated share of the amount that the
property contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the stormwater
system. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.22.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter and chapters 15.23 through 15.25 of this title is
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants by
improving the city's stormwater system, managing and controlling stormwater
runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted waters from entering the
city's water supply and other receiving waters, and establishing a viable and
fair method of financing the construction, operation and maintenance of the
stormwater system. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.22.030: DEFINITIONS:
The words or phrases in this section shall be defined as follows for all
chapters in this code relating to stormwater:
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A wide range of management procedures,
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control
the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with
the planned land use. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. A list of sample BMPs
and their effectiveness ratings can be found in the most current version of the
city's stormwater management plan available at the city office or as otherwise
provided.
   CATCH BASIN: A drain inlet designed to keep out large or obstructive matter.
   CITY: Includes the geographical boundaries of Farr West City, Utah, and also
refers to the classification of the jurisdictional area within a municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4).
   CITY COUNCIL: Refers to the legislative body of Farr West City, Utah.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT: A development that is contiguous to an area
where multiple separate distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times or different schedules under one plan. For example, if a
developer buys a twenty (20) acre lot and builds roads, installs pipes, and
runs electricity with the intention of constructing homes or other structures
sometime in the future, this would be considered a common plan of development
or sale. If the land is parceled off or sold, and construction occurs on plots
that are less than one acre by separate, independent builders, this activity
still would be subject to stormwater permitting requirements if the smaller
lots were included on the original site plan. The common plan of development or
sale also applies to other types of land development such as industrial parks
or well fields. A permit is required if one or more acres of land will be
disturbed, regardless of the size of any of the individually owned or developed
sites.
   DEBRIS: Any dirt, rock, sand, vegetation, rubbish or litter.
   DETENTION BASIN: An area designed to detain peak flows from stormwater
runoff and to regulate release rates of that water into the city's storm
drainage system, also allowing debris to settle out. Detention basin outlets
are connected directly to downstream storm drains. All flow entering detention
basins is released via outlet piping. "Regional detention basins" are defined
as large detention basins owned and maintained by the city. "Local detention
basins" are defined as smaller basins typically in subdivisions and constructed
by developers. Following acceptance of the construction, the ownership,
operation and maintenance may either be conveyed and maintained by the city or
owned and maintained by private property owners.
   DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural
condition by grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other
impervious surfaces.
   DEVELOPMENT OR LAND DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, site preparation,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, development of a parcel, lot, subdivision
plat or site plan and construction of buildings or other structures.
   DIRECTOR: The public works director, or other person or agent designated by
the city to enforce stormwater regulations adopted by the city.
   DISTURB: To alter the physical condition, natural terrain or vegetation of
land by clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, filling, building or other
construction activity.
   DRAIN INLET: A point of entry into a sump, detention basin, or storm drain
system.
   DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE: Zones determined by geohydrology
designed to protect groundwater aquifers of a well in a culinary water system.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels in the
city. One ERU equals two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet of
impervious surface area.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial presence or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous material includes, but is not
limited to, any hazardous substance designated under 40 CFR part 116 pursuant
to section 311 of the clean water act.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION: Either of the following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system. Examples include,
but are not limited to, any conveyances which allow nonstormwater discharge
such as sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter the storm drain
system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains or
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected to or discharging to the storm drain
system, which has not been: 1) documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records
submitted to the city, and 2) approved in writing by the city.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any nonstormwater discharge to the stormwater system.
Illicit discharges include both direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping
either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the stormwater system) and
indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the stormwater system or spills
collected by drain inlets).
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at greater rates of flow than
the natural surface. Such impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to:
roofs, concrete, asphalt, and similar improvements that prevent or impede the
natural absorption of water into the soil.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of
conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains.
   PERCOLATION: The ability of a soil to absorb water. Typically measured by a
standard percolation test in units of minute per inch.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company or
body politic, including any agency of the state of Utah and the United States
government.
   POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid
and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, that may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited
to, sediments, slurries, and concrete resinates); and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
   REDEVELOPMENT: Alterations of a property that change the footprint of a site
or building in such a way that disturbs one acre of land or more.
   RETENTION BASIN: An area designed to retain flows from stormwater runoff and
to encourage infiltration into surrounding subsurface soils. Retention basins
do not have outlet piping connected into a stormwater system. A retention basin
allows debris to settle out.
   SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW (SSO): A discharge of untreated sanitary wastewater.
SSOs are illegal and must be eliminated. All SSOs must be reported to the
division of water quality and to the permittee's local wastewater treatment
plant.
   STORM DRAIN: A closed conduit for conducting collected stormwater.
   STORMWATER: Any flow that occurs during or following any form of natural
precipitation. Stormwater includes only the portion of such flow that is
composed of precipitation.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: Water that is generated by stormwater flows over land.
   STORMWATER SYSTEM: The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, detention basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, sumps, storm drains, and
groundwater) owned and operated by the city, which is designed and used for
collecting or conveying stormwater. The stormwater system is also referred to
as MS4.
   SUMP: A city approved formalized underground structure that may be used in
rare situations to act as a detention basin to allow the slow release of water
into the surrounding subsoil. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.22.040: STORMWATER UTILITY:
   A.   Creation: The city council hereby creates and establishes a stormwater
utility as part of the city's overall stormwater system. The stormwater utility
shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the city's
stormwater system.
   B.   Funding: The city council hereby establishes a stormwater utility
reserve fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial transactions
related to the stormwater utility. All stormwater utility service charges shall
be deposited in this reserve fund. Money in the stormwater utility shall be
accounted separately and held in reserve separate from general funds. The
stormwater utility may be used to pay for any services and expenses
attributable to stormwater. The city may administer the stormwater utility
reserve fund and an enterprise fund.
   C.   Facilities: The stormwater utility shall operate independently of the
general fund. The stormwater utility shall have the same relationship to the
city as other utilities, such as the water and sanitary sewer. Upon creation of
this utility, all of the city's stormwater facilities (not including streets
and similar facilities as designated by the city council) shall be transferred
to the stormwater utility in consideration for the stormwater utility taking
primary responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, maintaining,
administering and operating the stormwater system and facilities.
   D.   Administration: The stormwater utility shall be administered by the
director under the oversight of the city management. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.22.050: STORMWATER UTILITY FEE:
   A.   Imposed: Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be
charged a stormwater utility fee.
   B.   ERU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent residential
units (ERUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ERU is
the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel
contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the stormwater utility. Based
on engineer's research, the city council finds and establishes that one ERU
equals two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet of impervious surface
area.
   C.   Calculation: The city council finds that:
      1.   Each single-family residential parcel contributes approximately the
same amount of stormwater runoff. Therefore, each developed single-family
residential parcel shall pay a base rate of one ERU.
      2.   All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple of
this base rate, expressed in ERUs, according to the total measured impervious
area on the parcel being imposed a fee.
   D.   Charge Per ERU: The stormwater utility fee as established by the city
council is codified in title 3, chapter 3.30, "Fee Schedule", of this code.
   E.   Exemptions And Credits: The city council may establish exemptions and
credits to the stormwater utility fee by ordinance or resolution.
   F.   Policies: The director may adopt policies and rules, consistent with
this chapter to assist in the application, administration, and interpretation
of this chapter and any other chapter related to the stormwater.
   G.   Appeals: Any person or entity that believes that this chapter, or any
stormwater utility rate, was interpreted or applied erroneously may appeal to
the city's appeal authority. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state any
facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within ten (10) days of the
decision, action, or bill being appealed. All appeals shall be handled in
accordance with the procedure in this code for the appeal authority. The
decision of the appeal authority shall be final. (Ord. 2014-07: Ord. 2012-05)
15.22.060: BILLING:
The city council finds that the city's stormwater system, sanitary sewer
system, culinary water system, and solid waste collection system are
interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents in an environmentally
responsible manner. Billing shall be as follows:
   A.   Utilities And Fees: City utility billing is completed in conjunction
with the regular monthly billing statement of Bona Vista water district who
shall bill on behalf of the city for:
      1.   Sanitary sewer;
      2.   Solid waste collection and disposal;
      3.   Enhanced services;
      4.   Franchise fees if imposed;
      5.   Stormwater; and
      6.   An administrative cost per bill.
   B.   General Provisions: The following general provisions apply:
      1.   If there is no regular utility bill for the property, there is no
city utility imposed for stormwater.
      2.   A utility fee is a civil debt owed to the city by the person or
entity paying for the city utility services provided to the property.
      3.   All properties receiving Bona Vista water service shall be charged
the applicable city utilities specified in this part, including the stormwater
fee, regardless of whether or not the owner or occupant of the property
requests the stormwater utility service.
      4.   Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may result in
termination of water service.
   C.   Billing Changes: The city council may modify, reduce, impose, or rebate
erroneous billing charges not to exceed a period of three (3) months. The mayor
may make special exceptions on billing charges for special circumstances as
recommended by the director. (Ord. 2012-05)
CHAPTER 15.23
STORM DRAINAGE
SECTION:
15.23.010: Prohibited Obstructions
15.23.020: Prohibited Discharges
15.23.030: Prohibited Storage And Debris
15.23.040: Best Management Practices
15.23.050: Easements
15.23.060: Authority To Inspect
15.23.070: Requirement To Monitor And Analyze
15.23.080: Violations And Enforcement
15.23.090: Damage To Stormwater System
15.23.100: Manhole Covers
15.23.110: Compliance With Federal And State Law
15.23.010: PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Obstruct the flow of water in the stormwater system.
      2.   Contribute to the obstruction of the flow of water in the stormwater
system.
      3.   Cover or obstruct any drain inlet.
   B.   The following obstructions are exempt from the prohibitions of this
section:
      1.   Street and/or stormwater improvement projects authorized by the
city.
      2.   Flood control and prevention activities performed by the city.
      3.   Obstructions approved by the city as part of a site's stormwater
drainage plan.
      4.   Obstructions occurring during cleanup periods established by the
city, provided that the materials are placed according to city directions and
do not obstruct drain inlets. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.020: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge nonstormwater discharges to
the MS4 including spills, illicit connections, illegal dumping, and sanitary
sewer overflows ("SSOs") into the storm sewer system. All SSOs must be reported
to the division of water quality and to the MS4s local wastewater treatment
plant.
   B.   The following discharges to the stormwater system are exempt from the
prohibitions of this section:
      1.   Water line flushing.
      2.   Landscape irrigation runoff.
      3.   Diverted stream flows.
      4.   Rising groundwaters.
      5.   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration.
      6.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
      7.   Discharges from potable water sources.
      8.   Foundation drains.
      9.   Air conditioning condensate.
      10.   Springs.
      11.   Water from crawl space pumps.
      12.   Footing drains.
      13.   Individual residential car washing.
      14.   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
      15.   Dechlorinated swimming/asthenic pool discharges.
      16.   Residual wash water.
      17.   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.
      18.   Discharges or flows from firefighting activity. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.030: PROHIBITED STORAGE AND DEBRIS:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, store, keep, deposit or leave any
pollutant or hazardous material, or any item containing a pollutant or
hazardous material in a manner that is likely to result in the discharge of the
pollutant or hazardous material to the stormwater system. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.040: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
Any person connecting to the stormwater system or developing a commercial or
industrial site shall employ best management practices (BMPs) approved by the
city. The city shall adopt a policy establishing a menu of BMPs that may be
used to satisfy this requirement. The BMPs may be structural and/or
nonstructural depending on the needs of the site. The BMPs shall be designed to
ensure that the quality and quantity of stormwater released to the city's
stormwater system meets the requirements of federal, state, local law,
regulations, and the city's NPDES permit, and will not exceed the designed
capacity of the stormwater system or jeopardize the integrity of the stormwater
system. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.050: EASEMENTS:
The director may enter all private properties through which the city holds an
easement for the purposes of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling,
repairing or maintaining any portion of the stormwater facilities lying within
the easement, or the performance of any other duties pertinent to the operation
of the stormwater system. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on an
easement, shall be completed according to any special terms of the easement.
(Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.060: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
   A.   Inspections: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
provision of this chapter, or whenever the city has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, a condition which constitutes a violation of
this chapter, the city may direct its qualified personnel to enter the premises
at all reasonable times to inspect, detect, investigate, eliminate, and enforce
any suspected nonstormwater discharges, including illegal dumping, into the
city's stormwater system. During the same time the city may inspect and copy
records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant
refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is
hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
   B.   Access: The access for the city to inspect stormwater control measures
on private property that is vested subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter includes both construction phase and postconstruction access. Upon
approval of the director, and in lieu of city employees inspecting and
maintaining stormwater controls on private property, the city may allow the
owner/operators or a qualified third party to conduct maintenance so long as:
      1.   At least annual certification, in the form of inspection
documentation which has been performed, is provided to the city.
      2.   The structural controls are adequately operating and maintained as
such were designed to protect water quality as provided in the original
maintenance agreement and plans submitted upon vesting and approval of the
site.
   C.   Agreement: A maintenance agreement is required on private property that
is vested subsequent to the effective date of this chapter and includes both
construction phase and postconstruction access and where owner/operators or a
qualified third party are to conduct maintenance as provided herein. Said
maintenance agreement shall be promulgated in the form and manner as determined
by the director so long as the agreement at a minimum:
      1.   Allows the city oversight authority of the stormwater measures.
      2.   Includes a provision that the agreement acts as a covenant that runs
with the land.
      3.   Allows the city to perform necessary maintenance or corrective
actions neglected by the owner/operators or the qualified third party.
      4.   Allows the city to recoup the costs from the owner/operator as
necessary to cover the expenses for necessary actions conducted by the city.
   D.   Interpretation: The city interprets this regulation as secondary and
subservient to the United States constitution and the Utah state constitution
as applied to property rights, land use, development, and similar rights.
Specifically, the intent of this regulation is not to be applied to violate
vested, property rights nor to be a physical invasion of property rights as
determined by the United States supreme court in Loretto v. Teleprompter
Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 (1982). The city recognizes that the United
States supreme court interprets property right in conjunction with the laws and
constitutions of each state. Therefore, Utah law also plays an important role
in defining property rights. For the purpose of determining when a property
right is vested the city shall continue to apply the Utah supreme court ruling
in Western Land Equities, Inc. v. City Of Logan, 617 P.2d 388 (1980) that
states a property owner is vested to follow the city's regulations in effect at
the time a land use application is filed. Furthermore, where there is vagueness
in any land use regulation, including the stormwater regulations, it shall be
interpreted in favor of the property owner. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.070: REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE:
If city tests or inspections indicate that a site is causing or contributing to
stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or nonstormwater discharges to
the stormwater system or waters of the United States, and if the violations
continue after notice from the city, the city may require any person engaged in
the illicit activity and/or the owner or operator of the site to provide, at
their own expense, monitoring and analyses required by the city to determine
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.080: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the city finds that a person, organization, or institution has
violated a prohibition or failed to comply with a requirement of this chapter,
the city will order compliance by the following procedure:
   A.   Warning: A verbal warning shall be given. The verbal warning shall be
documented in the city records by the qualified person (code enforcement
officer, city inspector, public works employee) who issued the warning. The
city may skip the requirements set forth in this subsection and immediately
proceed with other more severe actions against the violator if the following
may have occurred:
      1.   The violator has committed the same violation in the past.
      2.   The violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious risk to
persons, the environment or property.
      3.   The city deems the violation to constitute an emergency.
   B.   Written Violation: Issue a written notice of violation to the
responsible person(s), company or institution. The notice of violation may be
documented in the city's stormwater records by the official who issued the
warning. Such notice may require without limitation one or more of the
following as may be applicable:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges.
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist.
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
      5.   Payment to cover administrative, remediation, monitoring, analyses,
and reporting costs.
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   C.   Prosecution: The city may skip the notice requirements set forth in
this section and immediately proceed with criminal and/or civil action against
the violator if any of the following may have occurred:
      1.   The violator has committed the same violation in the past.
      2.   The violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious risk to
persons, the environment or property.
      3.   The city deems the violation to constitute an emergency.
   D.   Penalty: The following penalties apply for each written violation:
      1.   Criminal: The violation of any provision of any chapter relating to
stormwater is a class B misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
      2.   Civil: In addition to other penalties and remedies, any person,
firm, corporation, principal, agent, employee, contractor, or other party
violating or permitting the violation of any governing stormwater regulation is
subject to a civil fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), per
violation, per day, in addition to reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred
by the city for enforcement of stormwater regulations.
      3.   Damage Recovery: The city is entitled to seek and receive damages
equal to the cost to make all repairs and/or replace any materials in addition
to any criminal or civil fines and/or penalties imposed.
      4.   State Penalties: A violation of stormwater regulations may also be
subject to any penalties that may be imposed by the state of Utah, under the
authority of the Utah water quality act, title 19, chapter 5 of the Utah code.
      5.   Federal Penalties: A violation of stormwater regulations may also be
subject to prosecution, fines, and penalties imposed by the United States Of
America.
   E.   Permit: The small MS4 general UPDES permit, permit no. UTR090000
defines the maximum penalties for violations of permit conditions as follows:
      1.   The general UPDES permit provides that any person who violates a
permit condition implementing provisions of the act is subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day of such
violation. Any person who wilfully or negligently violates permit conditions or
the act is subject to a fine not exceeding twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per day of violation. Any person convicted under Utah Code
Annotated section 19-5-115(2) a second time shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per day.
      2.   The general UPDES permit provides that any person who knowingly
makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any record or
other document submitted or required to be maintained under this permit,
including monitoring reports or reports of compliance or noncompliance shall,
upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) per violation, or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
per violation, or by both. Utah Code Annotated section 19-5-115(4).
      3.   The general UPDES permit provides that any person who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate, any monitoring device or method
required to be maintained under this permit shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation, or
by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months per violation, or by both.
   F.   Stop Work Order: In addition to other fines and penalties, a stop work
order may be issued upon the discovery of work being conducted without a
required permit. The stop work order may be issued by any city inspector. No
construction activity may be commenced or continued on any site for which a
permit has been revoked or suspended until the permit has been reinstated or
reissued.
   G.   Injunctive And Corrective Action: The city may seek injunctive relief
or take corrective action to install and/or maintain appropriate stormwater
control measures on any site required to have such measures in place, and seek
reimbursement for the same, including penalties, administrative costs, attorney
fees, and court costs. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.090: DAMAGE TO STORMWATER SYSTEM:
Any person who damages any portion of the stormwater system shall be
responsible for repairing the damages. The damages shall be repaired by a
licensed contractor bonded to do work in the city and shall be repaired in
accordance with the public works standards and technical specifications adopted
by the city. It is unlawful to remove or alter any portion of the stormwater
system without permission from the director. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.23.100: MANHOLE COVERS:
It shall be unlawful to open any stormwater manhole or other stormwater fixture
(such as grates, lids, or inlets) without permission from the director. (Ord.
2012-05)
15.23.110: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to relieve any person from an
obligation to comply with an applicable federal, state, or local law relating
to stormwater discharges or drinking water protection. (Ord. 2012-05)
CHAPTER 15.24
STORMWATER PERMITS
SECTION:
15.24.010: Purpose And Intent
15.24.020: Activity Permit Required
15.24.030: Activity Permit Application
15.24.040: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
15.24.050: Proper Operation And Maintenance
15.24.060: Inspection And Entry
15.24.070: Revocation Or Suspension Of A Permit
15.24.080: Connection Permit
15.24.090: Violations And Enforcement
15.24.100: Exemptions
15.24.110: Appeal
15.24.120: Compliance With Federal And State Law
15.24.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the discharge of sediment and other
construction related pollutants from construction sites. Sediment and debris
from construction sites are a major source of pollution to waterways and water
systems located within the city and surrounding areas. Each year stormwater
runoff carries tons of sediment from construction sites into local drainage
systems, irrigation systems, canals, rivers, and lakes. Sediment from
stormwater runoff also clogs and obstructs storm drains, culverts, canals, and
may cause damage to private property, wildlife habitat, or water quality. (Ord.
2012-05)
15.24.020: ACTIVITY PERMIT REQUIRED:
A stormwater construction activity permit is required before any person or
entity may excavate, grub and clear, grade, or perform any type of construction
activity that will disrupt or cause a change in the natural landscape upon any
of the following types of property located within the city:
   A.   One Acre Plus: Any parcel, lot, development, or "common plan of
development" which is equal to or greater than one acre (43,560 square feet) in
size.
   B.   Subdivisions: A subdivision development greater than or equal to one
acre in size qualifies under this subsection even if each of the individual
lots in the subdivision are smaller than one acre.
   C.   Special Areas: Any parcel, lot, or development or "common plan of
development" the city determines that because of the nature or type of the
parcel, lot, or development that there may occur a disturbance of land that may
likely result in erosion or the transport of sediment off of the site by
stormwater to a degree substantially greater than that which would occur under
natural landscape conditions. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.030: ACTIVITY PERMIT APPLICATION:
Any person or entity desiring a stormwater construction activity permit must
first file an application with the city. The application shall be submitted
with, or as part of an application for a site plan or subdivision approval or
building permit. Any person or entity desiring a stormwater construction
activity permit must also submit a "notice of intent" (NOI) with the state of
Utah.
   A.   Content: The application shall include a stormwater pollution
prevention plan which meets the criteria set forth in section
15.24.040 of this chapter.
   B.   Timing: The applicant shall file the application on or before the
following dates:
      1.   Subdivision: The date that the applicant submits the preliminary
subdivision plat application if the applicant proposes to develop a
subdivision.
      2.   Site Plan: The date that the applicant submits a site plan
application if the applicant proposes to develop a site plan or amended site
plan.
      3.   Building Permit: The date that the applicant submits a building
permit application if the applicant proposes to construct a building on an
existing lot or parcel.
      4.   Other: At least two (2) weeks before the developer intends to
perform any type of work not listed above that would require a stormwater
construction activity permit in accordance with this chapter.
   C.   Compliance: If an applicant's development comes under more than one of
the categories listed above, then the applicant shall submit the stormwater
construction activity permit application on the earliest of the listed dates.
Failure to comply with the application dates set forth above is not a criminal
offense, but will delay the applicant's project. Failure to acquire a required
stormwater construction activity permit is grounds for denying a related
subdivision application, site plan application, conditional use permit
application, or building permit application. It is unlawful to commence work
(move dirt) on a development site before obtaining a required stormwater
construction activity permit.
   D.   Fee: The applicant for a stormwater construction activity permit shall
pay a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Application Approval: The city administrative staff shall approve the
application and grant the permit if the application is complete and meets the
criteria set forth in section
15.24.040 of this chapter. The city administrative staff shall deny the
application or approve the application with conditions if the city
administrative staff determines that the measures proposed in the stormwater
pollution prevention plan fail to meet the criteria set forth in section
15.24.040 of this chapter. Conditions the city administrative staff may impose
in connection with the approval of a permit include, but are not limited to,
the establishment of specific measures and controls to prevent erosion and the
discharge of sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants from
the site by stormwater.
   F.   Term: Unless otherwise revoked or suspended, a stormwater construction
activity permit shall be in effect for the full period of the construction
activity. The construction activity will not be considered to be completed
until the following events occur:
      1.   Subdivisions: For permits associated with a subdivision plat
approval:
         a.   The permittee must complete all required subdivision
improvements.
         b.   One of the following three (3) events must occur:
            (1)   The city issues a final certificate of occupancy for each lot
in the subdivision.
            (2)   An individual stormwater construction activity permit is
issued for each lot in the subdivision not having a final occupancy permit.
            (3)   The property has been revegetated or landscaped in a manner
that eliminates erosion and sediment discharge or that brings the property back
to its natural state.
      2.   Site Plans: For permits associated with a site plan approval, the
date that the permittee has completed all required landscaping and all outside
construction work associated with the site plan.
      3.   Building Permits: For permits associated with a building permit
application, the date that the city issues a final occupancy permit for the
structure covered by the building permit.
      4.   Other: For permits issued that are not tied to other approvals from
the city, the date that the permittee has completed all work associated with
the permit and takes steps required by the permit to prevent further erosion
and runoff from the site.
   G.   Termination: No stormwater construction activity permit shall be
considered terminated until the permittee notifies the city of the completion
of the project and a final inspection is performed by an authorized city
inspector to verify site stabilization. When the city inspector has verified
the site is stabilized a "notice of termination" shall be submitted to the
state of Utah. The permittee shall keep and maintain all permit required
improvements on the site until the city accepts the "notice of termination".
   H.   Amendments: In the event that the proposed construction activity for a
site to which a permit pertains is materially altered from that described in an
original stormwater pollution prevention plan in a way that may have a
significant impact upon the effectiveness of the measures and controls
described in the original stormwater pollution prevention plan, the permittee
shall file an amended stormwater pollution prevention plan which meets the
criteria set forth in section
15.24.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.040: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN:
   A.   Required Information: The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
shall be required for all sites disturbing one acre or greater and for sites
that are less than one acre that are part of a common plan of development. The
SWPPP shall contain the following information. The following is not a
comprehensive list of required elements of an SWPPP. For complete requirements
see the general permit UTR300000 which can be found at: http://
www.waterquality.utah.gov/.
      1.   Site Map: Provide an accurate map of the development area and
surrounding property with spot elevations and contour lines.
      2.   Site Description: Provide a description of the total area of the
development site and acreage to be disturbed. Explain the nature and location
of the construction activities, and a description of the intended sequence of
major activities which will disturb soils for major portions of the site and
include activities such as:
         a.   Grubbing.
         b.   Excavation.
         c.   Grading.
         d.   Utilities.
         e.   Infrastructure.
         f.   Any other activity that may disturb the natural landscape or
vegetation.
      3.   Wetland Area: For sites containing any portion of delineated
wetlands the above referenced map and description shall include a USACE
certified wetland delineation study and a certified survey marking the
boundaries of said wetland area.
      4.   Control Description: Provide a description of the proposed measures
and controls that will be implemented during construction activity, while the
site is not stable, or while the soil is being disturbed or in a state of
transition. The SWPPP must clearly describe the times during the construction
process that the measures will be implemented for each major activity
identified in this section.
      5.   Contact Information: The SWPPP shall state the name and phone number
of the person or entity responsible for implementation of each control measure.
   B.   Goals And Criteria: The proposed measures and controls described in the
SWPPP shall be designed to meet the following goals and criteria:
      1.   Discharges: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed to
prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of
sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants from the
construction site by stormwater runoff into the storm drainage system.
      2.   Debris: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed to
prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the deposit, discharge,
tracking by construction vehicles, or dropping of mud, sediment, debris or
other potential pollutants onto public streets and rights of way.
         a.   Any such discharge shall be cleaned up and removed immediately
upon notification to the permittee, or when it otherwise comes to the attention
of the permittee.
         b.   Permittee shall, at a minimum, clean and remove any deposit or
discharge by the end of the work shift in which the deposit occurred, or at the
end of the workday, whichever comes first.
      3.   BMPs: The proposed measures and controls shall consist of best
management practices (BMPs) available at the time that the SWPPP is submitted.
BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to:
         a.   Temporary silt or sediment fences.
         b.   Sediment traps.
         c.   Detention ponds.
         d.   Gravel construction entrances and wash down pads to reduce or
eliminate off site tracking.
         e.   Porous type filter material or authorized sediment barrier.
         f.   Temporary grasses and permanent vegetative cover.
         g.   Straw mulch as a temporary ground cover.
         h.   Erosion control blankets.
         i.   Temporary interceptor dikes and swales.
         j.   Storm drain inlet protection.
         k.   Check dams.
         l.   Pipe slope drains.
         m.   Rock outlet protection.
         n.   Reinforced soil retaining systems.
         o.   Gabions.
         p.   Other BMPs that are designed to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter.
      4.   Stabilization: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed
to preserve existing vegetation, where possible. Disturbed portions of the site
shall be stabilized. Stabilization practices may include:
         a.   Temporary seeding.
         b.   Permanent seeding.
         c.   Mulching.
         d.   Geotextiles.
         e.   Sod stabilization.
         f.   Vegetative buffer strips.
         g.   Protection of existing trees.
         h.   Planting of additional trees.
         i.   Preservation of mature vegetation.
         j.   Other appropriate measures.
      5.   Stabilization Practices: The use of impervious surfaces for
stabilization is not an appropriate BMP, and should be avoided. Stabilization
measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in disturbed portions of the
site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but
in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction activity in that
portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased, except under the
following circumstances:
         a.   If within fourteen (14) days of the initiation of stabilization
measures the construction activity temporarily or permanently ceases or is
precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures
shall be initiated as soon as practicable; or
         b.   If construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily
ceased, and earth disturbing will resume within twenty one (21) days, temporary
stabilization measures need not be initiated on that portion of the site.
      6.   Minimizing Risk Materials: The proposed measures and controls shall
be installed to minimize at the site the risk of discharge of construction
related pollutants such as oil, fuels, paint, thinners, solvents, salts, and
other chemicals or pollution material:
         a.   Implementation of storage practices to minimize exposure of the
material to stormwater as well as spill prevention and response.
         b.   Storage of pollution potential materials under cover and on
impervious surfaces.
         c.   Maintaining permanent vehicle and equipment parking or storage
areas on approved impervious surfaces with appropriate catch basins and oil
separation devices that are properly maintained. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.050: PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The permittee of an SWPPP shall install the erosion and sediment control
measures required by the approved SWPPP before commencing any construction
activity on the site to which the SWPPP applies or at such times indicated in
the SWPPP. The erosion and sediment control measures shall be properly
installed and maintained in accordance with the permit, the manufacturers'
specifications, and good engineering practices. The permittee shall maintain
such measures on the site until the city accepts the termination of the permit
pursuant to subsection
15.24.030G of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.060: INSPECTION AND ENTRY:
The permittee shall allow any authorized employees and representatives of the
city, representatives of the Utah division of water quality, and
representatives of the EPA, to enter the site to which a permit applies at any
time and to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the
permittee. The permittee shall also allow inspection of any records pertaining
to the conditions of the permit. Section
15.23.060 of this title further specifies the authority relating to
inspections. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.070: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF A PERMIT:
   A.   Revocation Or Suspension: A stormwater construction permit issued under
this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city upon the occurrence of any
one of the following:
      1.   Failure of permittee to comply with the SWPPP or any related
condition.
      2.   Failure of permittee to comply with any provision of this chapter or
any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to stormwater.
      3.   A determination by the city that the erosion and sediment control
measures implemented by a permittee pursuant to the SWPPP are inadequate to
prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of
sediment, debris or other pollutants from the construction site by stormwater.
   B.   Notice: The city shall provide permittee written notice of
noncompliance before revoking or suspending a permit. The notice shall:
      1.   State the location and nature of the noncompliance, and shall also
specify what action is required for the permittee to avoid revocation or
suspension of the permit.
      2.   Allow the permittee a reasonable time to take the necessary
corrective action to avoid revocation or suspension of the permit which time,
in the absence of exceptional circumstances, shall not be less than ten (10)
nor more than thirty (30) days.
      3.   Be delivered or mailed to the address listed for the permittee in
the application or the site of the construction activity, or both.
      4.   If the permittee fails to correct the problems identified in the
notice during the time specified in the notice, the city may suspend or revoke
the permit by recording a certificate of noncompliance on the property where
the violation occurred.
      5.   The permittee may appeal a suspension or revocation determination of
any permit as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Exceptional Circumstances: The city may take any steps necessary to
mitigate, remedy, or alleviate any exceptional circumstances and recover the
costs for the same from a permittee, owner, developer, or contractor
responsible for creating an exceptional circumstance. For purposes of this
chapter, exceptional circumstances include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Situations which involve a risk of injury to persons.
      2.   Damage to storm drain facilities.
      3.   Damage to other property or the environment.
      4.   Discharge of a pollutant into the environment.
   D.   Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be issued upon the revocation or
suspension of a permit, or upon the discovery of work being conducted without a
required permit. The stop work order may be issued by the appropriate city
inspector. No construction activity may be commenced or continued on any site
where a stop work order has been issued, or where a permit has been revoked or
suspended until the permit has been reinstated or corrected.
   E.   Reinstatement: A permit may be reinstated or corrected upon:
      1.   Compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Correction and compliance with all permit conditions.
      3.   Correction of substandard performance.
      4.   Correction of noncompliance issues.
      5.   Upon the filing of an amended SWPPP which is designed to correct the
deficiencies of the original SWPPP. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.080: CONNECTION PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall:
      1.   Connect to the city's stormwater system, either directly or
indirectly, without first obtaining a stormwater connection permit from the
city.
      2.   Commence new development or redevelopment without first obtaining a
stormwater connection permit.
   B.   Application: The applicant for a stormwater connection permit shall
submit the following to the city:
      1.   Application Form: A completed application form as provided by the
city.
      2.   BMPs: A plan incorporating stormwater BMPs that meet the
requirements of the stormwater regulations and section
15.23.040 of this title.
      3.   Maintenance: A maintenance plan and any maintenance agreement
outlining how the applicant will maintain the stormwater improvements listed in
the application.
      4.   Fee: A fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Additional Requirements: The application shall be submitted to the city
in conjunction with building permit or subdivision approval, whichever is
applicable.
   D.   Review: The stormwater connection permit application shall be reviewed
by the city official designated to issue stormwater permits. Upon review, the
permit shall be issued, issued with conditions, or denied.
   E.   Appeal: An aggrieved party may appeal as provided in this chapter the
issuance or denial of any stormwater permit.
   F.   Factors: When deciding whether to issue, issue with conditions, or deny
a stormwater permit application, the following factors shall be considered:
      1.   Whether the application is complete.
      2.   Whether all development fees have been paid.
      3.   Whether the application complies with all stormwater regulations and
policies.
      4.   Whether the application conforms to the city's storm drain plan.
      5.   Whether the application incorporates effective BMPs.
      6.   The potential for the connection to introduce pollutants into the
storm drain system.
      7.   Whether the proposed connection creates a safety hazard.
      8.   Whether the proposed connection affects the integrity of the storm
sewer system infrastructure.
      9.   Whether the proposed connection endangers any groundwater or
drinking water supply.
      10.   Whether the applicant has submitted a maintenance plan and any
maintenance agreement ensuring the proper maintenance and upkeep of the
applicant's connection and on site stormwater improvements.
   G.   Failure: Failure to construct or maintain stormwater improvements in
accordance with an approved stormwater connection permit shall be a violation
of this chapter.
   H.   As Built: Any person connecting to the stormwater system shall provide
the "as built" drawings showing the details and the location of the connection
along with any location device. The plans shall be provided in a format
acceptable to the city.
   I.   Rate: Connections to the stormwater system shall be designed so that
the discharge to the stormwater system does not exceed one-tenth cubic foot per
second (0.1 cfs) per acre. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.090: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement, violations, and penalties for this chapter are specified in
section
15.23.080 of this title. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.100: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Bona fide municipal activities of the city.
   B.   Activities of a public utility, government entity, or similar entity to
remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, reopen a
public thoroughfare to traffic, or otherwise protect public health, safety, and
welfare.
   C.   Bona fide agricultural and farming operations. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.110: APPEAL:
   A.   Any aggrieved party may appeal the approval, suspension, revocation, or
denial of any stormwater permit issued under this chapter by filing a notice to
appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) days of determination being
issued by the city. The notice of appeal shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Appellant's name, address, and contact telephone number.
      2.   A short statement describing the basis for the appeal.
      3.   The relief sought by the appellant.
   B.   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city recorder shall schedule
an appeal before the city's appeal authority in accordance with the procedures
and rules for the same as specified in this code. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.24.120: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to relieve any person or entity from any
obligation to comply with applicable federal and state regulations. (Ord. 2012-
05)
CHAPTER 15.25
STORM DRAIN DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS, AND POLICIES
SECTION:
15.25.010: General Provisions
15.25.020: Rainfall Hydrology
15.25.025: Low Impact Development Standards
15.25.030: Storm Drain System
15.25.040: Basins
15.25.050: Discharge
15.25.060: Permits And Practices
15.25.070: Violations And Penalties
15.25.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Findings: The city council finds:
      1.   The city faces unique stormwater challenges as shown on the city's
sensitive lands overlay in the city's general plan.
      2.   The city is impacted by watercourses and multiple drainageways.
      3.   The city is impacted by stormwater and runoff and nonsource point
pollution from parking lots, residential uses, commercial uses, and industrial
activity and such pollution presents a hazard for the health, safety, and
welfare of the public in this community.
      4.   There exists in the city a high groundwater table that precludes
certain stormwater control measures and necessitates extensive storm drain
design, open space preservation, construction standards, and policies as set
forth in this chapter.
   B.   Purpose: This chapter represents the construction standards for private
and public construction as it relates to storm drainage within the city.
   C.   Conformance: All efforts have been made for this policy to conform with
the requirements of phase II of the federal clean water act, and the city's
stormwater management plan.
   D.   Outline: The following information is organized in such a way to follow
the natural flow of stormwater, from the initial rainfall hydrology (section
15.25.020 of this chapter), to conveying the rainwater (section
15.25.030 of this chapter), to a basin (section
15.25.040 of this chapter), then discharging to a natural outlet location
(section
15.25.050 of this chapter). Permits and practices (section 15.25.060 of this
chapter), and penalties for violations (section
15.25.070 of this chapter) are also discussed.
   E.   Definitions: The definitions specified in chapter 15.22 of this title
apply to all stormwater regulations in this code. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.25.020: RAINFALL HYDROLOGY:
   A.   Policy: All storm drain systems shall be designed to carry the 100-year
storm.
   B.   Storm Specifications: Local storm drain piping shall be designed for
the 10-year storm where the road or other aboveground conveyance will carry the
difference to the 100-year storm. All basins regardless of local or regional,
or retention or detention, shall be designed to accommodate a 100-year storm
event. The storm duration used for the sizing of basins shall be based upon the
worst case scenario and not the time of concentration.
   C.   Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF): For the use of the "rational
method", an IDF curve shall be obtained from the city engineer for the project
location.
   D.   Calculation Basis: For single site plans and small subdivisions, the
rational equation may be used. For larger sites a city engineer approved
computer model shall be used.
   E.   Rainfall Pattern: For the use of computer models, the following
rainfall pattern shall be used. This pattern is based upon the "Farmer-Flecher
distribution". This pattern is for a one inch (1") unit storm and must be
multiplied by rainfall depth for storms of other magnitudes.
   F.   Rainfall Total: For the use of the following rainfall pattern, a
rainfall total from the "NOAA atlas" must be obtained. Such total shall be
based upon a 1-hour storm as follows:
1  0     11 0.004 21 0.033 31 0.052 41 0.012 51 0.005
2  0     12 0.005 22 0.034 32 0.045 42 0.011 52 0.005
3  0.002 13 0.008 23 0.035 33 0.04  43 0.01  53 0.004
4  0.002 14 0.009 24 0.038 34 0.035 44 0.009 54 0.004
5  0.002 15 0.009 25 0.039 35 0.03  45 0.009 55 0.004
6  0.002 16 0.013 26 0.045 36 0.022 46 0.008 56 0.003
7  0.002 17 0.017 27 0.052 37 0.02  47 0.006 57 0.003
8  0.002 18 0.02  28 0.054 38 0.018 48 0.006 58 0.002
9  0.003 19 0.024 29 0.054 39 0.016 49 0.005 59 0.002
10 0.003 20 0.029 30 0.054 40 0.014 50 0.005 60 0.001
 
(Ord. 2012-05)
15.25.025: LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Guide Adopted: The Utah Department of Environmental Quality (UDEQ) "A
Guide to Low Impact Development within Utah" (Guide) dated December 2018, to
implement Low Impact Development (LID) standards, is hereby adopted by Farr
West City and incorporated herein by this reference.
   B.   Report: A storm water quality report, following the template provided
in guide and as may be further defined by the city engineer, shall be submitted
to the city engineer for each development or subdivision submitted to the city
for approval.
   C.   Standards: The following LID standards, which may be further defined in
the public works standards and technical specifications of the city, shall be
implemented into each development to the greatest extent practicable as
approved by the city engineer.
      1.   Pervious Surfaces: Pervious surfaces such as permeable pavement,
concrete pavers, pervious concrete, modular open pavers, and other types of
pervious surfaces that provide structural support for light vehicle and/or
pedestrian traffic while also providing open space for storm water
infiltration.
      2.   Infiltration Basin: Infiltration basins are shallow depressions
using existing soils to retain and provide treatment for storm water runoff by
capturing and infiltrating runoff over a specified draw-down time.
      3.   Infiltration Trench: An infiltration trench is a linear excavation
backfilled with a combination of gravel, open grade stone, and sand layers that
provides storage within the pore space of the specified layers.
      4.   Harvest System: A harvest and reuse system refers to any type of
runoff collection system that captures rainfall, stores it temporarily, and
reuses it for irrigation, landscaping, or other non-potable use.
      5.   Underground Collection Galleries: A storm drain collection system
which can be used under parking lots or grass surfaces to retain or detain
stormwater and allow for infiltration or controlled release.
      6.   Other: Other methods may be reviewed and approved by the city
engineer as technology is developed for low impact design, except those that
provide underground storage.
   D.   Feasibility: If meeting the standards described in 15.25.021 is
infeasible, a rationale shall be provided for the use of alternative design
criteria. The new or redevelopment project must document and quantify that
infiltration, evapotranspiration, and rainwater harvesting have been used to
the maximum extent feasible and that full employment of these controls are
infeasible due to constraints. The infeasibility of following the LID standards
may be due to one or more of the following conditions: high groundwater,
drinking water source protection areas, incompatible soil conditions, slopes,
accessibility, excessive cost, or others approved by Farr West City. (Ord. 20-
06)
15.25.030: STORM DRAIN SYSTEM:
   A.   Policy: It is the policy of the city that:
      1.   Stormwaters not be carried in irrigation ditches, nor that
irrigation water be conveyed in storm drain systems.
      2.   Local pipes shall be sized for the 10-year storm event, however, all
basins and other aboveground stormwater facilities shall be designed and
constructed to manage the difference for the 100-year storm event.
   B.   Piping: Storm drain lines shall be concrete pipe (NRCP or RCP), of
appropriate class. Minimum size for storm sewer mains shall be fifteen inch
(15") diameter. Pipe specifications are included in the city's public works
standard and technical specifications. Where determined by the city engineer,
larger drain lines shall be installed to accommodate future development.
   C.   System Design And Costs: The cost to provide adequate storm drainage to
a development shall be paid for by the developer. Structures shall be installed
in accordance with the standard drawings.
   D.   Access: Storm drain lines shall have cleanout boxes, inlets or manholes
installed at all changes in grade or alignment, with a maximum distance of four
hundred feet (400') between accesses. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.25.040: BASINS:
   A.   Policy: It is the policy of the city to require storm drainage basins
for all development.
   B.   Basin Size And Location: All new development and redevelopment sites
are required to have a stormwater detention system designed as provided in this
chapter. It is critical for developments that are in close proximity to a
stream or river, or within "drinking water source protection zones" 1 or 2 as
defined by the "state division of drinking water rules". All detention basin
designs and calculations shall be reviewed by the city engineer for approval.
   C.   Certain Development Requirement: On site detention is required for all
commercial, manufacturing, industrial, or similar development in the city.
   D.   Ownership: The ownership of stormwater basins is specified as follows:
      1.   Private Basins: Where the development will have a homeowners'
association (HOA) or in commercial applications, local detention basins shall
be owned and maintained by the owner or HOA.
      2.   Local Public Or Private Basins: In subdivisions, local detention
basins shall be constructed by the developer. Following acceptance of the
construction, the ownership, operation, and maintenance may either be conveyed
and maintained by the city or HOA under an appropriate maintenance agreement.
      3.   Regional Detention Basins: Regional basins shall be owned and
maintained by the city and constructed according to the criteria given herein
and approved by the city engineer. Actual ownership and responsibility shall be
specifically defined in the owner dedication certificates, development
agreements, or deed.
   E.   Basin Access And Setback: Basin access shall be as follows:
      1.   Public Basins: The developer shall provide the city ingress and
egress easements for construction, operation, service, maintenance, and repair
for any public basin.
      2.   Private Basin: The owner or owning association shall be provided
ingress and egress easements for construction, operation, service, maintenance,
and repair for any private basin. The city shall be provided an emergency
easement for emergency access, service, and repair for a private basin.
      3.   Setback: Each basin shall be constructed with a flat rim circling
the basin which shall be set back from a property line, adjoining property, and
from any structure an appropriate distance determined by the city engineer to
prevent erosion, and to allow for a backhoe and dump truck to circle the rim
for maintenance and repair.
   F.   Percolation: No reduction due to percolation for detention basins
volumes shall be permitted in design, due to the nature of basins silting in
over time and also possible frost conditions during a storm.
   G.   Basin Construction: Basins shall be constructed as follows:
      1.   Policy: Basins must be constructed to enhance safety, health and
aesthetics of the area.
      2.   Engineering: Basins, whether detention or retention, must be
designed and stamped by a licensed civil engineer.
      3.   Location: Detention basins shall be located with convenient access
for maintenance and repair by maintenance personnel. This generally means that
the basin property has frontage along a public roadway. Volume in ditches or
roadside swales shall not be considered in the volume calculation.
      4.   Fencing: If unfenced and open to general public, the maximum depth
of water should not exceed three feet (3'). If a fence is required, six foot
(6') chainlink fencing is to be installed in accordance with the city's public
works standards and technical specifications, or as may more specifically be
stated in any land use regulations.
      5.   Side Slopes: Side slopes should not exceed 3:1 (horizontal to
vertical) (4.5:1 is desirable) for ease of mowing and access.
      6.   Bottom Slope: The basin floor shall be designed so as to prevent the
permanent ponding of water. The slope of the floor of the basin shall not be
less than one percent (1%) to provide drainage of water to the outlet grate and
prevent prolonged wet, soggy or unstable soil conditions. The preferred minimum
slope is two percent (2%).
      7.   Freeboard: There should be at least one foot (1') of freeboard (berm
above the high water mark).
      8.   Spillways: Spillways must be included and a path with a maintained
swale and drainage easement to a safe location. Attention should be given to
the design of the spillway to avoid erosion. Overflow spillways are intended to
introduce flows back into the main pipe and are typically downstream of the
outlet control. Emergency spillways are intended to carry flows beyond the
capacity of the overflow spillway to a safe downstream location. All spillways
shall be designed to protect adjacent embankments, nearby structures, and
surrounding properties.
      9.   Outlet Control: Small, local, private detention basins may be
allowed to have calculated fixed orifice plates mounted on the outlet of the
basin. Large, regional, public detention basins shall have movable screw type
head gates (Waterman C-10 OAE) set at a calculated opening height for the
discharge and with a chain to fix the position.
      10.   Grates: All grates on inlets and outlets must be hot dipped
galvanized (not painted) with bars at spacing to prohibit feet from falling in
and yet avoid clogging with debris. Generally bar spacing should never exceed
three inch (3") spacing.
      11.   Low Flow Piping: The inlet and outlet structures may be located in
different areas of the basin, requiring a buried pipe to convey any base flows
that enter and exit the basin, rather than a cross gutter or surface flow. The
minimum pipe size and material for the low flow shall be twelve inch (12")
diameter or as approved by the city engineer.
      12.   Ground Covers: The surface area of the basin may either be seeded,
sodded, or covered with fabric and cobbles, as specified by the city. If
seeded, measures shall be taken to eliminate erosion until grasses are
established. A minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil must be installed prior
to sod or seed placement. Cobble sizes shall be four inches (4") or greater in
size overlying a city approved weed barrier. Cobble rock may be permitted if
the basin is fenced and no other alternative purpose is proposed for the land.
Grass or hydroseeding on all basins shall be installed in accordance with the
city's public work standards and technical specifications. The basin shall be
provided with an automated sprinkler system previously approved by the city
engineer. Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the applicable
landscaping regulations.
      13.   Embankment (Fill) Construction: If a raised embankment is
constructed for a basin (constructed with granular materials), it shall be
provided with a minimum of six inches (6") of clay cover on the inside of the
berm to prevent water passage through the soil.
      14.   Excavation (Cut) Construction: If the basin is constructed
primarily by excavation, then it may be necessary to provide an impermeable
liner and land drain system when constructed in the proximity of basements or
other below grade structures as determined by a geotechnical evaluation.
      15.   Multiuse Basins: Basins may be designed as multiuse facilities when
appropriate precautions are incorporated into the design. If amenities such as
pavilions, playground equipment, volleyball courts, or other amenity are to be
constructed within the water detention area of a basin they shall be designed
appropriately. Structures shall be designed for saturated soil conditions and
bearing capacities are to be reduced accordingly. Restrooms shall not be
located in areas of inundation. Inlet and outlet structures should be located
as far as possible from all facilities. No woodchips or floatable objects may
be used in the area that will be inundated.
   H.   Detention Volume: Detention basins shall be sized based upon the
criteria set forth in section
15.25.020 of this chapter. Detention basins are designed to allow a
predetermined amount of flow to discharge during and after a storm event as
discussed above. Detention basins are preferred over retention basins. No
groundwater injection is allowed. Above grade detention basins are preferred
over below grade basins, yet both are allowable. Discharge rates shall comply
with section
15.25.050 of this chapter.
   I.   Retention Basins: The following applies to retention basins:
      1.   Policy: Regional retention basins shall not be permitted by the
city. It is the policy of the city to prohibit local or private retention
basins for developments, unless certain criteria are met.
      2.   Retention Discouraged: Any retention basin must be specifically
approved by the city engineer. Retention basins shall not be permitted within
zones 1, 2, or 3 of any "drinking water source protection zone" of any drinking
water source. Due to the silting in potential, no percolation rate may be used
in the calculation of volume unless an approved oil/sand separator is installed
upstream. The volume must be based upon the 100-year, 3-hour storm. Local storm
retention basins shall be designed for the 100-year, 3-hour storm, based upon
the intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) curve for the area as approved by the
city engineer. Local basins are typically private ownership and maintenance,
and serve only one or two (2) specified subdivisions or sites as may be
approved.
      3.   Retention Basin Criteria: Retention basins are basins which hold and
store water until it is evaporated or percolated, and shall not be permitted
for developments unless all the following conditions are met:
         a.   The basin is greater than five hundred feet (500') or fifty feet
(50') times the number of lots in the entire development (whichever is greater)
from the city storm drain system or waterway, and is topographically capable of
draining to the city system.
         b.   The basin is not located within a hazardous area such as a steep
slope, floodplain, high groundwater area, "drinking water source protection
zone", or some other hazard area.
      4.   Percolation For Basins: The percolation rate of the ambient soils
may be permitted in the calculations only if an oil/sand separator is installed
upstream and only ten percent (10%) of the percolation rate may be used due to
eventual silting in of the basin.
   J.   Standing Water: The following regulations apply to standing water:
      1.   It is the policy of the city to eliminate standing water wherever
possible as an effort to minimize a mosquito problem and associated viruses,
except where wetland protection is enforced.
      2.   Basins should completely drain within forty eight (48) hours of the
primary storm event.
      3.   Low flow bypass pipes may be required.
   K.   Ground Surface Improvements: It is the city policy that the finished
surface of the basin shall be improved to eliminate erosion and dust and to
enhance the aesthetics of the area by being appropriately landscaped with
approved plant material, landscape material, and approved trees. All basins
shall be fully landscaped or constructed in accordance with any applicable
landscaping regulations. (Ord. 2012-05)
15.25.050: DISCHARGE:
   A.   Policy: It is the policy of the city to control stormwater at the
source and minimize the potential for flooding downstream.
   B.   Requirements: The following requirements apply:
      1.   Storm Drainage: Storm drainage leaving a site or subdivision shall
not exceed, as much as practicable, the predeveloped quantities and qualities
at a maximum rate as follows:
         a.   Allowable Discharge: The allowable discharge rate from any
nonregional basin shall:
            (1)   Prehard Surfacing Discharge: Not exceed the prehard surfacing
discharge for the entire site for the 100-year storm event.
            (2)   Maximum Discharge Rate: Not exceed the maximum discharge rate
set by the city engineer depending on the proposal, the facts and circumstances
of the basin, and historical flow, and the drainage within the surrounding
area. If no maximum discharge rate is established then the standard discharge
rate of 0.1 cubic feet per second per total acre within the development
draining to the basin shall be applied.
            (3)   Controlled Discharge: Controlled discharge may be established
through an orifice or adjustable gate as approved by the city engineer.
            (4)   Flow Concentration: By nature of development, flows are
concentrated to one or more locations where historically sheet flow in lower
concentrations may have left the site. Attempts shall be made to minimize the
runoff concentrated quantity to the flows stated above by use of detention
basins, downstream piping to safe areas or other methods as deemed necessary by
the city engineer.
      2.   Water Quality: Best management practices (BMPs) shall be used to the
maximum extent practicable to ensure healthy water quality based upon national
standards for the same. BMPs are included in the city's stormwater management
plan and must be approved by the city engineer.
      3.   Irrigation Facilities: No stormwater discharge shall be permitted to
irrigation ditches and canals, except where such ditch or canal has had
historical use only for storm drainage or was an irrigation facility that has
been wholly converted to only stormwater use. Irrigation facilities are vested
rights under state law and protected against all encroachment, therefore,
written permission is required in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section
73-1-15 from the owner or operator of any irrigation ditch or canal before any
construction activity that affects an irrigation facility.
      4.   Parking Lots: No parking lot, including sidewalks and all other
impervious surfaces, shall be used for stormwater storage of any kind, above or
below surface.
      5.   Basin Overflows: Attention shall be given to overflow locations and
pathways to safe locations downstream as discussed above. Easement shall be
obtained and pipes or swales sized to handle the 100-year flow. (Ord. 20-05:
Ord. 2012-05)
15.25.060: PERMITS AND PRACTICES:
   A.   Policy: The following policies apply:
      1.   It shall be the policy of the city to comply with the requirements
of phase II of the federal clean water act, and all other state and federal
requirements. This is to include applications, permits, plans, and
implementation.
      2.   It is the policy of the city to require a stormwater permit for all
construction sites within the city.
   B.   Permits: Permitting applies as follows:
      1.   Permit Required: A stormwater activity and/or a stormwater
connection permit is required as provided by this code. A permit for all
construction activities is required and can be obtained as outlined in sections
15.24.030 and
15.24.080 of this title.
         a.   This permit must be obtained before connecting to any existing
stormwater system, drain, pipe, catch basin, stormwater box, manhole, or
similar facility.
         b.   As part of this permit all fees must be paid, all detention
basins shall be calculated, designed, and stamped by a licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) Permit: A
stormwater general UPDES permit for construction activities is required for all
sites or development projects affecting one acre or more, including any area
used for staging, stockpiling, or any other temporary construction activity.
This permit is filed with the Utah division of water quality, department of
environmental quality. The permit can be obtained online as follows:
         a.   http://waterquality.utah.gov/updes/stormwater.htm.
         b.   Click on "online application process notice of intent".
         c.   The appropriate fee must be paid to the state.
         d.   An SWPPP must be prepared and on site for this application.
      3.   Stream Alteration Permit: A stream alteration permit is filed with
the Utah department of natural resources, division of water rights.
         a.   This permit overlaps the 404 wetlands permit, discussed below,
because it is applicable to the area equal to the stream plus two (2) times the
bank full width (up to 30 feet).
         b.   Any modifications to the stream or banks within this area must
comply with the stream alteration permit.
      4.   EPA 404 Wetlands Permit: This permit is filed with the U.S. army
corps of engineers. It is applicable for all wetlands within a development.
         a.   This will apply to all wetlands depending upon the presence of
water, soil type and vegetation.
         b.   As part of this permit, a wetlands delineation report with USACE
acceptance letter is required.
         c.   The scope of this permit applies to all jurisdictional waters of
the United States up to and including the normal high water mark.
         d.   No fee is typically required for this permit.
         e.   A letter of nonregulated wetlands may also be applicable.
         f.   Any mitigation that may be required must be done prior to final
acceptance of a subdivision.
         g.   Any wetlands identified must be indicated on the final plat with
certified survey included.
   C.   Best Management Practices (BMPs): The city's stormwater management plan
contains a listing of BMPs that can be used on a site.
      1.   Categories:   BMPs typically fall into the following categories:
         a.   Perimeter control.
         b.   Erosion controls.
         c.   Sediment control.
         d.   Materials handling and spill prevention.
         e.   Waste management.
         f.   Good housekeeping.
      2.   Application: The application of some BMPs are discussed below. They
include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Oil separators.
         b.   Inlet protection.
         c.   Tracking pads.
         d.   Street sweeping.
         e.   Concrete washout.
         f.   Silt fences.
      3.   Oil Separators (OWS): Oil separators shall be required on all sites
with parking facilities that exceed two (2) acres, automobile salvage or
wrecking areas, or smaller sites anticipating oily discharges such as mechanic
shops or similar facilities. Oil separators must be capable of removing
particulates down to one hundred fifty (150) microns. Possible products
include, but are not limited to: BaySaver, Stormceptor, Vortechnic.
         a.   Where oil separators are required, sizing and design of OWS must
be reviewed by the city engineer prior to installation. Consideration must be
given to frequency and ease of maintenance of the structure. Private basins
shall have contracts in place with a local sewer company to periodically clean
the separator in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
         b.   Manufacturer's recommendations for sizing must be followed with
calculations submitted to the city. The separator may either be installed
upstream or downstream of the basin keeping in mind that flows on the outlet of
the basin would be smaller.
      4.   Inlet Protection (IP): The city's stormwater management plan may
permit straw bails, silt fences, or curb snakes (after asphalt is placed).
Filter fabric under the grate shall not be permitted since drainage is greatly
inhibited.
      5.   Tracking Pads (CR): Sites must have a tracking pad to eliminate mud
from being tracked onto the adjacent street. If mud is tracked, the contractor
shall be responsible to sweep the streets as necessary.
      6.   Street Sweeping (SC): If mud is tracked onto the street, the
developer or owner shall be responsible for sweeping the street.
      7.   Concrete Washout (CWM): A place must be located within the
subdivision or on the site for concrete washout. No washout will be permitted
on the street which would then continue to the storm drain. The washout area
may need to be maintained and temporarily excavated until the building
foundations and driveways are constructed, or some other arrangement made.
      8.   Silt Fences (SF): Silt fences must be installed to prohibit the flow
of sediments off of the site in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations
and the city's stormwater management plan.
   D.   Notice Sign: All subdivisions, except minor lot subdivisions, are
required to have at least one large notice sign that is clearly visible at the
entryway of the subdivision indicating that the SWPPP must be obtained and
followed. Said sign shall be maintained by the original subdivision applicant
until conditional acceptance of the subdivision. The specific wording on the
sign relating to stormwater and other related development requirement may be
prescribed and modified by the administration as needed to meet challenges
created by development and to give notice to requirements of law. (Ord. 2012-
05)
15.25.070: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Enforcement, violations, and penalties for this chapter are specified in
section
15.23.080 of this title. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2012-05)
TITLE 16
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16.04.010: Purpose
16.04.020: Compliance Required
16.04.030: Permit Issuance Restrictions
16.04.040: Exceptions
16.04.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The underlying purpose and intent of this title is to promote the
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city
of Farr West in the matter of the subdivision of land, to encourage the
healthful growth of the city and related matters affected by such subdivision.
   B.   Any proposed subdivision and its ultimate use shall be in the best
interests of the public and shall be in harmony with good neighborhood
development of the area concerned and the subdivider shall present evidence to
this effect when required to do so by the planning commission. (Ord. 2024-06:
Ord. 89-003 § 1(A), (B))
16.04.020: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or
in part in the city, except in compliance with this title.
   B.   No person shall sell or exchange or offer to sell or exchange any
parcel of land which is a part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land, nor
offer for recording in the office of the county recorder any deed conveying
such a parcel of land, or any interest therein, unless such subdivision has
been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this title;
provided, that this title shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of
a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the initial
subdivision regulations adopted by the city of Farr West. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord.
89-003 § 2)
16.04.030: PERMIT ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS:
The city building inspector shall not issue any permit unless the plans for the
proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use fully
conform to all provisions of this title. No officer of the city of Farr West
shall grant any permit or license for any building structure or land use when
such land is a part of a subdivision which has not been approved and recorded
in the county recorder's office. Any license or permit issued in conflict with
this title shall be null and void. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 10)
16.04.040: EXCEPTIONS:
In cases where unusual topographic or other exceptional conditions exist,
variations and exceptions from this title may be made by the city council after
recommendation by the planning commission. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 1(C))
CHAPTER 16.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
16.08.010: Definitions
16.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this title shall have the respective
meanings hereinafter set forth, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY (ALUA): A committee consisting of the
Planning Commission Chair or a delegated member of the Planning Commission, the
Vice Planning Commission Chair or a delegated member of the Planning
Commission, two members of the Public Works or Storm Water departments, the
City Recorder, and the City Engineer.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty six feet (26') wide.
BLOCK: The land surrounded by streets and other right of way other than an
alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
BONA FIDE DIVISION OR PARTITION OF AGRICULTURAL LAND FOR AGRICULTURAL
DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES: The division of a parcel of land into three (3) or more
lots or parcels which is or is intended to be used in the immediate future for
a legitimate and acceptable agricultural purpose. Such agricultural purpose
must be economically feasible and otherwise qualify as a bona fide agricultural
use. The division of land for the purpose of building, for commercial or
residential development, or for investment purposes, whether immediate or
future, shall not constitute a bona fide division or a partition of
agricultural land for agricultural development purposes. This will include five
(5) acres minimum and must meet the greenbelt amendment of Weber County.
CITY: The city of Farr West, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Farr West, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: Any registered civil engineer appointed by the city council to
accomplish the objectives of this title, provided that no such person may serve
the city and a subdivider in the city simultaneously where he or she would have
to check his own work or the work of a member of his firm in connection with
any subdivision in the city.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: A set of standard drawings and specifications entitled
"public works standards and technical specifications of Weber County" (adopted
September 21, 1989).
EASEMENT: That portion of a lot or lots reserved, granted or arising in behalf
of and for the present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal
owner or owners of said property or properties. The easement may be for use
under, over or above the lot or lots.
FINAL PLAT: A drawing of a proposed subdivision drawn accurately to scale,
which has thereon all measurements, data, certificates and dedications required
for final approval and acceptance by the proper agencies and for the recording
in the office of the county recorder.
HALF STREETS: That portion of a street within a subdivision comprising one-half
(1/2) the required right of way width upon which improvements in accordance
with one-half (1/2) of an approved typical street cross section are
constructed. (See section 16.28.010 of this title.)
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A plan to complete permanent infrastructure on the
subdivision that is essential for the public health and safety, that is
required for human occupation, or that is required by applicable law and that
an applicant must install in accordance with public installation and inspection
specifications for public improvements and as a condition of recording a
subdivision plat.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: An individual, board, or commission appointed or employed
by a municipality to make land use decisions.
LOT: A parcel of land comprising a unit within a subdivision of a unit of land
for building development or transfer of ownership together with such yards,
open spaces, lot width and area as required by the zoning ordinance of the city
of Farr West, having frontage of no less than twenty feet (20') upon a street,
lot right of way or right of way approved by the appeal authority defined in
title 2, chapter 2.28 of this code.
LOT RIGHT OF WAY: An easement of not less than twenty feet (20') wide reserved
by the lot owners as private access to serve the lots through which it passes.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: A plan, labeled "major street plan of the city of Farr
West", approved by the city council.
MASTER PLAN: A plan, labeled "master plan of Farr West", including maps or
reports or both, which has been approved by the planning commission and the
city council as required by law.
OFFICIAL MAP: Prohibited under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-306, as
amended. Municipalities may not adopt official maps nor may they be used to
unconstitutionally prohibit development of property designated for eventual use
as a public street.
PARCEL OF LAND: A contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of, or owned
by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant or person.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or association of
individuals however styled or designated.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Farr West City planning commission.
PLAT, GENERALLY: An instrument subdividing property into lots as depicted on a
map or other graphic representation of land that a licensed professional land
surveyor makes and prepares in accordance with §10-9a-603 or §57-8-13 of Utah
State Code (as amended).
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A drawing drawn to scale representing a proposal as to a
method of subdividing a tract, lot or parcel of land but which does not require
the certificates and dedications necessary for acceptance by the council. This
definition does not apply to
chapter 16.14 of this Title.
PROTECTION STRIP: A strip of land bordering both the boundary of a subdivision
and a street within the subdivision for the purpose of controlling the access
of property owners abutting the subdivision, to the street.
STREET: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the public and
accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare not less than twenty six
feet (26') wide which has been made public by right of use and which affords
the principal access to the abutting property.
   Collector Street: A street, existing or proposed, of considerable continuity
which is the main means of access to the major street system.
   Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor terminal street provided with a turnaround.
   Major Street: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to
serve as a major trafficway and is designated on the master street plan as a
controlled access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
   Marginal Access Street: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to
a limited access major street and which provides access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
   Minor Street: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a
collector street and of limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve
the local needs of a neighborhood.
   Private Street: A thoroughfare within a subdivision which has been reserved
by dedication unto the subdivider or lot owners to be used as private access to
serve the lots platted within the subdivision and complying with the adopted
street cross section standards or by the city and maintained by the subdivider
or other private agency.
SUBDIVIDER: An individual, corporation or registered partnership owning or
controlling any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided or a group of two
(2) or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided
who have given their power of attorney to one of their group or to another
individual to act on their behalf in planning, negotiating for, representing or
executing the purpose of the subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, subdivided, or proposed to be divided
into two or more lots or other division of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either on the
installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions.
   1.   Subdivision includes:
      i.   The division or development of land, whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument, regardless of whether the division includes all or a portion of a
parcel or lot; and
      ii.   Except as provided below, divisions of land for residential and
nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for commercial,
agricultural, and industrial purposes.
   2.   Subdivision does not include:
      i.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land
use ordinance;
      ii.   A boundary line agreement recorded with the County Recorder's
Office between owners of adjoining parcels adjusting the mutual boundary in
accordance with §10-9a-524 of Utah State Code (as amended) if no new parcel is
created;
      iii.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record revising the
legal descriptions of multiple parcels into one legal description encompassing
all such parcels or joining a lot to parcel;
      iv.   A boundary line agreement between owners of adjoining subdivided
properties adjusting the mutual lot line boundary in accordance with §10-9a-524
and §10-9a-608 of Utah State Code (as amended) if no new dwelling lot or
housing unit will result from the adjustment and the adjustment will not
violate any applicable land use ordinance;
      v.   A bona fide division of land by deed or other instrument if the deed
or other instrument states in writing that the division is in anticipation of
future land use approvals on the parcel or parcels does not confer any land use
approvals, and has not been approved by the land use authority;
      vi.   A parcel boundary adjustment;
      vii.   A lot line adjustment;
      viii.   A joining of one or more lots to a parcel;
      ix.   A road, street, or highway dedication plat;
      x.   A deed or easement for a road, street, or highway purpose; or
      xi.   Any other division of land authorized by law.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or
less building sites, tracts or lots, each accessible by an existing public
street.
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE: A committee consisting of the Mayor, two
members of the Planning Commission, two members of the Public Works or Storm
Water departments, and the City Engineer.
UTILITIES: Culinary water lines, pressure and gravity irrigation lines,
sanitary and storm sewer lines, electric power and telephone transmission
lines, underground conduit and junction boxes.
VICINITY PLAN: A vicinity plan shall be drawn to scale and shall show a
representation of the blocks and streets of the proposed subdivision and their
relationship to existing and proposed streets and to existing and proposed
utilities. Size of such utilities shall also be shown.
   1.   A vicinity plan and a written statement explaining the intent of the
subdivider can then be prepared for review by the planning commission prior to
submission of the preliminary plat. Two (2) copies of each are required.
   2.   The vicinity plan should be based on or referenced to a published
street, highway, USGS or zoning map and should show the relationship of the
proposed residential development to the community facilities which serve or
influence it, such as traffic arteries, commercial or industrial areas,
schools, parks, etc., within one mile of the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision. Consideration should be given to proposed future as well as
existing facilities in the area.
   3.   The written statement should be in sufficient detail that the intent of
the subdivider is clear to those persons who review the proposal for the city.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance of the city of Farr West as adopted and
amended by the city council of the city of Farr West. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 13-
05: Ord. 06-01 §§ 1, 2: Ord. 97-19 § 1: Ord. 97-11 § 1: Ord. 93-04: Ord. 93-02:
Ord. 89-003 § 3)
CHAPTER 16.12
FEES
SECTION:
16.12.010: Processing Fees
16.12.020: Subdivision Plat Application And Engineering Fees
16.12.010: PROCESSING FEES:
   A.   At the time of presenting the preliminary plan to the planning
commission, the subdivider shall pay the Farr West City recorder a
nonrefundable processing fee as prescribed in the fee schedule (see title 3,
chapter 3.30 of this code).
   B.   Phase developments will be charged a fee for the overall preliminary
plan (see title 3,
chapter 3.30, "Fee Schedule", of this code), and each individual phase will pay
the regular processing fees.
   C.   In the event that action of the appeal authority is required, an
additional fee shall be paid as prescribed in the fee schedule.
   D.   Any revision of original plans which require planning commission action
shall be charged an additional fee as prescribed in the fee schedule.
   E.   The payment of any fees above prescribed shall not constitute or imply
in any way that the subject subdivision has been or will be approved. The fees
herein prescribed and paid shall in no event be refundable. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord.
13-05: Ord. 2012-02)
16.12.020: SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION AND ENGINEERING FEES:
   A.   The Farr West City council directs that the engineering review system,
as provided by Farr West City for all new developments proposed within the
city, be based on a user fee.
   B.   The engineering review provided to the city for the purpose of
development review shall be outlined in the adopted engineering services
contract, as amended.
   C.   The engineering review fees shall cover the cost of the associated
professional services rendered to the city by the consultant engineer during
the development approval period. The "development approval period" shall be
defined as that period beginning with the preliminary development application
with the city through final approval by the city council. This does not cover
user fees associated with the actual construction period.
   D.   The engineering review fees as prescribed in the fee schedule (see
title 3,
chapter 3.30 of this code) shall be payable to the city at the time of the
preliminary site plan approval application. The potential development will not
be placed on the planning commission agenda until the fees are paid in advance.
The engineering review fees shall be based on: 1) the subdivision developments,
and 2) the site plan reviews. These fees shall be considered by the city as a
"deposit" against the actual cost of the services provided by the city engineer
during the development review period. Following final approval by the city
council of the subdivision or the site plan, the city recorder will provide an
accounting of the costs incurred during the development review process. If the
costs incurred are less than the fee collected, the balance of the funds in the
account will be refunded to the developer/subdivider. If the costs incurred are
more than the amount of the collected fee, then the developer/subdivider will
be required to pay to the city the deficient amount. The city will not record
the final subdivision plat or issue building permits until deficient fees have
been paid.
   E.   Should the developer/subdivider decide to abandon the proposed
development after the payment of the review fees, the city recorder will
provide an accounting of the costs incurred to date during the development
review process. If the costs incurred are less than the fee collected, the
balance of the funds in the account will be refunded to the developer/
subdivider. If the costs incurred are more than the amount of the collected
fee, then the developer/subdivider will be required to pay to the city the
deficient amount.
   F.   The developer/subdivider, at the time of the payment of the review fee
deposit, shall sign an acknowledgment that he understands the city engineering
review system and he agrees to abide by the requirements. Should the city be
required to employ legal means to collect deficient user fees, the developer/
subdivider will pay all associated legal and collection fees required for
collection. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 2012-02)
CHAPTER 16.14
SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS FOR 1-2 FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SECTION:
16.14.010: Purpose
16.14.020: Scope Of Applicability
16.14.030: Interpretation And Conflict Of Laws
16.14.040: Subdivision Land Use Authority
16.14.050: Subdivision Appeal Authority
16.14.060: Application Process And Requirements
16.14.070: Pre-Application Meeting
16.14.080: Notice To Affected Entities
16.14.090: Review
16.14.100: Approval
16.14.110: Post-Approval Actions
16.14.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to comply with Utah Code §10-9a-604—604.9 and
increase administrative efficiency in reviewing subdivision applications. (Ord.
2024-06)
16.14.020: SCOPE OF APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter applies to all subdivision-related applications or petitions where
the intended use is one- or two-family residential dwellings. This Chapter does
not apply to applications or petitions for other uses. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.030: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT OF LAWS:
Where any provision in this Subdivision Chapter conflicts with state law, state
law shall prevail. Where any provision in this Subdivision Chapter conflicts
with other ordinances enacted by the City, the provisions in this Subdivision
Chapter shall prevail unless the City intended such conflicting ordinances not
in this Chapter to amend this Chapter. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.040: SUBDIVISION LAND USE AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Land Use Authority for preliminary applications under this Chapter
is the Planning Commission. For purposes of subdivision applications, the
Planning Commission shall be ultimately responsible for the following, but may
delegate any task to the City Engineer, City staff, or members of the Planning
Commission:
      1.   Rendering land use decisions related to preliminary applications
under this Chapter, including approving or denying preliminary applications.
      2.   Reviewing all preliminary applications under this Chapter in an
impartial manner and according to the standards and deadlines described in this
Chapter. This task is delegated to the City Engineer by default.
      3.   Holding public meetings for reviewing preliminary applications as
required by this Chapter.
      4.   Providing feedback to applicants on their preliminary applications
in the manner required by this Chapter. This task is delegated to City staff by
default.
      5.   Scheduling and holding a pre-application meeting with potential
applicants as required by this Chapter. This task is delegated to City staff
and the Subdivision Development Committee, as described in
16.14.070, by default.
      6.   Keeping subdivision application forms (both preliminary and final)
and related informational material up to date and publicly accessible and
distributing such forms and materials to potential applicants. This task is
delegated to City staff by default.
   B.   The Land Use Authority for final applications under this Chapter is the
Administrative Land Use Authority (ALUA). For purposes of subdivision
applications, the ALUA shall be responsible for the following, but may delegate
any task to the City Engineer, City staff, or members of the ALUA:
      1.   Rendering land use decisions related to final applications under
this Chapter, including approving or denying final applications.
      2.   Reviewing all final applications under this Chapter in an impartial
manner and according to the standards and deadlines described in this Chapter.
      3.   Providing feedback to applicants on their final applications in the
manner required by this Chapter.
      4.   Providing notice to entities and parties as required by this
Chapter.
      5.   Signing final application approvals as required by this Chapter.
      6.   Ensuring that documents are properly recorded with the County as
required by this Chapter.
   C.   As subdivision application decisions are administrative, not
legislative, the Land Use Authorities are authorized to make any land use
decision described by this Chapter without City Council approval.
   D.   Except when operating as the Appeal Authority, the City Council shall
not require a Land Use Authority to approve or deny an application under this
Chapter. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.050: SUBDIVISION APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Appeal Authority for City decisions relating to this Chapter,
except where otherwise noted, is the City Council.
   B.   The Appeal Authority shall hear appeals on final decisions made by the
Land Use Authorities and shall hear complaints about the conduct of the Land
Use Authorities in administering the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   A party appealing or complaining of a Land Use Authority's decision
under this Chapter must exhaust its remedies under this section (by appealing
or complaining to the Appeal Authority) before bringing an action against the
City in a court of law.
   D.   A party who has submitted a subdivision application or petition may
appeal or complain to the Appeal Authority under this Chapter. In such an
appeal or complaint, the party may appeal or complain only regarding the Land
Use Authority's treatment of that party's own application; a third party may
not appeal or complain of Land Use Authority decisions or conduct.
   E.   A party desiring to appeal or complain of a Land Use Authority decision
shall submit to the Appeal Authority the following in writing:
      1.   A brief explanation of the relief the party is seeking, the reason
the party submitted its application or petition, the Land Use Authority's
decision and treatment of the application or petition, and why the applicant
believes the Land Use Authority misapplied the provisions of this Chapter or
abused the discretion given it by this Chapter.
      2.   The most recent version of the application or petition the party
submitted.
      3.   Any supplemental documentation or information that the Appeal
Authority requests.
      4.   All appeals and complaints must be emailed or mailed to the City
Recorder using the Recorder's official City address and/or email account listed
on the City website.
   F.   After receiving a complete appeal or complaint in accordance with this
Section, the Appeal Authority shall deliver a decision to the applicant, in
writing, no later than 30 days after the Appeal Authority receives the appeal
or complaint. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.060: APPLICATION PROCESS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The City shall not approve, nor shall a party record, any plat or other
creating instrument for a new subdivision under this Chapter unless the party
has properly applied under this Chapter and received both a preliminary
approval and a final approval from the respective Land Use Authorities.
   B.   To be considered complete, a preliminary subdivision application must
include at least the following elements:
      1.   An approved land use application that describes how the property
will be used after it is subdivided.
         a.   If the intended use is permitted by right under City ordinances,
the land use application must include citations to the specific ordinance(s)
that the applicant believes authorizes the intended use.
         b.   If the intended use is prohibited under City ordinances and
requires a variance, the land use application must include an approved, City-
issued variance authorizing the intended use. Should an applicant seek a
variance concurrently with a related subdivision application, the subdivision
application shall be considered incomplete until the variance is issued.
      2.   A plat. The plat must be drawn to scale, in detail, and in
accordance with generally accepted surveying standards and the acceptable
filing standards of the County Recorder's Office. The plat must also meet the
requirements listed in section
16.16.040 and
chapter 16.28 of this Title.
      3.   An improvement plan, created in accordance with applicable portions
of chapters 16.29 and
16.32 of this Title, for all public improvements proposed by the applicant or
required by City ordinances.
      4.   Certifications, including:
         a.   An affidavit from the applicant certifying that the submitted
information is true and accurate.
         b.   The signature of each owner of record of land described on the
plat, signifying their dedication and approval of the plat.
         c.   Certification that the surveyor who prepared the plat:
            (1)   Holds a license in accordance with Utah Code 58-22; and
            (2)   Either:
               (A)   Has completed a survey of the property described on the
plat in accordance with state requirements and has verified all measurements;
or
               (B)   Has referenced a record of survey map of the existing
property boundaries shown on the plat and verified the locations of the
boundaries; and
            (3)   Has placed monuments as represented on the plat.
         d.   Proof of approval by the local fire department and the entities
that will provide the subdivision with the following:
            (1)   Culinary water;
            (2)   Sanitary sewer;
            (3)   Secondary water;
            (4)   Natural gas;
            (5)   Electricity; and
            (6)   Telecommunications.
      5.   An electronic copy of all plans in PDF format.
      6.   Payment of any application-processing fees required by the City.
   C.   To be considered complete, a final subdivision application must meet
all the same requirements as the preliminary application, plus the requirements
listed in sections
16.24.030 and
16.24.040 of this Title and the requirement in
16.14.090.H.2 that the applicant attend all public meetings held to discuss the
applicant's preliminary application. The City may, however, waive the final
plat requirement for minor subdivisions as authorized by
chapter 16.20 of this Title.
   D.   City staff (under the direction of the Planning Commission) shall
produce, maintain, and make available to the public a list of the specific
items that comprise complete preliminary and final applications and a breakdown
of any fees due upon submission or approval of the applications.
   E.   The Planning Commission, the ALUA, or their designees may require, and
the applicant shall provide, additional information beyond the requirements of
this Section or those published by the City relating to an applicant's plans to
ensure compliance with City ordinances and approved standards and
specifications for construction of public improvements. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.070: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING:
   A.   A party intending to submit a subdivision application under this
Chapter may request a pre-application meeting with the Subdivision Development
Committee for the purpose of reviewing any element of the party's proposed
subdivision application (preliminary or final). The proposed application need
not be complete for purposes of this meeting and may-if the party desires-be
limited to a concept plan.
      1.   To request a pre-application meeting, the party must contact a City
staff member.
      2.   If a party requests a pre-application meeting, City staff shall
schedule the meeting within 15 business days after the request. The meeting
shall be scheduled at the earliest convenient opportunity, and, at the option
of the party requesting the meeting, shall occur within 45 business days after
scheduling.
      3.   The Subdivision Development Committee (or a member of the body that
makes up the Subdivision Development Committee) shall conduct the meeting,
provide feedback on materials as requested by the party, and shall provide or
have available on the City website the following at the time of the meeting:
         a.   Copies of applicable land use regulations;
         b.   A complete list of standards required for the project; and
         c.   Relevant application checklists. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.080: NOTICE TO AFFECTED ENTITIES:
   A.   Within 15 days after receiving a complete preliminary subdivision
application under this Chapter, City staff shall provide written notice of the
proposed subdivision to the facility owner of any water conveyance facility
located, entirely or partially, within 100 feet of the subdivision plat.
      1.   To determine whether any water conveyance facility is located within
100 feet of a proposed subdivision, City staff shall review information:
         a.   From the facility owner under Utah Code §10-9a-211, using
mapping-grade global positioning satellite units or digitized data from the
most recent aerial photo available to the facility owner;
         b.   From the state engineer's inventory of canals; or
         c.   From a licensed surveyor who has consulted with a representative
of an existing water conveyance facility that services an area near the land
the application concerns.
   B.   To give water conveyance facilities time to provide feedback on
subdivision applications, the City shall not approve a preliminary or final
subdivision application under this Chapter sooner than 20 days after the
applicant submits a complete application. This waiting period does not apply to
revised applications the applicant may submit during the application review
process.
      1.   A water conveyance facility owner's failure to provide comments
about a subdivision application does not affect or impair the City's authority
to approve the subdivision application. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.090: REVIEW:
   A.   The respective Land Use Authorities or their designees shall review all
subdivision applications under this Chapter in accordance with the requirements
of this Section before approving or denying those applications.
   B.   For both preliminary and final applications, the review process begins
when an applicant submits a complete application.
      1.   The respective Land Use Authorities or their designees shall not
review an incomplete preliminary or final subdivision application, except to
determine whether the application is complete.
      2.   If the appropriate Land Use Authority or its designees determines
that a preliminary or final application is incomplete, it shall notify the
applicant of the incompleteness, highlighting any insufficiencies and
explaining that the application will not be reviewed until completed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2937.png]
   C.   Preliminary Review: After the applicant submits a complete preliminary
application, the Land Use Authority or its designees shall review and provide
feedback to the applicant in up to three "review cycles."
      1.   A review cycle consists of the following phases:
         a.   Phase #1: The applicant submits a complete application (or, if
after the first cycle, submits a revised version of the complete application).
         b.   Phase #2: The Land Use Authority reviews the application in
detail and assesses whether the application conforms to City ordinances.
         c.   Phase #3: The Land Use Authority responds to the applicant,
citing any missing requirements or areas of noncompliance and providing a
detailed list of necessary revisions to the applicant, within 15 business days
after the applicant submitted the complete application. For any required
modification or addition to the application or request for more information,
the Land Use Authority shall be specific and include citations to ordinances,
standards, or specifications that require the modification and shall provide
the applicant with an index of all requested modifications or additions.
         d.   Phase #4: The applicant revises the application, addressing each
comment or requirement the Land Use Authority made. The applicant must submit
both revised plans and a written explanation in response to the Land Use
Authority's review comments, identifying and explaining the applicant's
revisions and reasons for declining to make revisions, if any. This written
explanation shall be comprehensive and specific, including citations to
applicable standards and ordinances and an index of requested revisions or
additions for each required correction. If the applicant fails to respond to a
comment made by the Land Use Authority in its review, the review cycle is not
complete and will remain open until the applicant addresses all comments.
      2.   Unless otherwise decided by the Planning Commission, the City
Engineer, with help from other City staff, shall receive, review, and respond
to preliminary applications (completing Step #2 and Step #3) during the first
two review cycles. The Planning Commission will then review the application and
either request further changes in the third review cycle or approve the
application.
         a.   The Planning Commission may review a preliminary application at
any time at its own request or the request of the City Engineer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2939.png]
   D.   Final Review: Once the Planning Commission has approved an applicant's
preliminary application and once the applicant submits a complete final
application, the ALUA shall review and provide feedback to the applicant in up
to one review cycle. This review cycle functions as described in subsection C1,
except that the Land Use Authority shall have 20 business days to review and
respond to the applicant's final application (completing Step #2 and Step #3).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2941.png]
 
   E.   The City shall not require more than three review cycles for a
preliminary application and one for a final application under this Chapter. If
no further revisions are needed, the Planning Commission or ALUA, respectively,
may end a review period early and approve or deny the preliminary or final
application.
      1.   If the applicant makes a material change to a preliminary or final
application not requested by the City at any point in the review process, the
appropriate Land Use Authority may restart the review process, but only with
respect to the portion of the application that the material change
substantively affects.
      2.   If an applicant does not submit a revised application (beginning
Phase #1 of the next review cycle or triggering an approval decision) within 20
business days after the City requires a modification or correction (in Phase #3
of the past review cycle), the City shall have an additional 20 business days
to review and respond to the application (completing Phases #2 and #3 of the
next review cycle).
      3.   This provision notwithstanding, any subdivision application
affecting property within identified geological hazard areas is exempt from
review cycle restrictions and requirements.
   F.   After the third preliminary review cycle or the final review cycle is
complete, the Planning Commission or ALUA shall approve or deny the respective
preliminary or final application within 20 business days.
      1.   If the appropriate Land Use Authority has not approved or denied the
application within 20 business days after the allotted review cycles are
complete, the applicant may request a decision. After such a request, the City
shall, within 10 business days:
         a.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision improvement plans,
assemble an appeal panel in accordance with Utah Code §10-9a-508(5)(d) to
review and approve or deny the revised set of plans; or
         b.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision ordinance review,
advise the applicant, in writing, of the deficiency in the application and of
the right to appeal the determination to the designated Appeal Authority.
   G.   After the ALUA provides comments in the final review cycle, the City
shall not require further modifications or corrections to an application unless
those modifications or corrections are needed to protect public health and
safety or to enforce state or federal law or unless the review cycle reset due
to the applicant making a material change that the Planning Commission or the
ALUA did not request.
      1.   With the exception of modifications or corrections that are needed
to protect public health and safety, that are needed to enforce state or
federal law, or that arise from the review cycle being reset, the City waives
noncompliant subdivision-related requirements that the Planning Commission and
the ALUA do not identify during the review process.
      2.   The applicant shall make reasonable changes, unless prohibited
otherwise by a contract or deed, to the subdivision application to accommodate
water conveyance facilities to the extent required by Utah Code §73-1-15.5.
   H.   The Planning Commission may hold one or more public meetings during the
review period of a preliminary application under this Chapter for the purpose
of reviewing or approving such application.
      1.   All public meetings to review a preliminary subdivision application
must occur before the end of the City's review period in the third review
cycle. Scheduling issues shall not extend the review and approval deadlines in
this Chapter.
      2.   The applicant shall attend all public meetings held to discuss the
applicant's preliminary subdivision application. Unless waived by the Planning
Commission on a case-by-case basis, attendance at such meetings is a
requirement for submitting a complete final application.
   I.   Other chapters of this Title notwithstanding, the Planning Commission
and the ALUA, respectively, shall approve or deny preliminary and final
applications under this Chapter after reviewing the complete applications as
described in this Section. (Ord. 2024-06)
16.14.100: APPROVAL:
   A.   The Planning Commission and the ALUA, respectively, shall approve any
complete preliminary and final applications made under this Chapter that comply
with applicable City ordinances.
   B.   The Planning Commission and the ALUA shall issue all approvals in
writing. The ALUA shall certify the approved final plat, either by signing the
plat directly or by attaching a signed certification to the plat. (Ord. 2024-
06)
16.14.110: POST-APPROVAL ACTIONS:
   A.   The applicant shall record the approved final plat with the County
Recorder's Office within twelve months after the ALUA approves the final
application, provided that the applicant has completed any improvements or
posted any performance guarantee required by City ordinances or described in
the improvement plan the applicant submitted. The applicant shall not record
the approved final plat until such improvements are completed or guaranteed.
   B.   City staff shall submit to the Utah Geospatial Resource Center (so the
subdivision can be included in the 911 database), within 30 days after
approving a final application, either:
      1.   An electronic copy of the approved final plat; or
      2.   Preliminary geospatial data that depict any new streets and situs
addresses proposed for construction within the bounds of the approved final
plat.
   C.   City staff shall, if requested by the Utah Geospatial Resource Center:
      1.   Coordinate with the Utah Geospatial Resource Center to validate the
information the City submitted about the final plat; and
      2.   Assist the Utah Geospatial Resource Center in creating electronic
files that contain the information described in the final plat for inclusion in
the unified statewide 911 emergency service database. (Ord. 2024-06)
CHAPTER 16.16
PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL
SECTION:
16.16.010: Preliminary Information
16.16.020: Subdivision Information Form
16.16.030: Preliminary Plan Filing
16.16.040: Preliminary Plan Requirements
16.16.050: Preliminary Plan Approval
16.16.060: Time Limitation
16.16.070: Grading Limitation
16.16.010: PRELIMINARY INFORMATION:
Each person who proposes to subdivide land in the city of Farr West shall
confer with the planning commission staff before preparing any plats, charts or
plans in order to become familiar with the city subdivision requirements and
existing master plans for the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies
and to discuss the proposed plan of development of the tract. (Ord. 2024-06:
Ord. 89- 003 § 5(A))
16.16.020: SUBDIVISION INFORMATION FORM:
A subdivision information form (form 002-89) supplied to the subdivider by the
city recorder shall be filled out and submitted to the planning commission with
the preliminary plan. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89- 003 § 5(B))
16.16.030: PRELIMINARY PLAN FILING:
A preliminary plan shall be prepared in conformance with the standards, rules
and regulations contained herein and eighteen (18) black and white prints
thereof shall be submitted to the city to be distributed to the planning
commission and the city council for approval or disapproval. One print shall be
delivered by the planning commission chairperson to each of the following for
their information and written recommendations: city engineer, servicing fire
department, and any company furnishing telephone, electricity, water or gas
service as well as those companies or entities involved with easements or
rights of way within the city which may be affected by the proposed
subdivision. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 92-04: Ord. 89-003 § 5(C))
16.16.040: PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one
hundred feet (100') to the inch, and shall show:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision, which must be distinct from
any subdivision name on a plat recorded in the county recorder's office;
      2.   The boundaries, course, and dimensions of all parcels;
      3.   The lot or unit reference; block or building reference; street or
site address; street name or coordinate address; acreage or square footage for
all parcels, units, or lots; and length and width of the blocks and lots
intended for sale;
      4.   Its location as forming a part of a larger tract or parcel, where
the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract or only a part
of a larger vacant area. In such case, a sketch of the prospective future
street system of the unplatted parts, shall be submitted, and the street system
of the part submitted shall be considered in the light of adjustments and
connections with the future street system of the larger area;
      5.   Sufficient information to locate accurately the property shown on
the plan;
      6.   The names and addresses of the subdivider, the engineer or surveyor
of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land
to be subdivided;
      7.   Contour map at appropriate intervals as determined by the planning
commission;
      8.   The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided;
      9.   The location, widths and other dimensions of all existing or platted
streets and other important features such as railroad lines, watercourses,
exceptional topography, and buildings within or immediately adjacent to the
tract to be subdivided;
      10.   Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, water supply mains, and
culverts within the tract and within five hundred feet (500') thereof;
      11.   Any other known and unrecorded water conveyance facility located,
entirely or partially, within the plat;
      12.   Every existing right-of-way and recorded easement located within
the plat for underground, water, and utility facilities;
      13.   The locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed public
streets, private streets, alleys, utility easements, parks, other open spaces
and lots, with proper labeling of spaces to be dedicated to the public, or
designated as private streets;
      14.   North point, scale and date.
   B.   Plans or written statements regarding the proposed storm water drainage
facilities and other proposed improvements, such as planting and parks, and any
grading of individual lots. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 5(D))
16.16.050: PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL:
   A.   Review And Recommendations: The preliminary plan shall be reviewed by
the planning commission. The commission shall make a recommendation to the city
council on the plan, as submitted or modified, within sixty (60) days after its
presentation to the planning commission. The city council shall conduct a
review based upon the planning commission's recommendations, the
recommendations of the city engineer and the written recommendations of the
utilities. Within forty five (45) days of receiving the planning commission's
recommendation, the city council shall vote to approve, disapprove or to
approve with conditions the preliminary plan.
   B.   City Council Determination: If approved, the city council shall express
its written approval with those conditions, if any, specified in writing and
shall return one copy of the preliminary plan, signed by the mayor, to the
subdivider. If the preliminary plan is disapproved the city council shall
indicate its disapproval in writing and reasons therefore by similarly signed
copies. Notification of approval of the preliminary plan shall be authorization
for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat and
specifications for the minimum improvements required in
chapters 16.24 and
16.28 of this title. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 92-04: Ord. 89-003 § 5(E))
16.16.060: TIME LIMITATION:
Approval of the preliminary plan by the city council shall be valid for a
maximum period of one year after approval unless upon application of the
subdivider, the city council grants an extension. If the final plat has not
been submitted within the one year or approved extended period, the preliminary
plan must again be submitted to the planning commission and city council for
reapproval; however preliminary approval of a large tract shall not be voided,
provided the final plat of the first section is submitted for final approval
within the one year period. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 92-04: Ord. 89-003 § 5(F))
16.16.070: GRADING LIMITATION:
No large scale excavation, grading or regrading shall take place on any land
for which a preliminary subdivision has been submitted until such plan has been
given preliminary approval by the planning commission. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-
003 § 5(G))
CHAPTER 16.20
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
16.20.010: Designated
16.20.020: Required Applications
16.20.030: Waiver Of Final Plats Allowed When
16.20.010: DESIGNATED:
When a tract or parcel of land is divided into three (3) or less building
sites, tracts or lots, each of which are accessible by an existing public
street, said lots shall be termed a minor subdivision. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 93-
04: Ord. 89-003 § 5A(A))
16.20.020: REQUIRED APPLICATIONS:
Applications for subdivision and preliminary plats shall be required for all
minor subdivisions. Under the following conditions, and upon review and
approval of the Farr West City planning commission and city council, the
subdivider may be authorized to sell a building lot, or lots, by metes and
bounds, and the requirements of preparing a final plat may be waived. When
final plats are not required, the subdivider shall provide plans and construct
such improvements on existing streets abutting the subdivision as required by
this title. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 93-04: Ord. 89-003 § 5A(B))
16.20.030: WAIVER OF FINAL PLATS ALLOWED WHEN:
   A.   At the discretion of the planning commission and city council, final
plats may be waived when all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The proposed subdivision consists of not more than three (3) lots;
      2.   The proposed subdivision does not require the dedication of any land
for street or other public purposes;
      3.   The proposed subdivision has in place access to public "utilities"
as defined in
chapter 16.08 of this title;
      4.   Each of the lots in the proposed subdivision meets the frontage,
width and area requirements of the Farr West City zoning ordinance, or has been
granted a variance from such requirements by the appeal authority.
   B.   When the final plat is waived under this Section, the preliminary plat
shall be properly recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 13-05:
Ord. 93-04: Ord. 89-003 § 5A(C))
CHAPTER 16.24
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
16.24.010: Tentative Final Plat Required
16.24.020: Final Plat Required
16.24.030: Final Plat Requirements
16.24.040: Engineering Data Required
16.24.050: Approval Of Final Plat
16.24.010: TENTATIVE FINAL PLAT REQUIRED:
   A.   Prior to the submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall submit
two (2) copies of the tentative final plat to the Planning Commission who shall
check the tentative final plat against the requirements and conditions of
approval of the preliminary plan.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall return one (1) copy of the checked
tentative final plat to the subdivider indicating thereon any changes required
by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 6(A))
16.24.020: FINAL PLAT REQUIRED:
   A.   After compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
chapter 16.28 of this title, the subdivider shall submit a final plat with two
(2) copies thereof to the Planning Commission. Such plat shall be accompanied
by a letter of certification by the subdivider's engineer, indicating that all
lots meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
   B.   The final plat and accompanying information shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission at least ten (10) working days prior to a regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting in order to be considered at said
meeting. (2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 6(B))
16.24.030: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat shall consist of a sheet of approved tracing linen or Mylar, to
the outside or trim dimensions of nineteen inches by thirty inches (19" x 30")
and the borderline of the plat shall be drawn in heavy lines leaving a space of
at least one-half inch (1/2") margin on all four (4) sides of the sheet. The
plat shall be so drawn that the top of the sheet faces either north or west,
whichever accommodates the drawing best. All lines, dimensions and markings
shall be made on the tracing linen with approved waterproof black India drawing
ink. The plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly show all
details, in any case not smaller than one hundred feet (100') to the inch, and
the workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat, clean cut and readable.
The plat shall be signed by all parties mentioned in subsection H of this
section, duly authorized and required to sign, and shall contain the following
information:
   A.   A subdivision name, approved by the County Recorder, and the general
location of the subdivision, in bold letters at the top of the sheet;
   B.   Where a subdivision complies with the planned development overlay of
the zoning ordinance and chapter 16.28 of this title, the final plat shall
indicate underneath the subdivision name, the words, "Planned Development";
   C.   A north point and scale of the drawing, and the date;
   D.   Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper bearings and dimensions
of all boundary lines of the subdivision. These lines should be slightly
heavier than street and lot lines;
   E.   The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data on centerlines of
proposed streets, alleys and easements; also the boundaries, bearings and
dimensions of all portions within the subdivision as intended to be dedicated
to the use of the public; the lines, dimensions, bearings and numbers of all
lots, blocks and parts reserved for any reason within the subdivision. All lots
are to be numbered consecutively under a definite system approved by the
Planning Commission and conform as far as practicable to the adopted street
naming and numbering system of the City of Farr West;
   F.   The final plat will designate all lots with an "R" restriction with the
following note: "R" Restriction. All lots in this subdivision are restricted
with regard to finished floor level. Finished floor elevation of future homes
lower than top back of curb elevation fronting the lot are not allowed.
Exceptions to this restriction are found in subsection 15.04.020K of the Farr
West Municipal Code;
   G.   Parcels of land to be dedicated as public park or to be permanently
reserved for private common open space shall be included in the lot numbering
system and shall also be titled "public park" or "private common open space",
whichever is applicable;
   H.   Approval by the culinary water authority and the sanitary sewer
authority;
   I.   A Preliminary Title Report or Title Insurance Policy for the land to be
subdivided verifying property ownership.
   J.   A completion assurance for public improvements, as described in section
16.32.030 of this Title.
   K.   As applicable, formal, irrevocable offers for dedication to the public
of streets, City uses, utilities, parks, easements, or other spaces.
   L.   If the plat is to be part of a community association, signed and
binding documents conveying to the association all common areas.
   M.   The standard forms approved by the Planning Commission for all
subdivision plats lettered for the following:
      1.   Description of land to be included in subdivision;
      2.   Registered professional engineer and/or land surveyors' certificate
of survey;
      3.   Owner's dedication certificate;
      4.   Notary public's acknowledgment;
      5.   City Planning Commission's certificate of approval;
      6.   City Engineer's certificate of approval;
      7.   City Council certificate of acceptance attested by the City
Recorder.
   N.   A three inch by three inch (3" x 3") space in the lower right hand
corner of the drawing for recording information. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 17-05)
16.24.040: ENGINEERING DATA REQUIRED:
The subdivider shall cause to be prepared by a qualified engineer not in the
employ of the City a complete set of profiles, construction and design data of
all streets, existing and proposed, and all utilities to be constructed within
the subdivision and furnish two (2) sets of such information to the City with
the final plat. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 92-04: Ord. 89-003 § 6(D))
16.24.050: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   After approving and signing the final plat, the Planning Commission
shall submit the plat for approval to the City Engineer, who shall check the
engineering requirements of the drawing, and determine the amount of the bond,
escrow agreement or irrevocable letter of credit to assure construction of the
improvements where necessary. After approval and signature by the City
Engineer, the plat and the escrow, bond agreement, or the letter of credit
shall be submitted to the City Attorney and the City Council, respectively for
their approval. The final plat, bearing all official approvals as above
required, shall be deposited in the Offices of the County Recorder for
recording at the expense of the subdivider who shall be notified of such
deposit by the Office of the County Recorder. No construction or building shall
be begun until after the recording of the final plat.
   B.   No plats shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder and no
lots included in such plat shall be sold or exchanged unless and until the plat
is so approved, signed and accepted. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 6(E))
CHAPTER 16.28
SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.28.010: Relation To Adjoining Street System
16.28.020: Street And Alley Widths, Cul-De-Sacs, Easements And Street Access
16.28.030: Blocks
16.28.040: Lots
16.28.050: Parks, School Sites And Other Public Places
16.28.010: RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM:
   A.   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas (or their proper
protection where adjoining land is not subdivided) insofar as such may be
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for public requirements. The street
arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of
adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for
convenient access to it. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for
subdivision will not be permitted.
   B.   Minor streets shall approach the major or collector streets at an angle
of not less than eighty degrees (80°). (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 7(A))
16.28.020: STREET AND ALLEY WIDTHS, CUL-DE-SACS, EASEMENTS AND STREET ACCESS:
   A.   Street Dedication: All streets in subdivisions in the City of Farr West
shall be dedicated to the City.
   B.   Major And Collector Streets: Major and collector streets shall conform
to the width designated on the Master Street Plan wherever a subdivision falls
in an area for which a Master Street Plan has been adopted. For territory where
such street plan has not been completed at the time the preliminary plan is
submitted to the Planning Commission, the minimum widths of one hundred feet
(100') for major streets and sixty feet to eighty feet (60' - 80') for
collector streets shall apply.
   C.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall have a minimum width of sixty feet
(60').
   D.   Alleys: Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Alleys
may be required in the rear of business lots, but will not be accepted in
residential blocks except under unusual conditions where such alleys are
considered necessary by the Planning Commission.
   E.   Cul-De-Sacs:
      1.   Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum diameter of one hundred thirty feet
(130') and have a turnaround not less than one hundred ten feet (110') in
diameter, as measured from inside edge of the curb to inside edge of the curb.
If, due to the grade of the street, surface water drainage is into the
turnaround, then necessary catch basins and/or drains and drainage easements
shall be provided.
      2.   Where a street is designed to remain only temporarily as a dead end
street and a house has frontage on the street, an adequate temporary turning
area shall be provided at the dead end street thereof to remain and be
available for public use so long as the dead end condition exists.
      3.   Half cul-de-sacs and knuckles are not permitted on any street.
   F.   Easements For Drainage: Easements for drainage through the property may
be required by the City Engineer, and easements of not less than ten feet (10')
in width shall be provided where required for utilities or other purposes.
   G.   Service Roads: Service roads paralleling major streets shall be
required unless the Planning Commission approves double frontage lots which may
back onto major highways or collector streets as designated on the major street
plan. Where lots back onto a major highway or collector street a buffer
planting strip of trees or shrubs shall be provided at a width of ten feet
(10') or wider, but in no case less than ten feet (10').
   H.   Protection Strips: Where subdivision streets parallel contiguous
property of other owners, the subdivider may, upon approval of the Planning
Commission, retain a protection strip not less than one foot (1') in width
between the street and adjacent property, provided that an agreement approved
by the City Attorney has been made by the subdivider, contracting to deed to
the owners of the contiguous property, the one foot (1') or larger protection
strip for consideration named in the agreement. Such consideration to be not
more than the fair cost of land in the protection strip, the street
improvements properly chargeable to the contiguous property, plus the value of
one-half (1/2) the land in the street at the time of agreement, together with
interest at a fair rate from time of agreement until time of subdivision of
such contiguous property. One copy of the agreement shall be submitted to the
City Attorney and one to the Planning Commission prior to approval of the final
plat.
   I.   Street Access: Developments, including proposed developments done in
multiple phases, where the total number of dwelling units in the entire
development exceeds thirty (30), shall require two (2) separate City approved
access streets. Where two (2) access streets are required, they shall be placed
a distance apart not less than one-half (1/2) of the length of the maximum
overall diagonal dimension of the property, measured in a straight line between
accesses.
   J.   Alternative Access: If the required distance between the two (2) access
streets required by this chapter cannot be achieved because of the
development's configuration and dimensions, the location of connecting roads,
topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar conditions which
are not due solely to the design of the development, then the developer may
submit to the Planning Commission for its consideration access streets which
have an alternate distance apart than that required by this paragraph. Such a
submission must fully describe the conditions which the developer believes
would not permit the distance between access roads required by this chapter and
include the developer's recommendation for alternate locations of the required
access streets. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 2017-12: Ord. 2014-03: Ord. 2013-04: Ord.
02-01 § 1: Ord. 89-003 § 7(B))
16.28.030: BLOCKS:
   A.   Blocks shall not exceed one thousand six hundred feet (1,600') in
length. A dedicated walkway through the block may be required where access is
necessary to a point designated by the Planning Commission. The subdivider
shall surface the full width of the walkway with concrete surface, install a
chainlink fence, or its equal, four feet (4') high on each side and the full
length of each walkway, and provide, in accordance with the standards and rules
and regulations, barriers at each walkway entrance to allow vehicles no wider
than four feet (4').
   B.   The width of blocks generally shall be sufficient to allow two (2)
tiers or lots.
   C.   Irregular shaped blocks, indented by cul-de-sacs, or containing
interior spaces, will be acceptable when properly designed and fitted to the
overall plat.
   D.   Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off street
parking and delivery facilities. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 7(C))
16.28.040: LOTS:
   A.   Arrangement And Design: The lot arrangement and design shall be such
that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings and be
properly related to topography and to existing and probable future
requirements.
   B.   Required Minimums:
      1.   All lots shown on the subdivision plan must conform to the minimum
requirements of the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the subdivision is
located, and to the minimum requirements of the City Engineer and the County
Board of Health for sewage disposal.
      2.   The minimum width for any residential building lot shall be as
required by the zoning ordinance.
      3.   Where a public sewer is not available the minimum area of such lots
shall be not less than that approved in a letter to the Planning Commission by
the Board of Health nor less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
whichever is greater.
   C.   Abut On Dedicated Street:
      1.   Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the recording of the
subdivision or on an existing publicly dedicated street, or on a street which
has become public by right of use and is more than twenty six feet (26') wide.
      2.   Interior lots abutting on more than one street shall be prohibited
except where unusual conditions make other design undesirable. In the event a
lot abuts on a public right-of-way created by use, the subdividers shall be
required to improve the right-of-way to the standards set by Farr West City.
   D.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for
maintenance of required building lines on both streets.
   E.   Sideline Standard: Sidelines of lots shall be approximately at right
angles, or radial to the street lines.
   F.   Remnants To Be Absorbed: All remnants of lots below minimum size left
over after subdividing a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather
than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
   G.   Single Or Joint Ownership Only: Where the land covered by a subdivision
includes two (2) or more parcels in separate ownership and the lot arrangement
is such that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, the land in
each lot so divided shall be transferred by deed to either single or joint
ownership before approval of the final plan, and such transfer certified to the
Planning Commission by the County Recorder. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 7(D))
16.28.050: PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Open Space In Design: When the preliminary plan is submitted for the
division of property, a part or all of which is deemed suitable by the Planning
Commission for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public use in accordance
with the Master Plan, the Planning Commission shall require the subdivider to
include the required public open space in the subdivision design to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
   B.   Space Offered For Sale: The subdivider at or before the time of
presentation of the final subdivision plat for approval of the City Council
shall offer to sell to the City or other appropriate agency, at any time during
the two (2) year period immediately following the recording of the final plat,
any land which has been set aside for park, playground, school or other public
use at a fair market price.
   C.   Fair Market Value: In the case of land required for park or playground
the fair market price shall be based upon raw land value but in no event shall
such price exceed the price for the land in the last bona fide sale thereof
within a period of five (5) years immediately before the date of the final
subdivision plat.
   D.   Available For Two Year Period: The City or other appropriate public
agency, may accept such offer at any time within a two (2) year period
immediately following the recording of the final plat. If any such proposed
public areas have not been purchased by the appropriate public agency within
two (2) years after the recording of the final plat, such areas may be divided
into lots in accordance with the requirement of this title, and sold. (Ord.
2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 7(E))
CHAPTER 16.32
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
16.32.010: Compliance With Standards Required
16.32.020: Improvements Designated
16.32.030: Improvement Completion Assurance
16.32.040: Engineering Checking Fees (Rep. by Ord. 2012-02)
16.32.050: Inspection Of Improvements
16.32.060: Guarantee Of Work
16.32.010: COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS REQUIRED:
Design standards, construction specifications and inspection of subdivisions
shall be in accordance with the design standards and specifications adopted by
the Farr West City council on September 21, 1989. The improvements shall be
inspected by the city engineer for approval. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 8(A))
16.32.020: IMPROVEMENTS DESIGNATED:
The owner of any land to be platted as a subdivision shall at his own expense
install the following improvements in accordance with the public works
standards and technical specifications adopted by the city council, except for
septic tanks which must be installed according to the specifications and under
the inspection of the county board of health.
   A.   Water Lines: Where an approved public water supply is accessible or
procurable the subdivider shall install water lines, to make the water supply
available to each lot within the subdivision, including laterals to the
property line of each lot. The location and size of water mains shall be
determined by the city engineer.
   B.   Sewage Disposal:
      1.   Connection To City Sewer: Where a public sanitary sewer is within
five hundred feet (500') or is close enough in the opinion of the city council
after recommendation of the city engineer to require a connection, the
subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide adequate lateral
lines to the property line of each lot. Such sewer connections and subdivision
sewer systems shall comply with the regulations and specifications of, and
shall be approved by, the city council and city engineer.
      2.   Private Sewage Disposal: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall obtain approval from the state
department of health for sewage disposal by means of a septic tank and
drainfield for each of the lots. Subdividers shall furnish to the board of
health a report of percolation tests completed on the property proposed for
subdivision in accordance with the regulations of the Utah state department of
public health governing individual sewage disposal systems. A tentative final
plat of the subdivision shall accompany the report showing thereon the location
of test holes used in completing the tests. Percolation tests shall be
completed and reports prepared and signed by a qualified registered sanitarian
or a licensed engineer not in the employ of the city. Written approval from the
board of health shall be submitted to the planning commission before
consideration of the final plat.
   C.   Surface Water Conveyance And Disposal: The subdivider shall provide
adequate methods of conveyance and disposal of stormwater and surface water at
his or her expense, the plans for which shall be prepared by a licensed
engineer not in the employ of the city and which shall be approved by the
planning commission after recommendations by the city engineer. If easements
are required across abutting property to permit drainage of subdivisions, it
shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to acquire such easements.
   D.   Street Grading And Surfacing: All public streets shall be graded and
surfaced in accordance with the public works standards and technical
specifications adopted by the Farr West City council.
   E.   Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks:
      1.   Required: Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed on
existing and proposed streets by the subdivider, for the purpose of
facilitating removal of surface water and for the safety and protection of the
public except as exempted below. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be
installed by the subdivider in subdivisions abutting state highways per the
specifications of the state department of transportation.
      2.   Exemption: After recommendation by the Planning Commission and City
Engineer, the City Council may waive the curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements
in subdivisions:
         a.   Which are located in primarily agricultural areas;
         b.   Where parcels in a proposed residential subdivision with land
area in excess of five (5) acres and with a lot width (measured fifteen feet
(15') back from property line abutting road) exceeding three hundred feet
(300'); or
         c.   Where in the best interest of the City such improvements should
be delayed (i.e., a minor subdivision abutting an existing City street or State
highway where improvements are anticipated in the near future).
      3.   In Lieu Provision: A fee may be assessed by the City in lieu of
improvements.
   F.   Drainage Required: Street drainage and drainage structures shall be
required where necessary in the opinion of the City Council after
recommendation by the City Engineer.
   G.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed as prescribed in subsection E
of this section.
   H.   Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established
at such points as are necessary to definitely establish all lines of the plat
except those outlining individual lots. Monuments shall be of a type approved
by the City Engineer and all subdivision plats shall be tied to a corner or
monument of record or established land office survey corner.
   I.   Street Trees: Street trees may be provided at the option of the
subdivider but when so provided the variety and location of such trees shall be
approved by the Planning Commission.
   J.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed. Such fire hydrants
shall be of the type, size and number and shall be installed in such locations
as determined by the written recommendation of the City Engineer and the
Director of the Weber Fire District.
   K.   Street Signs: The City Council will furnish and install all necessary
street signs. The cost will be charged to the subdivider and must be paid
within thirty (30) days after installation.
   L.   Ditches And Canals: Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within
or adjoining a subdivision except along rear or side lot lines. The subdivider
shall work with the irrigation, drainage or ditch companies as to the methods
of covering, realigning or eliminating ditches, pipes and culverts. In cases
where canals or ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads,
specifications and grades for pipe or culvert must be approved by the City
Engineer and the irrigation company involved.
   M.   Fencing: See section
17.46.010 of this Code.
   N.   Street Lights: Street lights shall be provided by the subdivider. The
location and construction of such lights shall be designated by the City
Engineer and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
   O.   Mailbox Cluster: In accordance with United States Postal Service (USPS)
guidelines, centralized mailbox clusters shall be required in all new
residential subdivisions. The developer shall obtain USPS approval of the
location of mailbox clusters and provide a copy of the USPS approval to the
Planning Commission prior to final approval of the subdivision plat. The City
Engineer shall also approve the location of mailbox clusters prior to final
approval of the subdivision plat. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 2017-13: Ord. 17-08: Ord.
2015-10: Ord. 95-07: Ord. 93-02: Ord. 89-003 § 8(B))
16.32.030: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE:
   A.   A subdivider or developer who desires to record any subdivision plat
prior to the completion of subdivision improvements shall provide an
improvement completion assurance to guarantee completion of incomplete
improvements within a two (2)-year period from the approval of the subdivision
plat by the City Council. The improvement completion assurance may be in the
form of an escrow agreement or an irrevocable letter of credit as provided
herein. Another method of security other than those contemplated herein may be
acceptable if agreed upon between the City and the subdivider or developer.
   B.   Escrow Agreement.
      1.   The subdivider or developer shall deposit in escrow, with an escrow
holder approved by the City Council, an amount of money equal to one hundred
and ten percent (110%) of the cost of the required improvements not then
installed as estimated by the City Engineer.
      2.   The escrow agreement shall be approved by the City Council and City
Attorney and shall be filed with the City Recorder.
      3.   The City Council shall, at the request of the subdivider or his/her
successors in interest, grant a partial release of an improvement guarantee
proportionally as portions of required improvements are completed and accepted
in accordance with ordinance.
   C.   Irrevocable Letter of Credit. A subdivider or developer may use an
irrevocable letter of credit if the following conditions are satisfied:
      1.   The irrevocable letter of credit is issued from a FDIC insured
financial institution with funds immediately available to the City upon
default.
      2.   The subdivider or developer and, if applicable, the subdivider's or
developer's subsidiaries and/or members or shareholders have a history of
positive performance, with no incidences of negative performance, in its
development related contractual obligations in the State of Utah, and has a
history of positive performance, with no incidences of negative performance, in
completing developments in the State of Utah. The City or City Engineer may
require the applicant to provide a performance history from other
jurisdictions;
      3.   The City Attorney, City Treasurer, and City Engineer approve the
letter of credit, which they shall do if all of the conditions above are met
unless they have reasonable, objective indications of a substantial risk that
either the applicant or the applicant's financial institution will not fulfill
its obligations related to the completion of improvements or the financial
guarantee.
   D.   Whenever the subdivider develops a subdivision a portion at a time,
such development shall be in an orderly manner and in such a way that the
required improvements will be continuous, and all of the improvements will be
made available for the full, effective practical use and enjoyment thereof by
the lessees or grantees of any of the lands subdivided within the time
hereinbefore specified.
   E.   The City shall not withhold a building permit on account of an
incomplete infrastructure improvement if the improvement is not essential for
issuing a building permit under the building and fire codes or if the City has
accepted a completion assurance for the improvement.
   F.   If a financial guarantee authorized by this section is defaulted, the
City shall have the authority, in its sole discretion, to use the remaining
defaulted funds to make whatever improvements the City deems necessary to bring
the subdivision into or closer to compliance with the requirements of City
ordinances. For any subdivision that has a defaulted financial guarantee, the
City is authorized, but not obligated, to release financial guarantee funds to
a third party that performs the work that the City has deemed necessary.
   G.   The provisions of this Section do not supersede the terms of a valid
development agreement, an adopted phasing plan, or the state construction code.
(Ord. 2025-06: Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 99-05 §§ 1, 2: Ord. 89-003 § 8(C))
16.32.040: ENGINEERING CHECKING FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-02)
16.32.050: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The building inspector and City Engineer shall inspect or cause to be inspected
all buildings, structures, streets, fire hydrants, water supply, and sewage
disposal systems in the course of construction, installation or repair.
Excavations for fire hydrants, water and sewer mains and laterals shall not be
covered over or backfilled until such installations shall have been approved by
the City Engineer, nor shall any pavement on any street be laid unless and
until the City Engineer has been notified of the intention and the time and
place of the paving and unless and until the City Engineer has approved the
paving of the street in all its aspects. If any such installation is covered
before being inspected and approved it shall be uncovered after notice to
uncover has been issued to the responsible person by the inspector. If any
paving of any street is done without prior notification and approval of the
City Engineer then the subdivider and any other responsible person would be
liable for any costs incurred by the City in repairing or replacing the
pavement whenever such repair or replacement shall result from inadequate
paving by the subdivider or other responsible person. At completion of the
construction of improvements the City Engineer shall be provided with as built
drawings from the subdivider. The City Engineer shall complete an intermediate
inspection and shall inform in writing the subdivider and the City Council of
the results of the inspection.
The City Engineer and the City building inspector are designated and authorized
as the officers charged with the enforcement of this title. They shall enforce
all the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 8(E))
16.32.060: GUARANTEE OF WORK:
The subdivider shall warrant and guarantee that the improvements provided for
hereunder and every part of this title, will remain in good condition for a
period of two (2) years after the date of the intermediate inspection release,
and agrees to make all repairs to and maintain the improvements and every part
thereof in good condition during the time with no cost to the City. The
subdivider shall agree that the determination for necessity of repairs and
maintenance of the work rests with the City Engineer and City inspector. His
decision upon the matter shall be final and binding upon the subdivider, and
the guarantee required shall extend to and include, but shall not be limited
to, the entire street base, and all pipes, joints, valves, backfill and
compaction, as well as the working surface and curbs. At the expiration of two
(2) years from intermediate inspection and release, provided that the City
Engineer finds the required improvements in good condition, the bond or funds
held in escrow shall be released in writing by the City Council and the Council
shall accept such improvements in behalf of the City for perpetual maintenance.
If the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual deterioration or does
not comply with acceptable standards of durability, the Council shall require
the subdivider to repair or replace the faulty facility to an approved
standard. If the subdivider shall fail to perform as directed, the Council
shall declare the subdivider to be in default. The subdivider shall be required
to guarantee the improvements by posting a bond, escrow agreement or
irrevocable letter of credit as provided for in section
16.32.030  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 § 9)
CHAPTER 16.36
PENALTY
SECTION:
16.36.010: Violation; Penalty
16.36.010: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred ninety nine
dollars ($299.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding
six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2024-06: Ord. 89-003 §
12)
TITLE 17
ZONING
CHAPTER 17.04
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17.04.010: Short Title
17.04.020: Purpose
17.04.030: Interpretation, Conflict And Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
17.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the UNIFORM ZONING ORDINANCE OF FARR WEST CITY,
UTAH. (Ord. 93-003 § 1-1)
17.04.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to establish a method of implementing the master
land use plan for the city of Farr West. The intent of establishing the zones
contained herein is to facilitate the orderly, coordinated and adjusted growth
of the community in compliance with the plan. The objective of the title is to
maintain the current rural atmosphere and promote efficiency and economy in the
process of development by the economical use of water, drainage, sanitary
systems and other facilities and natural resources. (Ord. 93-003 § 1-2)
17.04.030: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
   A.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the
requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for
the purpose set forth.
   B.   This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of
covenants, agreements, other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail
notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
   C.   The existing ordinances of the city governing the zoning of areas and
districts in the city in their entirety and including the maps heretofore
adopted and made a part of said ordinances are hereby superseded and amended to
read as set forth herein. (Ord. 93-003 § 1-3)
CHAPTER 17.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
17.08.010: Definitions
17.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain words and terms that are found herein
shall be defined as found in this chapter. As they are defined in this chapter,
words used in the present tense shall also include the future tense; words in
the singular number shall also include the plural, and the plural the singular,
words not included herein but which are defined in any adopted Building Codes,
shall be defined therein.
   ABANDONED: A use, structure or object when that use, structure or object has
not been used, maintained or practiced for a continuous period of one year.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached building or structure in which the use of is
incidental to and subordinate to that of the main building or structure and is
located on the same lot occupied by the main building. It does not include any
building or structure that contains habitable space as defined by the
International Building Code.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use or
structure which is incidental to and subordinate to the prescribed permitted
primary use within any respective zoning provisions excluding buildings or
spaces within buildings for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking.
   AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening, the keeping and raising of farm animals and fowl. This definition
shall not include any agricultural industry or business such as fruit packing
plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or similar uses.
   ALLEY: A public thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians and vehicles which
affords, or is designated or intended to afford, a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
   APARTMENT: A rented room, or a suite of two (2) or more rented rooms
designated for, or intended for, or occupied by, one family for living and
sleeping purposes.
   AREA: The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross section within given
boundaries.
   BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. A basement shall be counted
as a story for height measurement where more than one- half (1/2) of its height
is above the average level of the adjoining ground or where more than three-
fourths (3/4) of any wall is above the level of the adjoining ground.
   BUILDING: A permanently located structure for the shelter, housing or
enclosure of any person, animal, article or chattel. When any portion thereof
is completely separate from every other portion thereof by a division wall or
firewall, without openings, each such portion shall be a separate building. The
term "building" shall not include any form of vehicle, even though immobilized.
Where this title requires, or where special authority granted pursuant to this
title requires, that a use shall be entirely enclosed within a building, this
definition shall be qualified by adding "and enclosed on all sides".
   BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building connected by any two (2) of the following: a
common wall, a continuous wall, a continuous foundation, or a continuous
roofline. Walls or fences, patios, porches, terraces or other roofed accessory
uses open on at least two (2) sides shall not constitute an attached building.
   BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the finished grade of the front yard to a point midway between the highest
and the lowest point of the roof.
   BUILDING, MAIN: The principal building on a lot or building site designed or
used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted. Where a
permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the
primary purpose, as in the case of apartment groups, each such permitted
building on one lot shall be construed to be a main building.
   CARPORT: A covered automobile parking space not completely enclosed by walls
or doors. A carport shall be subject to all of the regulations described in
this title for a private garage.
   CONDOMINIUM: A residential structure consisting of two (2) or more units,
each under individual ownership, but each subject to certain joint agreements
and covenants.
   DENSITY: The number of dwellings per acre of land in which public and
private streets, existing or proposed, and other publicly dedicated areas,
existing or proposed, are not included in the total acreage.
   DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family, multiple-family and apartment
structures, but shall not include boarding, rooming or lodging houses, tents,
trailers, mobile home parks, motels, motor courts, motor lodges, cottage camps,
or similar structures designed or used primarily for transient residential
uses.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families, living independently of each other, and containing three (3) or
more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building arranged, designed for, or
intended to be occupied by not more than one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for occupancy by two (2) families,
living independently of each other, and containing two (2) dwelling units.
   FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption living together in a dwelling unit. For the purpose of this title,
paying tenants in excess of two (2) shall be considered as boarders or roomers,
and the building in which they abide shall be considered as a boarding or
rooming house.
   FLAG LOT: A concept of lot design in which a single lot is connected to a
public access or street by a lot right-of-way no less than twenty feet (20') in
width.
   FLOOR AREA: The sum or the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a
building excluding carports, porches, attached garages, breezeways, patios and
cellars and basement floor areas as defined by the Building Code.
   FRONTAGE: All of the property abutting on one side of a street and lying
between the two (2) nearest intersections or intercepting streets, or between a
street and a waterway, end of a dead end street, or political subdivision
boundary, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall
determine only the length of frontage along the side of the street which it
intercepts.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main
building, designed and/or used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles
owned or operated by the occupants of the main building, and in which no
business for profit is conducted.
   GRADE: The elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure, except where the exterior walls
are parallel to and within thirty feet (30') of the sidewalk, the elevation of
the sidewalk at the center of such exterior wall or walls shall be taken as the
grade.
   HOSPITAL, NURSING OR REST HOME: A building or any portion thereof, designed
for the housing of sick, injured, convalescent or infirm persons, provided that
this definition shall not include rooms in any single-, two-, or three-family
dwelling, hotel, apartment hotel, or other building not ordinarily designed or
intended to be occupied by such persons.
   HOTEL: A building designed or used as the temporary abiding place of
individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, for compensation, and in
which there are more than ten (10) sleeping rooms usually occupied singly, and
in which no provision is made for cooking in any guestroom.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept
for company or pleasure, and not for profit, such as dogs, cats and canaries,
but not including a sufficient number of dogs to constitute a kennel. Household
pets shall not include any animals or fowl commonly regarded as farm animals.
Household pets shall not include any animals or fowl which are capable of
inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health, safety or welfare of
any person or property. The number of household pets shall be limited to that
allowed by the provisions of each respective zone as set forth in this title.
   INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An accessory dwelling unit created:
   A.   Within a primary dwelling;
   B.   Within the footprint of the primary dwelling at the time the internal
accessory dwelling unit is created; and
   C.   For the purpose of offering a long-term rental of thirty (30)
consecutive days or longer.
   JUNKYARD OR AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any lot, land or area used for the
storage, keeping, dismantling or abandonment of junk automobiles, household
furniture, and appliances, machinery, scrap material, or parts thereof. Any
more than two (2) such items on one property constitute a junkyard or
automobile wrecking yard.
   KENNEL: An establishment kept for the purpose of housing, breeding, selling
or boarding more than two (2) dogs or cats or engaged in the training of dogs
or cats.
   KITCHEN: Any room and/or other place used, or intended, or designed to be
used for cooking, or for the preparation of food.
   LOT: A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a
number and designation on the final plat of a subdivision, recorded in the
Office of the County Recorder of Weber County, or a parcel of land the
dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a record of survey map
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Weber County, in accordance
with the law regulating the division of the land, or a parcel of real property
not delineated as described above, containing not less than the prescribed
minimum area required in the zone in which it is located and which abuts at
least one public street or easement with the required "lot frontage" as defined
in this section and which the Planning Commission has designated adequate for
access purposes, and is held under one ownership. In Single-Family Residential
Zones, not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any one lot.
   LOT AREA: The total buildable area measured on a horizontal plane, included
within the lot line of the lot or parcel of land.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
which streets shall have an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred
thirty five degrees (135°).
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets. For the purpose of this title, such lots shall
have two (2) street frontages.
   LOT FRONTAGE: The distance a lot extends along a street usually measured
along the front lot line. Minimum lot frontage for any lot is twenty feet
(20').
   LOT LINE, FRONT: A line separating an interior lot from a street. In the
case of a corner lot, the side bordering the street which has the smallest
dimension shall be the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR: The recorded lot line or lines most distant from and
generally opposite the front lot line, except that in the case of an interior
triangular or gore shaped lot, it shall mean a straight line ten feet (10') in
length which is: a) parallel to the front lot line or its chord; and b)
intersects the two (2) other lot lines at points most distant from the front
lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT WIDTH: The distance across a lot or parcel or property measured at the
front setback line.
   MOBILE HOME: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle with attached axles and
wheels which may be used for permanent or semipermanent housing for human
occupancy, and which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term
"mobile home" shall also include any vehicle meeting the above description
which is used for office, classroom, laboratory, processing, manufacturing,
retail sales, or other such use.
   MOTEL:
   A.   Class 1: A building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms
designed for temporary use by automobile tourists, and in which provisions are
made for no more than ten percent (10%) kitchenettes, and which may provide for
a coffee shop, convention center or any amenities for the convenience of the
general traveling public.
   B.   Class 2: A building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms
designed for the temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, and which
may provide kitchen facilities for each guestroom within the building or
structure.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure or portion
thereof lawfully existing at the time this title became effective, erected or
structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the regulations of the
zone in which it is now located.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A use which was lawfully established and maintained, but
which, because of the application of this title, no longer conforms to the use
regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   OFFICES: A building, room or department wherein a business or service for
others is transacted but not including storage or sale of merchandise on the
premises.
   PARCEL: See definition of lot.
   PARKING AREA: An open area, other than a street or alley, used for the
parking of more than five (5) automobiles, whether free, for compensation, or
as an accommodation.
   PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area of not less than nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20'), exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps or
columns, to be used exclusively as temporary storage space for one private
motor vehicle.
   PERSON: An individual, an association, a firm, a copartnership, a
corporation or any similar legal entity.
   PERSONAL SERVICES: Uses which are primarily the serving of the daily
convenience needs of individuals. Examples of such uses are bakeries,
drugstores, newspaper and magazine stores, gift stores, banks, beauty and
barber services, laundry and dry cleaning, and so on.
   PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Farr West, as
duly appointed under the provision of State law.
   PRIMARY DWELLING: A single-family dwelling that:
   A.   Is detached; and
   B.   Is occupied as the primary residence of the owner of record.
   PUBLIC: A use or facility owned and/or operated exclusively by a public
body, having the purpose of serving the public health, safety or general
welfare.
   QUASI-PUBLIC: A use or facility owned and/or operated by a private
nonprofit, religious, recreational, charitable or philanthropic institution,
such use having the purpose primarily of serving the general public, such as a
church, hospital, private university, or similar use.
   RESIDENCE, RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any building or portion thereof where an
individual is actually living at a given point and time and intends to remain,
and not a place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
   RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS: Any income producing use conducted entirely within the
dwelling unit and carried on only by persons residing in the dwelling unit,
which use is clearly incidental, secondary and compatible to the use of the
residential use of the building. In general, a residential business is an
accessory use so located and conducted, that the average neighbor, under normal
conditions, would be unaware of its existence.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A dwelling unit that is occupied
on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8) or fewer elderly persons
in a family type arrangement. A residential facility for elderly persons shall
not include any of the following:
   A.   A facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility
may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
   B.   A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a healthcare
facility as defined by title 26, chapter 21, section 2, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended; or a facility which is a residential facility for persons
with a disability.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in which
more than one person with a disability resides and which is:
   A.   Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under title
62A, chapter 2 of the Utah Code, licensure of programs and facilities; or
   B.   Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Health under title 26,
chapter 21 of the Utah Code, titled the Health Care Facilities Licensing and
Inspection Act.
   RETAIL, GENERAL: Stores or shops intended for retail sales of goods or
merchandise. Such stores or shops include, but are not limited to, department
stores, convenience stores, discount stores, and grocery stores.
   SIGNS: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases,
sentences, devices, designs, pictures, trade names or trademarks by which
anything is made known, such as are used to designate a firm, an association, a
corporation, a profession, a business, a service or commodity, a product, or
any type of publicity or propaganda, whether placed on the ground, rocks,
trees, stumps or other natural objects, or on a building, wall, roof, frame,
support, fence or other manmade object, which are visible from any street,
public highway or public road right-of- way. For purpose of this title, the
term "sign" does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation,
state, city or other political unit, or of a nonprofit organization. It shall
not include any official notice issued by any court, or public body, or
officer, or directional warning, or information sign, or structure required or
authorized by law.
   SITE PLAN: A plot plan for any proposed developmental activity which
contains sufficient information concerning the proposed development to enable
the commission to approve the proposal.
   STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor, and surface of the floor next above it, or if there
is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling above
it.
   STREET: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated to the public and accepted
by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare by right of use, and which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property; provided, that
easements, walkways, and alleys shall not be considered as "streets", for the
purpose of this title.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders and floor joists, or roof
joists.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which is either located on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.
   TRAVEL TRAILERS: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is intended or
used for human habitation, and for travel or recreational purposes, which does
not exceed eight feet (8') in width and forty feet (40') in length and which
may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur's
license and without violating the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
   USE: The purpose for which premises or a building thereon is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY: See definition of accessory use.
   USE, CONDITIONAL: A use or occupancy of a building, or use of land,
permitted only when authorized upon issuance of a conditional use permit, and
subject to the limitations and conditions specified therein as provided in
chapter 17.48 of this title, intended to allow compatible integration of uses
which may be suitable only in certain locations within a particular zone, or
only upon certain conditions and/or design criteria being achieved.
   USE, PERMITTED: A use or occupancy of a building, or use of land, permitted
by right in the zone in which it is located.
   VETERINARY SERVICE: An establishment for the care and treatment of animals,
including household pets, livestock, and commercial poultry, all facilities to
be within completely enclosed buildings, except for exercising runs.
   YARD: A space on a lot or parcel, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings, except as otherwise provided
in this title.
   YARD, FRONT: An area extending across the full width of a lot or parcel,
having at no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal
distance between the front lot line, or its tangent, and the closest
permissible location of the main building. The distance shall be measured by a
line at right angles to the front lot line, or its tangent.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of a lot or parcel,
having at no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal
distance as measured from the part of the main building nearest the rear lot
line toward the rear lot line and such measurement shall be along a line
representing the shortest distance between the part of the main building and
the rear lot line. The required rear yard shall be that portion of the rear
yard continuous to the rear lot line having at no point a depth less than that
required for the rear yard. The area to the rear of the rear lot line of an
interior triangle or gore shaped lot shall be considered a part of the required
rear yard.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the side lot line extending
from the required front yard, or the front line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard, the width of which side yard shall be measured
horizontally from, and at right angles to, the nearest point on the side lot
line toward the nearest part of the main building.
   ZONE: A portion of the incorporated territory of Farr West City which has
been given a zone designation which provides for certain yards and open spaces
and certain height and other limitations for buildings and which provides for
certain uses. May also be referred to as a district. (Ord. 21-10: Ord. 2020-04
§ 2: Ord. 2018-03: Ord. 2018-02:Ord. 2016-10: Ord. 2012-03: Ord. 06-01 §§ 3, 4,
5: Ord. 98-02 § 1: Ord. 93-003 § 7-1)
CHAPTER 17.12
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
17.12.010: Changes And Amendments
17.12.020: Administration And Enforcement Authority
17.12.030: Building Permit Required
17.12.040: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
17.12.050: Issuance Of Licenses And Permits
17.12.060: Territory Annexed To City
17.12.070: Site Plan Review
17.12.080: Violation A Nuisance
17.12.090: Violation A Misdemeanor
17.12.010: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   This zoning ordinance, including the official zoning map, may be
amended from time to time by the city council after holding a public hearing.
Notice shall be posted in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time
and place of such hearing. All proposed amendments shall be posted with the
required notice. All proposed amendments shall be first proposed by the
planning commission or shall be submitted to the planning commission for its
recommendation which shall be returned to the city council for its
consideration within thirty (30) days. Failure by the planning commission to
take action on the proposed amendment within the prescribed time shall be
deemed approval by the commission of the proposed change or amendment. The city
council may overrule the planning commission's recommendation by a majority
vote of its members.
   B.   A property owner or owners may request a zoning change by completing
and submitting to the city recorder, along with the required fee, an
application for rezoning real property. A complete legal description of the
property proposed to be rezoned and a list of all adjacent property owners
within three hundred feet (300') of the property proposed for rezone and their
addresses, must be included in the application. The city will notify these
property owners of the proposed rezone.
   C.   In the case where a single, undivided parcel of property overlaps the
municipal boundary between Farr West City and an adjoining county or
municipality and the ongoing use of the entire property existed before the
adoption of this amendment, a property owner or owners may request a zoning
change for that portion of the property which is within the Farr West City to a
zone which is identical to, or most similar to, the municipal or county zone
governing that portion of the property within the adjacent county or
municipality. Such a zoning change request may be granted without condition if:
      1.   The entire property is owned by the same owner or owners;
      2.   The use of the property was established before the date of this
amendment and was ongoing up to the time of the zoning change request,
      3.   The use of the property is not being changed; and
      4.   The use of property is in compliance with the zoning regulations of
the neighboring county or municipality governing the portion of the property
outside of the Farr West City boundary. (Ord. 2014-02; Ord. 22-12)
17.12.020: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   The chief building official of the city is charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
   B.   The chief building official shall not grant a permit for the
construction or alteration of any building or structure, nor issue any
certificate of occupancy for a change in the use of land, if such construction
or alteration or change would be in violation or would involve a violation of
any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the
city or of any law of the state of Utah.
   C.   The chief building official shall enforce all of the provisions of this
zoning ordinance. He or she shall inspect or cause to be inspected all of the
buildings in course of construction, alteration or repair, and any change in
the use of land. If, in the course of such inspection, or otherwise, it shall
come to his/her attention that any such construction, alteration or repair, or
that any use or contemplated use of land is in violation of the provisions of
this zoning ordinance, he or she shall issue his or her written order to the
person to cease and desist such construction, alteration, repair or use. He or
she shall report violation of this zoning ordinance to the city's legal
department for prosecution and make complaint thereof before the court or
courts having jurisdiction of such violation. Upon the recommendation of the
city council, the legal department shall bring a civil action for the abatement
of any nuisance existing in violation of this zoning ordinance.
   D.   The chief building official may call for the assistance of law
enforcement personnel whenever in his or her opinion such assistance is
necessary in the investigation of a suspected violation of this zoning
ordinance.
   E.   The building inspector may establish reasonable rules and regulations
necessary or desirable in the administration of this zoning ordinance. Three
(3) copies of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the city recorder
and such rules and regulations shall become effective when so filed.
   F.   The city council may, by resolution, prescribe an exact payment of
reasonable fees to cover the expense of examining plans, issuing building
permits, inspecting uses, and issuing certificates of occupancy, and may
determine the method of collecting such fees.
   G.   All applications, including applications for rezoning, conditional
uses, and site plans filed with the City Recorder shall be accompanied by
payment of the fee for each application as established by the City Council and
codified in title 3, chapter 3.30, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2014-07:
Ord. 93-003 § 1-5)
17.12.030: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
The construction, alteration, repair, removal or occupancy of any structure or
of any part thereof, as provided or as restricted, in this title shall not be
commenced or proceeded with, except after the issuance of a written permit for
the same by the building inspector, provided, that no permit shall be necessary
where the erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration is minor in
character as defined herein, or as determined by the chief building official.
Base residential valuation fees are listed in the fee schedule in title 3,
chapter 3.30 of this Code. (Res. 2019-01: Ord. 93-003 § 1-6)
17.12.040: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter structurally
altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector stating that the
building or structure or the proposed use thereof, or the use of land, complies
with the provisions of this title. A like certificate shall be issued for the
purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing or extending a nonconforming use. A
certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building or
structure shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a
building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or
structural alteration of such building or structure, or a part thereof, shall
have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 93-
003 § 1-7)
17.12.050: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
All departments, officials and public employees of the City, which are vested
with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the
provisions of this title and shall issue no such permit or license for uses,
buildings, or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions
of this title, and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the
provisions of this title, shall be null and void. (Ord. 93-003 § 1-8)
17.12.060: TERRITORY ANNEXED TO CITY:
At the time of annexation of new territory to the City, the City Council, after
reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall classify such
territory for zoning purposes according to the zones established by this title.
(Ord. 93-003 § 1-11)
17.12.070: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Approval By Planning Commission: Prior to the issuance of any building
permit, approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission is required. In
considering any site plan, the Planning Commission may impose reasonable
requirements to assure, among other things, the safety and convenience of
traffic movement both within the area covered and in relation to access
streets, harmonious relation among the buildings and adjacent neighborhoods,
and the preservation of future road locations.
   B.   Requirements:
      1.   Site plan review shall be required for the following:
         a.   All proposed new development except single-family detached;
         b.   All plans for earth sheltered dwellings;
         c.   All additions or alterations to nonconforming structures;
         d.   Issuance of a conditional use permit for new construction;
         e.   New signs;
         f.   Modified site plan review shall be required for any change of use
in an existing structure or site or addition, except single- family detached.
      2.   In furthering the above objectives, the Planning Commission shall
review and may require certain improvements or design changes to be implemented
by the developer as part of his or her construction. The following information
must be submitted for a site plan review:
         a.   A site plan on nineteen inch by twenty four inch (19" x 24") or
smaller, paper. Paper size may be increased if the entire development cannot be
shown on one sheet.
         b.   Plan must be drawn accurately to an engineering scale. One inch
equals ten feet (1" = 10'), one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'), one inch
equals thirty feet (1" = 30') are acceptable scales.
         c.   One copy of a current County ownership plat showing the property.
         d.   Lot dimensions and orientation: north arrow, etc.
         e.   Existing and proposed buildings with their dimensions, and the
locations of all openings in exterior walls.
         f.   Height of all buildings and other proposed or existing
structures; type and slope of roof construction.
         g.   Proposed use of buildings.
         h.   All off street parking, locations and size of points of entry and
exits, loading facilities, internal traffic circulation patterns, location of
handicapped parking and handicapped access to building(s).
         i.   Height of all existing and proposed walls and fences and type of
construction.
         j.   Location and type of landscaping. (See sections
17.44.130 through 17.44.150 of this title.)
         k.   All existing easements (dedicated and prescriptive), irrigation
ditches, alleys and street rights-of-way. Location and height of any overhead
power and communication and transmission lines, and all utility easements which
may affect the property.
         l.   All existing and proposed improvements must be clearly shown on
the plan. Improvements include: curb and gutter, sidewalks, sanitary and storm
sewer lines, fire hydrants and driveway approaches. Grades must be shown for
curb and gutter, sidewalks, sanitary and storm sewer lines.
         m.   Location, type and size of proposed and existing signs.
         n.   Location, type, height and uses of proposed and existing light
poles.
         o.   A method for controlling storm drainage so that storm runoff will
not enter adjoining property must be shown. (See Public Work Standards and
Technical Specifications of Weber County.)
   C.   The building inspector shall ensure that development is in compliance
with the site plan and all other requirements imposed by the Planning
Commission. After approval of the site plan by the Planning Commission, no
alterations shall be made without first obtaining approval from the Planning
Commission.
   D.   The developer shall install all improvements and requirements of the
Planning Commission prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, or, if
uncompleted, shall file with the City a bond or cash escrow or letter of credit
in an amount estimated by the City Engineer to complete the required
improvements within a stipulated time period. (Ord. 93-003 § 1-12)
17.12.080: VIOLATION A NUISANCE:
Any structure made or existing and any use of land in violation of any
provisions of this title is a public nuisance and may be abated by appropriate
proceedings. (Ord. 93-003 § 1-9)
17.12.090: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation any of the
provisions of this title shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Such person,
firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during which any portion of any violation of this title is committed,
maintained, continued, or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and
shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 97-10 § 1: Ord. 93-003 § 1-10)
CHAPTER 17.16
APPEALS FROM ZONING DECISIONS
SECTION:
17.16.010: Appeal Authority Powers And Duties
17.16.020: Decision On Appeal
17.16.030: Appeals
17.16.040: Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal
17.16.050: Notice Of Hearing; Right Of Appearance
17.16.060: Time Limitation On Variance
17.16.070: Filing Fee
17.16.010: APPEAL AUTHORITY POWERS AND DUTIES:
With regards to the zoning decisions, the appeal authority shall have the
following powers:
   A.   Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, decision or refusal made by
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning ordinance;
   B.   Special Exceptions; Interpretation: To hear and decide, in accordance
with the provisions of any such ordinance, requests for special exceptions or
for interpretation of the map or for decisions on other special questions on
which such appeal authority is authorized by any such ordinance to hear;
   C.   Variances: Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the
regulation, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any regulation enacted would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardships upon,
the owner of such property, to authorize, on an appeal relating to said
property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardships, provided such relief may be granted without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the master plan and zoning
ordinance of the city. Before any variance may be authorized, however, it shall
be shown that:
      1.   The variance will not substantially affect the comprehensive plan of
zoning in the city and that adherence to the strict letter of this title will
cause difficulties and hardships, the imposition of which upon the petitioner
is not necessary in order to carry out the general purpose of the plan,
      2.   Special circumstances attached to the property covered by the
application which do not generally apply to the other property in the same
zone,
      3.   Because of the special circumstances, property covered by
application is deprived of privilege possessed by other properties in the same
zone; and that the granting of the variance in the same zone is essential to
the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in
the same zone;
   D.   Nonconformities In Buildings Or Structures: To permit the enlargement
of, addition to, or relocation of a building or structure, nonconforming as to
use regulations, as follows:
      1.   For a nonconforming use located in a residential zone, the
enlargement, addition or relocation shall either:
         a.   Comply with all the height, yard and area requirements for a
single-family dwelling in the zone in which the nonconforming building is
located, or
         b.   The proposed enlargement, addition or relocation will either:
            (1)   Improve the area by increasing the off street parking, or
            (2)   Improve the general appearance, convenience or safety of the
area.
      2.   For a nonconforming use located in any zone other than a residential
zone, the enlargement, addition or relocation shall comply with all height,
yard and area requirements for a main building, other than dwellings, in the
zone in which it is located.
      3.   Before granting a permit for any enlargement, addition, or
relocation as provided above, the appeal authority shall find that the proposed
changes will not hinder or obstruct the attainment of the objectives listed in
section
17.04.020 of this title more than does the existing nonconforming use;
   E.   Nonconformities In Yard, Height And Area: The appeal authority may
allow those enlargements of, additions to, or relocation of buildings and
structures, nonconforming as to yard, height or area regulations in those cases
where an undue hardship will result to the owner of the land involved unless
granted and the attainment of the objectives hindered or obstructed, and
provided the proposed enlargement, addition to or relocation will either:
      1.   Improve the area by increasing needed off street parking, or
      2.   Improve the general appearance, convenience or safety of the area;
   F.   Decide Boundaries: Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership at the time of the establishment of said boundary, the appeal
authority may permit a use authorized on either portion of such lot to extend
to the entire lot, provided such permission shall not authorize the use to
extend more than thirty five feet (35') beyond the district boundary line or
extend to an area greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet beyond the
said boundary line;
   G.   Changes In Use: Permit a nonconforming use to be changed to another use
allowed in the same or a more restrictive zone than the one in which the
nonconforming use would be allowed; provided, that the appeal authority finds
in its public hearing that such change will not hinder or obstruct the
attainment of the objectives listed in section
17.04.020 of this title more than does the existing nonconforming use. (Ord.
13-05)
17.16.020: DECISION ON APPEAL:
In exercising the above mentioned powers such appeal authority may in
conformity with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 13-05: Ord. 93-003 § 6-7)
17.16.030: APPEALS:
Appeals to the appeal authority may be taken by any person aggrieved by his or
her inability to obtain a building permit, or by the decision of any
administrative officer or agency based upon or made in the course of the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title. Appeals to the
appeal authority may be taken by any officer, department, council, board or
commission of the city affected by the grant or refusal of a building permit or
by other decision of an administrative officer or agency based on or made in
the course of the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this
title. The time within which such appeal must be made, and the form or other
procedure relating thereto, shall be as specified in the general rules to
govern the procedure of such appeal authority or in the supplemental rules of
procedure adopted by such appeal authority; provided further, that such rules
and regulations shall be available to the public at the office of the city
recorder at all times. (Ord. 13-05)
17.16.040: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING APPEAL:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the appeal
authority after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by restraining order which may be granted by the
appeal authority or by the district court on application and notice and on due
cause shown. (Ord. 13-05)
17.16.050: NOTICE OF HEARING; RIGHT OF APPEARANCE:
The appeal authority shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney. (Ord. 13-05)
17.16.060: TIME LIMITATION ON VARIANCE:
In the event the appeal authority does grant a variance in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, alterations in accordance with the variance must be
activated within six (6) months after the date variance is granted or variance
becomes null and void. The time limit of the variance may be extended an
additional six (6) months by the appeal authority, and then only if the
petitioner shows adequate cause to the appeal authority that circumstances
necessitate a time extension. (Ord. 13-05)
17.16.070: FILING FEE:
Upon filing of any appeal or application to the appeal authority, the appellant
or applicant shall pay to the city a fee as prescribed in the fee schedule in
title 3, chapter 3.30 of this code. No appeal or application shall be
considered by the appeal authority unless and until such fee has been paid.
(Ord. 13-05)
CHAPTER 17.20
A-1 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.20.010: General Objectives And Characteristics
17.20.020: Secondary Water
17.20.030: Permitted Nonconditional Uses
17.20.040: Permitted Conditional Uses
17.20.050: Site Development Standards
17.20.060: Special Provisions
17.20.010: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
The general objective of the A-1 zone is to establish a zone which is
characterized by large lots used for residential purposes. As development of
the community occurs, the subdivisions of property may be surrounded by land
used primarily for agricultural purposes. It is intended to provide development
opportunities while maintaining an open atmosphere. This zone is characterized
by well spaced single-family detached houses or well designed and constructed
planned developments. (Ord. 93-003 § 8-1(1))
17.20.020: SECONDARY WATER:
Any and all building lots for the purpose of a family dwelling shall have a
means of secondary water for the purpose of irrigation of lawns, shrubs,
gardens, agricultural products, etc. The secondary water supply must be
separate from any culinary water supply and approved by the city planning
commission. (See ordinance 87-004.) (Ord. 93-003 § 8-1(2))
17.20.030: PERMITTED NONCONDITIONAL USES:
See section
17.44.170, "Permitted Nonconditional Uses For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.20.040: PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES:
See section
17.44.180, "Permitted Conditional Uses For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.20.050: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
See section
17.44.190, "Site Development Standards For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.20.060: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
See section
17.44.200, "Special Provisions For All Residential Zones", of this title. (Ord.
2014-02)
CHAPTER 17.24
A-1-R RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.24.010: General Objectives And Characteristics
17.24.020: Frontage
17.24.030: Lot Size
17.24.040: Permitted Nonconditional Uses
17.24.050: Permitted Conditional Uses
17.24.060: Site Development Standards
17.24.070: Special Provisions
17.24.010: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
The general objective of the A-1-R zone is to establish a zone which is
characterized by large lots used for residential purposes. It is intended to
provide development opportunities while maintaining an open, rural atmosphere
and allow the keeping of large animals. The zone is characterized by
effectively spaced single-family detached houses with outbuildings and
agricultural activities confined to the area to the rear of the house. (Ord.
93-003 § 8-2(1))
17.24.020: FRONTAGE:
See section
17.24.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.24.030: LOT SIZE:
See section
17.24.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.24.040: PERMITTED NONCONDITIONAL USES:
See section
17.44.170, "Permitted Nonconditional Uses For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.24.050: PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES:
See section
17.44.180, "Permitted Conditional Uses For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.24.060: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
See section
 17.44.190, "Site Development Standards For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.24.070: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
See section
17.44.200, "Special Provisions For All Residential Zones", of this title. (Ord.
2014-02)
CHAPTER 17.28
R-1-15 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.28.010: General Objectives And Characteristics
17.28.020: Permitted Nonconditional Uses
17.28.030: Permitted Conditional Uses
17.28.040: Site Development Standards
17.28.050: Special Provisions
17.28.010: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
The general objective of the R-1-15 Zone is to establish a zone characterized
by lots used for residential, single-family dwellings. The purpose of this zone
is to provide the opportunity for the development of land for higher density
housing. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.28.020: PERMITTED NONCONDITIONAL USES:
See section
17.44.170, "Permitted Nonconditional Uses For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.28.030: PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES:
See section
17.44.180, "Permitted Conditional Uses For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.28.040: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
See section
 17.44.190, "Site Development Standards For All Residential Zones", of this
title. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.28.050: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   See section
17.44.200, "Special Provisions For All Residential Zones", of this title.
   B.   The density (number of buildable lots per acre of subdivision area)
shall not exceed 2.42 buildable lots per acre. The subdivision area shall be
the gross acreage of the subdivision, including roads, trails, easements, and
all nonlot areas.
   C.   Up to twenty percent (20%) of the buildable lots in an R-1 15
subdivision may have a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
and a ninety foot (90') minimum width when recommended for approval by the
Planning Commission and when complying with all of the following conditions:
      1.   The structure is a single level without a basement; and
      2.   The home does not exceed one thousand four hundred (1400) square
feet in size; and
      3.   The attached garage does not exceed six hundred feet (600') in size;
and
      4.   The lot has no more than one accessory building not exceeding two
hundred (200) square feet in size; and
   D.   If the General Plan adopted by the City denotes a public trail,
waterway, recreation area, park, open space or other land use within the
proposed subdivision, the proposed subdivision must include said trail,
waterway, recreation area, park, open space or land use.
   E.   If the City and developer jointly agree to include in the subdivision
or to convey to the City a public trail, waterway, recreation area, park, open
space, or similar public land use that is in addition to those called for in
the General Plan, then the subdivision may include an additional number of
smaller lots, as defined in subsection C of this section, of up to an
additional ten percent (10%) of the number of buildable lots in the
subdivision. In no event shall the number of smaller lots, as defined in
subsection C of this section, exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total number
of buildable lots within the subdivision.
   F.   If any smaller lots are included in the proposed subdivision, a
conceptual development plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council prior to obtaining any subdivision approvals.
(Ord. 17-07: Ord. 17-01: Ord. 21-02)
CHAPTER 17.29
SENIOR HOUSING RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.29.010: Purpose
17.29.020: Building Type
17.29.030: Lot Requirements
17.29.040: Setbacks
17.29.050: Maximum Structure Height
17.29.060: Development Agreement
17.29.070: Age Restrictions
17.29.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Senior Housing Residential Zone is to provide a single-
family “empty nest” type housing that is affordable and attractive for adults
55 years of age or older seeking to live in a community with others in the same
age group while enjoying an active lifestyle and to provide a sustainable
quality product in appropriate city locations where quiet residential
neighborhoods may be established and protected while being a positive
enhancement to the city of Farr West. (Ord. 2023-11)
17.29.020: BUILDING TYPE:
Single-family, detached dwelling. (Ord. 2023-11)
17.29.030: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density. There shall be no more than five residential units per acre;
   B.   Lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 55 feet. (Ord. 2023-11)
17.29.040: SETBACKS:
   A.   Front Setback. Twenty feet minimum;
   B.   Side Setback. Five feet minimum on each side, except 15 feet minimum
for side fronting a street;
   C.   Rear setback. Fifteen feet minimum. (Ord. 2023-11)
17.29.050: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
   A.   Dwelling shall be single level. Habitable attic space (bonus room) is
permitted over an attached garage area. Dwelling height shall not exceed 25
feet.
   B.   An attached third-car garage is permitted, provided it meets all
setback and height requirements. (Ord. 2023-11)
17.29.060: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A Development Agreement must be approved by the Farr West City Planning
Commission and the City Council prior to the initiation of any 55+ Residential
Patio Home Development. Items to be included in the Development Agreement
include, but are not limited to the following:
   A.   Open Space, 15% minimum of the total development must remain open
space;
   B.   Amenities;
   C.   Landscaping;
   D.   Fencing;
   E.   Conditional uses;
   F.   H.O.A. (Ord. 2023-11)
17.29.070: AGE RESTRICTIONS:
In accordance with applicable state and federal laws, this zone requires a
minimum of 80 percent of the occupied units to be occupied by at least one
person who is 55 years of age or older. (Ord. 2023-11)
CHAPTER 17.30
R-1-22 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2014-02)
CHAPTER 17.31
INNOVATION COMMERCIAL ZONE (ICZ)
SECTION:
17.31.010: Purpose
17.31.020: Location
17.31.030: Land Uses
17.31.040: Development Standards
17.31.010:   PURPOSE:
The purpose of the ICZ zone is to encourage responsible and healthy economic
development that will promote employment opportunities and encourage industry
and commerce within specified boundaries of Farr West City. (Ord. 2024-17)
17.31.020:   LOCATION:
The area in which the Innovation Commercial Zone shall be permitted is the area
east of I-15 to the Willard Canal and north the southern city boundary to the
Heritage Ranch Subdivision. (Ord. 2024-17)
17.31.030:   LAND USES:
The Following uses are permitted on the Project. Uses not listed here as
permitted are prohibited:
   Agriculture.
   Assembling in an enclosed building.
   Financial services.
   Equipment rental in an enclosed building.
   Conference and/or event center.
   Construction services in an enclosed building. No open or outdoor storage.
   Critical Infrastructure facility: data center, data warehousing, data
processing.
   Educational facilities.
   Food and beverage products manufacturing, storage, and distribution.
   Hotel.
   Laboratory, research and development
   Industrial laundry services.
   Light manufacturing.
   Media service.
   Medical service, clinic, pharmaceuticals, research, or laboratory.
   Motion picture studio.
   Professional Offices
   Indoor custom packaging.
   Health and fitness center
   Printing and publishing facilities.
   Public utility substation.
   Public or quasi-public uses.
   Restaurant.
   Retail or shops intended for retail sales of goods or merchandise.
   Theaters, amusement, and recreation facilities.
   Veterinary or pet related services.
   Wholesale and warehousing. (Ord. 2024-17)
17.31.040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following development standards shall apply to the zone.
   A.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum lot area shall be sufficient to provide for the use,
adequate parking, landscaping, and other requirements set forth herein.
      2.   No minimum lot width.
      3.   Maximum lot size shall be 10-acres.
      4.   Maximum lot coverage shall be 55% of any lot area covered by a main
building and/or accessory building(s) excluding surface areas and/or parking
structures.
      5.   Maximum impervious coverage shall be 80% as measured across the
entire Project.
      6.   Maximum building height shall be fifty (50) feet, measured from the
finished grade. Finished grade shall be calculated from the finished elevation
of car parking stalls adjacent to the building. Penthouse or roof structures
for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet
walls, skylights, cupolas, solar panels, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, water tanks, wireless or television masts, theater lofts, silos or
similar structures may be erected above the height limit, but no space above
the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor
space, and at no time shall the height be greater than 15 feet higher than the
maximum height.
      7.   Minimum front yard setback shall be twenty feet (20') measured from
back of street curb.
      8.   Minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet (10').
      9.   Minimum rear yard setback shall be ten feet (10').
      10.   Setbacks adjacent to any residential or agricultural zone shall be
equal to or greater than the highest point of the building.
      11.    Structures constructed for human occupancy shall have equally
attractive sides, rather than placing all emphasis on the front elevation of
the structure. The same types of building materials shall be used on all four
(4) sides, though the amount of material used on each side may vary. Structures
shall be designed and arranged with variations in wall surfaces by using such
things as varying textures, materials, and planes to avoid a blank wall
appearance.
      12.   Building colors shall be predominantly earth tones. Use of brighter
colors, including silvers and other metallic colors, is limited to accents or
details on a building and shall not exceed more than ten percent (10%) of the
wall surface of each wall.
   B.   Building Materials: Building walls shall be constructed with materials
of durability and quality and limited to the following types of exterior
surfaces: Windows shall not be reflective, tinting is permissible provided they
do not become reflective as part of the tinting process.
      1.   Brick.
      2.   Baked colored architectural metals. In no case shall ribbed metal
skin systems typical of pre-engineered metal buildings be permitted.
      3.   Integral colored split face or honed CMU. Smooth face CMU may be
used on portions of the building not visible from public areas.
      4.   Tilt up wall systems, site cast and plant cast concrete.
      5.   Stucco including EIFS is limited to architectural detailing surfaces
and articulation and are a minimum of eight feet (8') above grade.
   C.   Screening:
      1.   All mechanical equipment related to the Project shall be screened
from view, either by enclosure or parapet wall.
      2.   Dumpsters shall be screened from view by concrete screen walls or
enclosed within a concrete or masonry enclosure designed to be compatible with
the overall project architecture.
      3.   Outdoor Storage shall be located in the most accessible manner to
the side or rear of the main building, provided that such storage does not
exceed the height of the screening fence and is screened from the public right
of way.
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   Plant Materials to Complement: Selected plant materials shall
complement the proposed architecture by adding emphasis to primary points of
public access to buildings, by providing shade to commonly used paths for
pedestrians and to contrast larger continual planes of the buildings.
      2.   Screening; Visual/Noise: Landscaping prescribed by the Planning
Commission to accomplish other requirements of this title, as in visual
screening, noise abatement or other needs based on site conditions may be
required as part of, or in addition to, the twenty percent (20%) landscaping
requirement.
      3.   Location: Front setbacks, side setbacks facing the street, and other
areas visible to the public are required to be landscaped.
      4.   Ground Cover: All landscaped areas shall be covered with a minimum
three (3) inch layer of decorative rock or other approved medium to allow water
to infiltrate the ground and inhibit weed growth. Detention basins shall also
be lined with rock.
      5.   Plant Materials: All Landscaped areas shall be planted with plants
that are well-suited to conditions at the project site and may include native
and locally adapted shrubs, trees, or ornamental grasses and perennials
compatible with xeriscape environment. (Xeriscape is a landscaping method
developed especially for arid and semiarid climates the utilizes water-
conservation techniques.)
      6.   Watering: The landscaping plan shall include a secondary water
supply. Culinary water shall not be used. The irrigation systems shall be
designed to minimize water consumption by using an underground drip or bubble
system with an automatic controller.
      7.   Maintenance: The preservation of the landscaping shall be maintained
in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition free of weeds and litter. Diseased or
dead plant materials shall be removed and replaced by June 1 if due to winter
kill or October 1 if the plant materials die during the summer months. The
preservation and maintenance of the landscaping in the park strip areas are the
responsibility of the property owner/ tenant.
      8.   Completion Requirements: Landscaping shall be completed prior to the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the building or structure with
which it is associated. In the case of inclement weather that prevents the
installation of the required landscaping, the time of completion may be
extended, in writing, upon approval of the Chief Building Official.
      9.   No Interference: Plant materials shall not interfere with
anticipated large vehicles using roads and service bay areas.
      10.   Additional Landscaping Emphasis: Additional landscaping emphasis
shall be added to highly visible traffic corridors and lessened emphasis will
be required on landscaping adjacent to uses that are geographically removed
from highly visible traffic corridors.
      11.   Plants Lists: Plants shall be selected, with consideration given to
specific microclimatic conditions, including sun, shade, solar aspect, the size
and growth habit of selected species at maturity and the overall landscape
design concept.
      12.   Landscaping and Open Space Minimum: A minimum twenty percent (20%)
open space, trails, landscaping, and parks which shall be measured on a
Project-wide basis rather than an individual Parcel basis, and the Public Open
Space areas dedicated to the Cities, along with the open space, green space,
trails, landscaping, and parks located within the Project will be included in
the Project-wide twenty percent (20%) calculation.
   E.   Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following
ratios:
      1.   Parking For Professional and Office Buildings: For every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of office space, there shall be three (3) parking
spaces. ADA accessible stalls will be provided in accordance with applicable
laws.
      2.   Parking For Industrial Buildings: For every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of industrial space, there shall be a minimum of one (1) parking
space. ADA accessible stalls will be provided in accordance with applicable
laws.
   Parking For Retail Buildings: For every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
industrial space, there shall be a minimum of four (4) parking spaces. ADA
accessible stalls will be provided in accordance with applicable laws.
   F.   Lighting Adjacent to Residential:
      1.    Light, other than natural light, shall not negatively impact
residential or agricultural property.
      2.   No exterior light pole or light fixture shall be closer than four
feet (4') from a residential or agricultural property line.
      3.   Light fixtures within twenty feet (20') of a residential or
agricultural property line shall have a solid cover, from the top of the light
fixture and bulb to four inches (4") beyond the bottom of the light fixture and
bulb. The cover shall surround the light fixture and bulb for one hundred
eighty degrees (180°) on the side of the fixture adjacent to the residential or
agricultural property.
      4.   Exterior lighting twenty feet (20') or more from a residential or
agricultural property line shall be directed straight down or away from a
residential or agricultural property line.
      5.   The beam of exterior lighting shall not shine directly onto
residential or agricultural property.
      6.   Other lighting designs and covers may be approved at the sole
discretion of Farr West City.
   G.   Noise Levels Adjacent to Residential:
      1.   Operational noise levels shall be submitted to and approved by Farr
West City prior to final approval of construction documents.
      2.   Noise from a property in a ICZ zone that is determined to be a
nuisance by Farr West City shall be abated by the property owner. (Ord. 2024-
17)
CHAPTER 17.32
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
17.32.010: Purpose And Objective
17.32.020: Planned Development Designation
17.32.030: Standards And Requirements
17.32.040: Guarantees And Covenants
17.32.050: Review Procedure
17.32.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
The purpose of the Planned Development Overlay Zone is to encourage thoughtful
and efficient utilization of land in residential areas and by providing greater
flexibility in the location and density of buildings. It also allows the
consolidation of open spaces, the clustering of dwelling units, and the
efficient use of those public amenities required in connection with new
residential development. These provisions are intended to create more
attractive and more desirable environments within residential areas of the City
and to accommodate moderate income housing initiatives in accordance with Utah
state housing requirements and Farr West City general plan chapter eight.
(Ord. 2025-03)
17.32.020: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DESIGNATION:
The PD Overlay Zone is permitted to be used in areas of three acres or more
located in residential zones. All PD overlays will require the applicant to
enter into a development agreement with the City. The PD overlay provisions,
along with the development agreement, shall supersede the site development
standards of the zone to which it is applied. Any PD overlay project shall be
developed in strict conformance with this chapter and the final development
agreement as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council. The PD overlay designation shall encompass planned residential
developments of single-family housing and townhomes. Permitted uses in the PD
overlay shall be limited to those uses permitted in the underlying zone to
which the PD overlayapplies. The Planned Development Overlay Zone designation
(PD) shall become a suffix to the residential zone with which it is combined
and shall be shown on the official zoning map.
(Ord. 2025-03)
17.32.030: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A planned development established under the provisions of this chapter shall
conform to the following standards:
   A.   Density: The maximum number of dwelling units shall be limited to six
units per acre. Townhomes may only comprise fifty percent (50%) of the total
allowable dwelling units and shall contain a maximum of four units per
townhome. In computing the total allowable dwelling units, any fraction of one
unit shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
   B.   Density Bonus: The developer may request higher density than that which
is defined in this chapter. The Planning Commission must agree, however, that
any increase in density will be compensated for by increased public open space
and/or amenities and improved design which, by the commission's discretion, are
deemed proportional to the requested density increase. The increased density
shall be incorporated into the final development agreement as recommended by
the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
   C.   Building Locations: With the following exceptions, dwellings and
permitted structures may be located as approved in the final development plans.
Locations and arrangements of buildings on the lot should be accomplished in a
manner that will best utilize the lot area and create an attractive living
environment. The following exceptions shall be considered minimum requirements
as applicable:
      1.   Garages with entrances facing directly on the street, whether in a
front or side yard, shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the
property line.
      2.   Setbacks shall be maintained along the peripheral property lines of
the planned development and shall be equal to that required by the zone on the
property immediately adjacent thereto.
      3.   In those instances where a proposed planned development will front
upon one or more existing streets, the setback from the street shall be equal
to that required by the most restrictive zone of the property immediately
adjacent along the same street frontage.
   D.   Open Space: Not less than twenty percent (20%) of the total acreage of
the planned development shall be retained as permanent open space (parks,
playgrounds, trails, etc. See requirements below). Vehicular streets or roads,
parking, driveways and other required setbacks are not allowed to be included
in the computations for open space.
   E.   Requirements:
      1.   Accessibility - Open space must be accessible to residents of the
development and, where applicable, to the general public.
      2.   Functionality - Must provide active or passive recreation
opportunities or act as community gathering spaces.
      3.   Minimum Dimensions - Narrow strips of land, residual spaces, or
areas with a slope exceeding fifteen percent (15%) shall not count as usable
open space unless specifically designed for recreation or outdoor uses.
      4.   Maintenance - Usable open space shall be landscaped, maintained,
and, if applicable, include amenities such as benches, lighting, or trails.
         a.   Examples of Usable Open Space:
            (1)   Parks, playgrounds, and picnic areas;
            (2)   Walking and biking trails;
            (3)   Community gardens;
            (4)   Sports courts and fields;
            (5)   Plazas, courtyards, and community gathering spaces; and
            (6)   Natural open space with designated trails or educational
features.
         b.   Exclusions:
            a.   Stormwater detention basins unless designed for dual
recreational use.
   E.   Buffer: All areas adjacent to existing residential developments shall
contain only single-family detached housing units.
   F.   Utilities: All dwelling units shall be served by public sewer and a
public water supply. All utilities within the planned development shall be
placed underground, including telephone, electrical, television and internet
cables. Dwelling units under separate ownership shall have separate utility
metering.
   G.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of buildings within a planned
development shall be the same as that permitted by the underlying residential
zone.
   H.   Required Yard Area Landscaping: The required front and side yards which
face upon a public street shall not be used for vehicular parking but shall be
landscaped with lawn or appropriate plants and shrubs as indicated on the
approved final development plans.
   I.   Parking: Dwellings shall be provided with not less than two (2) parking
spaces per unit. All parking spaces, parking areas and driveways must be hard
surfaced and properly drained.
   J.   Dedication Of Streets: Streets in planned developments may be dedicated
to the City but must conform to the required City street standards. When
planning the street layout and connection to existing streets a traffic study
may be required at the discretion of the Planning Commission and/or City
Engineer. (Ord. 2025-03)
17.32.040: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
Adequate guarantees shall be provided for permanent retention and maintenance
of all open space areas created before final planned development approval is
granted.
   A.   Open Space Guarantees: Open space guarantees for all planned
developments may include the following:
      1.   The City may require the developer to furnish and record protective
covenants which will guarantee the retention of the open space area, or the
City may require the creation of a corporation granting beneficial rights to
the open space to all owners or occupants of land within the development.
      2.   The developer shall develop all required open space. Maintenance of
all open space shall also be the responsibility of the developer unless the
City accepts dedication and approves the annexation of said property.
      3.   In case of private reservation, the open space to be reserved shall
be protected against building development by conveying to the City as part of
the condition of project approval, an open space easement over such open areas,
restricting the area against any future building or use, except as approved on
the final development plan. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the open space
must also remain accessible to the public.
      4.   The care and maintenance of the area within such open space
reservation shall be ensured by the developer by establishing a private
association or corporation responsible for such maintenance which shall levy
the cost thereof as an assessment on the property owners within the planned
development. Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations
shall be established in a manner acceptable to the City and made a part of the
conditions of the final plan approval.
      5.   Maintenance of open space reservations shall be managed by a person,
partnership or corporate entity in which there is adequate expertise and
experience in property management to ensure that said maintenance is
accomplished efficiently at a high-quality standard.
      6.   Subsequent changes or additions to the plans or use of the land may
be made to the plan upon, first; a petition of two-thirds (2/3) or more of the
property owners within the development, second; submitting the changes to the
Planning Commission for its recommendation, and third; receiving approval of
the changes by the City Council.
   B.   Improvement Completion Assurance: To ensure that the planned
development will be constructed to completion in an acceptable manner, the
applicant shall submit an improvement completion assurance in a manner
acceptable to the City or as otherwise specified in City Ordinance. The amount
of the improvement completion assurance shall be determined by the City
Engineer as an estimated cost of the required improvements including
construction and installation of all required landscaping, parking and street
improvements, including paving, curbs, sidewalks, water and sewer lines, public
parks and playgrounds, recreation facilities and other amenities shown on the
final development plan. The applicant shall also file a schedule of anticipated
completion dates for such improvements. In the event that the improvements are
not completed in reasonable conformance with said schedule, the City may
undertake to complete the improvements and pay for such improvements from the
improvement completion assurance.
(Ord. 2025-03)
17.32.050: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: Application for a PD Overlay Zone designation shall follow
the procedures listed in this chapter.
   B.   Preliminary Development Plan: All applications for a PD overlay
designation shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan. The plan
shall contain the following:
      1.   A complete and accurate legal description of the property proposed
for the planned development.
      2.   A tabulation of the total acreage of the site and the percentages
thereof to be designated for parking, residential units, open space, amenities,
streets, etc.
      3.   Proposed circulation pattern, including private and public streets
and pedestrian paths.
      4.   Parks, common open spaces, playgrounds, public facilities and other
improvements or amenities proposed within the planned development.
      5.   General location of all dwellings and other structures in the
development and an indication of proposed population densities and building
densities (units per acre), including percentages of each dwelling type being
proposed.
      6.   Proposed location of parking and ingress and egress.
      7.   A landscaping plan showing what areas are to be landscaped and what
types of plants and materials are to be used, including sprinkler and
irrigation systems.
      8.   Preliminary elevations or perspectives of all building types
proposed within the development.
      9.   Preliminary subdivision plat, if the site is being divided, showing
a general layout of all proposed lots.
      10.   A preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which adequate
sewage disposal and water are to be provided to the site, including the point
from which said services are to be extended.
      11.   A draft of the declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions as required herein.
      12.   A draft of the proposed development agreement.
      13.   Other items that may be required by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Preliminary Plan Review: The Planning Commission shall review the
application for a PD Overlay Zone designation and accompanying preliminary
development plan. The Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve
subject to compliance with such modifications or conditions as may be deemed
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter and the preliminary plan.
The approval of the preliminary plan shall be made only after the Planning
Commission finds that:
      1.   That the proposed development will provide a more beneficial
environment than a conventional residential development established under the
provisions of the current underlying residential zone.
      2.   That the proposed development will not be detrimental to adjacent
properties and to the general area in which it is located; and that it will be
in substantial harmony with the character of existing development in the area.
      3.   That the development project will provide more efficient use of the
land and more useable open space than a conventional development permitted by
the residential zone.
      4.   That increased densities allowed within the proposed development
will be compensated by better site design and by the provision of increased
amenities and recreational facilities.
      5.   That any variation allowed from the development standards of the
residential zone will not increase hazards to the health, safety or general
welfare of the residents of the proposed planned development or adjacent areas.
   D.   Planning Commission Recommendation: Based on its action with the
preliminary development plan, the Planning Commission shall then recommend to
the City Council either approval or denial of the PD Overlay Zone designation
on the applicant's property.
   E.   City Council Action: The City Council shall review the preliminary
development plan and either approve or deny the PD Overlay Zone designation for
the proposed development.
   F.   Final Plans for Planned Development: Final planned development plans
shall contain the following:
      1.   Tabulations of all dwelling units to be constructed by types.
      2.   Detailed site plan with complete dimensions showing precise
locations of all buildings and structures, lot or parcel sizes and locations,
designations of common open spaces and special use areas, detailed circulation
pattern including proposed ownership and typical cross section of streets.
      3.   Exterior concept for all building types, presented as exterior
perspectives or exterior elevations.
      4.   Detailed landscaping plans which show the types and sizes of all
plant materials and their locations, decorative materials, recreation
equipment, and sprinkler or irrigation systems. Landscape planning shall be
accomplished by keeping water conservation in mind.
      5.   Dimensioned parking layout showing location of individual parking
stalls and all areas of ingress or egress.
      6.   Detailed engineering plans or final subdivision plat showing site
grading, street improvements, drainage, storm water management, and public
utility locations. Also, submission of engineering feasibility studies, if
required by the City Engineer.
      7.   The final draft of covenants, conditions and restrictions, together
with open space easements and other bonds, guarantees or agreements as required
herein or as deemed necessary by the City Attorney.
      8.   A proposed phasing schedule for the completion of landscaping,
parking, street improvement and other improvements and amenities.
      9.   Final draft of the development agreement for the PD Overlay.
   G.   Final Plan Review:
      1.   The Planning Commission shall review the submitted final plan. The
Planning Commission shall approve the final plan only after it has found the
following:
         a.   The proposed development meets all the requirements, objectives,
purposes and standards of the PD Zone regulations and of the residential zone.
         b.   The proposed development and development agreement does not
significantly deviate from the approved preliminary plan.
      2.   The Planning Commission may impose conditions on the approval of the
final development plans as are deemed appropriate to comply with this chapter.
      3.   Final approval of the planned PD Overlay development is made by the
City Council upon recommendation by the Planning Commission.
   H.   Building Permit: No building permit for any portion of the planned
development shall be issued until the final planned development plans have been
approved and all necessary requirements have been met.
   I.   Phased Final Plans: The final plan may be submitted in phases, provided
each such phase can exist as a separate unit capable of independently meeting
all the requirements and standards of this chapter and of the residential zone.
(Ord. 2025-03)
CHAPTER 17.34
MIXED USE ZONE; COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL USES
SECTION:
17.34.010: Purpose
17.34.020: Definitions
17.34.030: Zone Establishment
17.34.040: Permitted Uses
17.34.050: Conditional Uses
17.34.060: Residential Lot, Design And Street Standards
17.34.070: Commercial Standards
17.34.080: Zoning Requirement
17.34.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a mixed use zone is to allow the integration of commercial,
office and residential uses into a single, cohesive development. The places
that are created as a result of this zone will reflect a town center philosophy
and include excellence in architecture, streetscapes, public spaces,
connections and pedestrian emphasis. Each dwelling unit is to be held in
private individual ownership. (Ord. 2013-02)
17.34.020: DEFINITIONS:
   CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A document providing a sufficient description
of the overall plan and design of a proposed development in a mixed use zone.
The plan should provide sufficient detail and information to provide the city
with a clear overview of the proposed development.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A legally binding contract between a property owner
and/or a developer and the city which provides the details governing the
development of a parcel of land for the owner's or developer's personal or
commercial use.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A document providing sufficient detail to outline the
basic elements of a proposed development in a mixed use zone. The plan should
provide detailed information including, but not limited to: intended
residential and/or commercial uses, structure location, appearance, utilities,
traffic, drainage, ordinance compliance, impacts to neighboring properties, and
other significant details of the proposed development.
   MIXED USE ZONE: A land use zone permitting a combination of residential and
commercial developments.
   TOWNHOUSE: Single-family attached dwelling units with no more than four (4)
units attached. (Ord. 2013-02)
17.34.030: ZONE ESTABLISHMENT:
This zoning district is only applicable to parcels of property which are a
minimum of forty (40) contiguous acres in size and consistent with the general
plan as mixed use.
As part of an application to change the zoning of a parcel of property to the
mixed use zone, the applicant shall submit along with the application a
conceptual development plan and a development plan as part of a complete
application.
The conceptual development plan shall provide sufficient detail for the city to
assess the proposal and shall reflect the developer's commitment to a design
scheme for the entire property. The conceptual development plan and
accompanying information shall provide the basis for a development plan and
shall become an exhibit in the development agreement.
   A.   The conceptual development plan shall be reviewed by the planning
commission and approved by the city council and shall include:
      1.   A site plan showing the variety of land uses (residential,
commercial, office and public spaces) proposed along with street layouts and
connections to surrounding properties. Residential use shall not constitute
more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross acreage of the entire project.
      2.   Contain renderings of streetscape themes (sidewalks, curbs, gutters,
park strips, streetlights), landscape themes, sign themes, parking areas, yard
areas showing setbacks, surrounding properties, parks and plazas, fencing and
architectural themes.
      3.   Show building locations and elevations with exterior building
materials, size and general footprint of all dwelling units and commercial
buildings. The conceptual development plan shall also include the total number
of dwelling units proposed as well as a list of commitments relating to the
quality of the proposed development that the applicant is willing to commit to
in a development agreement. Examples of items that should be addressed in the
written description include amenities (swimming pool, tot lot, clubhouse,
public/private park, trails, special features, plazas, etc.), dwelling unit
sizes, exterior finish materials and entrance features.
      4.   The development of the commercial and residential areas shall
coincide with each other. Planning the development in phases is encouraged.
Describe in detail all phases of the commercial and residential development.
   B.   The development plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission to
ensure compliance with appropriate city ordinances and building standards
before submittal to the city council for final approval.
   C.   After the development plan has been approved, but prior to the rezoning
of the property, the developer shall enter into a development agreement with
the city and shall develop the property in accordance with the development
agreement and current city ordinances in effect as of the approval date of the
development agreement, together with the requirements set forth in the
development agreement. The development agreement requires approval prior to any
construction on the site. Once approved, the development agreement and
development plan shall not substantially change. Any proposed change to the
development plan or the development agreement shall be reviewed by the planning
commission and approved by the city council. (Ord. 2013-02: Ord. 21-02)
17.34.040: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted in a mixed use zone, subject to the approved
development plan and the development agreement, provided the requirements of
all other provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances of
Farr West City are met. No other permitted uses are allowed.
Buildings and uses commonly and customarily associated with residential uses
(chapter 17.28 of this title).
Commercial uses listed as permitted uses in chapter 17.36 of this title and are
limited to the areas designated as commercial on the approved development plan
and development agreement.
Public and private parks.
Residential businesses, except daycare centers (title 5, chapter 5.16 of this
code).
Residential facilities for persons with disabilities and assisted living
centers (chapter 17.60 of this title).
Single-family detached units.
Single level, single-family detached units.
Townhouses with no more than four (4) units attached. Townhouses shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total dwelling units. (Ord. 2016-10: Ord.
2013-02)
17.34.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following conditional uses are permitted in a mixed use zone, subject to
the approved development plan and development agreement and provided the
requirements of all other provisions of this chapter and any other applicable
ordinances of Farr West City are met. No other conditional uses are allowed.
Daycare centers (title 5, chapter 5.16 of this code).
Temporary lodging including motels, hotels and bed and breakfasts. (Ord. 2013-
02)
17.34.060: RESIDENTIAL LOT, DESIGN AND STREET STANDARDS:
The residential portion of the mixed use development shall create a
neighborhood with subneighborhoods displaying excellent architecture,
landscaping, pedestrian pathways, connections, open space and gathering places.
   A.   Density: The overall density of the development area shall not exceed
six (6) dwelling units per gross acre of the development.
   B.   Lot Size And Width: Lot size and width are determined by the
development plan.
   C.   Front Yard Setback: Twenty feet (20').
   D.   Side Yards: A minimum of sixteen feet (16') between each unit.
   E.   Rear Yard Setback: A minimum of fifteen feet (15').
   F.   Building Height: Generally as allowed by the current adopted building
code, with a maximum height of thirty five feet (35'), but can be modified by
the development plan to assure better transitions between uses and to maintain
views.
   G.   Architectural Design Standards: The design shall show detail in the
unification of exterior architectural style, building materials and color and
size of each unit, however, the intent is not to have such consistency in
design that all units are identical. Different sections of the development and
different housing types should reflect the architectural theme but be distinct
giving them their own identity.
   H.   Streets: Street widths, curbs and gutters shall meet Farr West City
standards. The size and location of sidewalks and park strip areas are
determined in the development plan.
   I.   Signs: The signs permitted within the residential areas shall only be
those allowed in residential zones. (Ord. 2013-02)
17.34.070: COMMERCIAL STANDARDS:
The commercial area within the mixed use zone is intended to provide an area to
accommodate the development of commercial businesses that integrates with the
adjacent residential use. The commercial business area should be characterized
by well landscaped areas, walkable streetscapes, excellent architecture and
sufficient off and on street parking. A town center approach is encouraged.
   A.   Signs: The signs permitted shall be those allowed in commercial zones
(section
17.56.070 of this title). (Ord. 16-01: Ord. 2013-02)
17.34.080: ZONING REQUIREMENT:
The rezone of the development property to mixed use is site specific. Once
property is rezoned to mixed use, the development must commence within five (5)
years of the approval. If no significant construction has begun, the city may
rezone the property back to the original zone. (Ord. 2013-02)
CHAPTER 17.36
C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.36.010: Purpose
17.36.020: Flex Space
17.36.030: Permitted Uses
17.36.040: Conditional Uses
17.36.050: Basis For Issuance Of Conditional Use
17.36.060: Prohibited Uses
17.36.070: Site Development Standards
17.36.080: C-2 Zone Adjacent To A Residential Or Agricultural Zone
17.36.090: Landscaping
17.36.100: Trash Storage
17.36.110: Walls And Fences
17.36.120: Special Provisions
17.36.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C-2 or General Commercial Zone is to provide an area which
will accommodate the orderly development of commercial businesses within the
city. The businesses must have landscaped lots and adequate off-street parking.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 17-02)
17.36.020: FLEX SPACE:
Flex space is any building or commercial property that has a mixture of retail
space, office space, and/or warehouse space. Flex space can be used for either
permitted or conditional uses (see lists), but conditional uses shall be
authorized only upon recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by
the City Council. (Ord. 2024-12)
17.36.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted subject to site plan approval and
compliance:
"Residential facility for elderly persons" as defined in section
17.08.010 of this title.
"Residential facility for persons with a disability" as defined in section
17.08.010 of this title.
Arcade.
Archery shop and range (indoor only).
Athletic club.
Bank or financial institutions.
Billiard parlor (no alcohol).
Catering.
Day care/preschool.
Detective agency.
Educational institution, tutoring, learning centers (no housing).
Employment agency.
Golf driving range (indoors only).
Government buildings or uses, non-industrial.
Laundromat.
Library (public).
Medical or dental clinics, pharmacy.
Mortuary.
Museum.
Office: general uses include business, property management, investment firm,
advertising agency, secretarial services.
Personal care and fitness center.
Pawn shop.
Racquet club (indoors).
Restaurant, cafe or cafeteria.
Retail sales.
Theater.
(Ord. 2024-12)
17.36.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Permits for conditional uses shall be authorized, only upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.
   B.   The Planning Commissions review of conditional uses shall be made with
   the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted,
and harmonious development in accordance with existing and future needs of the
city. In making a recommendation on conditional uses, the Planning Commission
shall consider the existing sites zoning, the Zoning Ordinances, the approved
general plan, and the use of the surrounding property; the present and future
requirements for streets, off street parking, and on street parking in relation
to exits and entrances from public streets, pedestrian and vehicular traffic
circulation, availability of water and other utilities, and other public
requirements including the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city. The City Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission or on
its own motion, may impose reasonable conditions as are necessary to protect
the rights of surrounding property owners and tenants and to conduct the
purposes of this chapter and characteristics of this zone. (Ord. 2024-12)
17.36.050: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE:
A conditional use permit shall not be authorized unless a public hearing is
held, and evidence is presented to establish:
   A.   That the proposed use of the location is necessary or desirable to
provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general well-being
of the community; and
   B.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the case and the
conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
persons nor injurious to property or improvements in the community, but will be
compatible with and complementary to the existing surrounding uses, buildings,
and structures when considering traffic generation, parking, building design
and location, landscaping and signs; and
   C.   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use; and
   D.   That the proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and governing
ordinances and principles and land use of the general plan for Farr West City;
and
   E.   That the proposed use will not lead to the deterioration of the
environment, or ecology of the general area, nor will produce conditions or
emit pollutants of such a type or of such a quantity to detrimentally affect,
to any appreciable degree, public or private property including the operation
of existing uses thereon, in the immediate vicinity or the community.
   F.   Conditional uses are restricted to the following:
Amusement fun centers.
Automobile new or used sales and service.
Automotive repair provided it is conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
Carpenter and cabinet shop.
Carwash.
Church.
Dance hall (no alcohol).
Event center.
Fuel service station/charging station.
Golf course.
Gun range (indoors).
Gun sales and service.
Heavy equipment rental, sales, and service.
Hospital.
Kennel.
Light indoor manufacturing with associated retail sales where the items
manufactured are sold on the premises.
Motel, hotel, bed and breakfast.
Pest control and extermination.
Public and quasi-public uses.
Radio and television broadcasting station.
Trade or industrial school.
Veterinary (small and medium sized animals with kennel services).
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2010-03)
17.36.060: PROHIBITED USES:
Bulk soil, rock, and aggregate sales, storage, or processing.
Residential uses except a "residential facility for elderly persons" and a
"residential facility for persons with a disability" as defined in section
17.08.010 of this title.
Storage units or facilities for lease or rent to the public. Portable sheds or
containers for lease or purchase.
Title loan and check cashing businesses.
Trucking companies, truck docks, cross docks.
(Ord. 2024-12)
17.36.070: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Front setback and side setback from a public dedicated street: Twenty
feet (20').
   B.   Side yard setback, adjacent to Commercially zoned property: As required
in the adopted Building Code.
   C.   Rear yard setback adjacent to Commercially zoned property: As required
in the adopted Building Code.
   D.   Side yard setback, adjacent to Residentially zoned property: Twenty
feet (20').
   E.   Rear yard setback, adjacent to Residentially zoned property: Twenty
feet (20').
   F.   Lot area and width: No requirement unless identified in the adopted
building code.
   G.   Maximum height: No requirement.
   H.   Minimum height: Eight feet (8') or one story whichever is greater.
   I.   Parking requirements: See supplementary regulations in section
17.44.150 of this title. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 17-02)
17.36.080: C-2 ZONE ADJACENT TO A RESIDENTIAL OR AGRICULTURAL ZONE:
   A.   Set back from any residential or agricultural zone:
      1.   Setbacks adjacent to any residential or agricultural zone shall be
equal to or greater than the highest point of the building.
      2.   The minimum setback is twenty feet (20').
   B.   Outside storage and staging of pallets, products, equipment, and
materials are not allowed.
   C.   Lighting:
      1.   Light, other than natural light, shall not negatively impact
residential or agricultural property.
      2.   No exterior light pole or light fixture shall be closer than four
feet (4') from a residential or agricultural property line.
      3.   Light fixtures within twenty feet (20') of a residential or
agricultural property line shall have a solid cover, from the top of the light
fixture and bulb to four inches (4") beyond the bottom of the light fixture and
bulb. The cover shall surround the light fixture and bulb for one hundred
eighty degrees (180°) on the side of the fixture adjacent to the residential or
agricultural property.
      4.   Exterior lighting twenty feet (20') or more from a residential or
agricultural property line shall be directed straight down or away from a
residential or agricultural property line.
      5.   The beam of exterior lighting shall not shine directly onto
residential or agricultural property.
      6.   Other lighting designs and covers may be approved at the sole
discretion of Farr West City.
   D.   Noise Levels:
      1.   Operational noise levels shall be submitted and approved by Farr
West City prior to final approval of construction documents.
      2.   Noise from a property in a C-2 zone that is determined to be a
nuisance by Farr West City shall be abated by the property owner.
   E.   Walls/Barriers: A solid visual wall/barrier at least eight feet (8') in
height shall be erected along all property lines in common with residential or
agricultural zoned property. The type and materials of such wall shall be
approved by the planning commission as a part of the site plan review. See
Chapter 17.46 of this title and Ordinance 2022-06. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2024-02:
Ord. 2022-06)
17.36.090: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Area Requirements: An area of not less than ten percent (10%) of the
site as depicted on the site plan shall be landscaped with live plantings. The
perimeter area and slopes of the retention/detention basins may be included as
part of the landscape area if landscaped.
   B.   Screening; Visual/Noise: Landscaping prescribed by the Planning
Commission to accomplish other requirements of this title, as in visual
screening, noise abatement or other needs based on site conditions are required
as part of, or in addition to, the ten percent (10%) landscaping requirement.
   C.   Location: Front setbacks, side setbacks facing the street, and other
areas visible to the public are required to be landscaped.
   D.   Ground Cover: All landscaped areas shall be covered with a minimum
three inch (3") layer of decorative rock or other approved medium to allow
water to infiltrate the ground and inhibit weed growth. Detention basins shall
also be lined with rock.
   E.   Plant Materials: All landscaped areas shall be planted with plants that
are well-suited to conditions at the project site and may include native and
locally adapted shrubs, trees, or ornamental grasses and perennials compatible
with xeriscape environment. (Xeriscape is a landscaping method developed
especially for arid and semiarid climates that utilizes water-conservation
techniques.)
   F.   Watering: The landscaping plan shall include a secondary water supply.
Culinary water shall not be used. The irrigation systems shall be designed to
minimize water consumption by using an underground drip or bubble system with
an automatic controller.
   G.   Maintenance: The preservation of the landscaping shall be maintained in
a healthy, neat, and orderly condition free of weeds and litter. Diseased or
dead plant materials shall be removed and replaced by June 1 if due to winter
kill or October 1 if the plant materials die during the summer months. The
preservation and maintenance of the landscaping in the park strip areas are the
responsibility of the property owner/tenant.
   H.   Completion Requirements: Landscaping shall be completed prior to the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the building or structure with
which it is associated. In the case of inclement weather that prevents the
installation of the required landscaping, the time of completion may be
extended, in writing, upon approval of the Chief Building Official. (Ord. 2024-
12)
17.36.100: TRASH STORAGE:
No trash, used materials, debris, wrecked or abandoned vehicles or equipment
shall be stored in an unsecured area. All such material shall be stored in an
area screened from public view by a sight obscuring fence or wall or within a
fully enclosed building. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 17-02)
17.36.110: WALLS AND FENCES:
A decorative wall/fence at least six feet (6') in height shall be erected along
all property lines in common with Residentially zoned property. See section
17.46.070 of this title. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 17-02)
17.36.120: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
See sections
17.44.130 through
17.44.150 of this title. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 17-02)
CHAPTER 17.38
C-3 2700 NORTH REGIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.38.010: Purpose
17.38.020: Location
17.38.030: Permitted Uses
17.38.040: Conditional Uses
17.38.050: Prohibited Uses
17.38.060: Site Development Standards
17.38.070: Development Review
17.38.080: Landscaping
17.38.090: Other Requirements
17.38.100: Use Regulations
17.38.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C-3 2700 North regional commercial zone is to provide an
aesthetically pleasing entry into Farr West City that allows for development of
a variety of regional retail, office, housing, and entertainment uses while
accommodating automobile traffic to regional services dependent upon the 2700
North corridor. In addition, the requirements of this zone are intended to
prevent anchorless strip retail from blocking access and visibility to larger
parcels. The businesses would be characterized as high demand, high traffic
generating uses serving a regional market area, with well designed buildings,
attractive landscaping and adequate off street parking. (Ord. 2024-13: Ord. 13-
10)
17.38.020: LOCATION:
As depicted in the city general plan, the area in which the C-3 2700 North
regional commercial zone shall be permitted is the area east of I-15 and north
of 2550 North extending to the city's east boundary line and to the city's
north boundary line. (Ord. 13-10)
17.38.030: PERMITTED USES:
All permitted uses require site plan and architectural approval through the
planning commission. Permitted uses are:
Banks, financial institutions, financial services.
Food sales, restaurant and fast food.
Gasoline sales.
Home improvement retailing.
Hotels, motels.
Medical, dental, health services and retailing.
Offices, business and professional.
Personal services, daycare, fitness centers.
Residential - townhouses, apartments.
Retail sales.
Theaters, amusement and recreation facilities.
(Ord. 2024-13: Ord. 13-10; Ord. 23-01)
17.38.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
Permits for conditional uses shall be authorized only after approval thereof
has been given by the city council upon recommendation by the planning
commission. Conditional uses in the C-3 2700 North regional commercial zone may
require the addition of conditions to improve their compatibility within the
zone.
The planning commission's review of a conditional use shall be made with the
general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, compatible and
harmonious development in accordance with existing and future needs. In making
a recommendation to the city council, the planning commission shall consider
and address in their recommendation the existing zoning and use of the
surrounding property, site design, the present and future requirements for
streets, sidewalks, park strips, street trees, off street parking, ingress and
egress, dumpster location and design, building design, building materials,
pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation, lighting, signs, landscaping,
transitions to adjacent uses, availability of water and other utilities, and
other public requirements. The city council shall consider the recommendation
from the planning commission and may by its own motion impose reasonable
conditions as are necessary to achieve the vision and needs of the city,
protect the rights of surrounding property owners and tenants, and to carry out
the purposes of this chapter and characteristics of this zone.
Only the following conditional uses are allowed:
Automobile bodywork except within one thousand feet (1,000') on either side of
the ROW line of 2700 North.
Construction services with no outdoor storage.
Construction services with outdoor storage except within one thousand feet
(1,000') on either side of the ROW line of 2700 North.
Dry cleaning and laundry facilities.
Hospital.
Light indoor manufacturing with retail sales except within one thousand feet
(1,000') on either side of the ROW line of 2700 North.
Major automobile service/repair.
Motor vehicle and recreational vehicle sales and associated services.
Office/warehousing with at least twenty five percent (25%) office use except
within one thousand feet (1,000') on either side of the ROW line of 2700 North.
Public and quasi-public uses.
Wireless telecommunication facilities (subject to chapter 17.50 of this title).
(Ord. 13-10)
17.38.050: PROHIBITED USES:
Pawnshops.
Personal storage facilities.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Tattoo businesses.
Tavern or an establishment that primarily sells alcoholic beverages.
Title loan and check cashing businesses.
Tobacco specialty store. (Ord. 13-10)
17.38.060: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Front setback and side setback from a public dedicated street: Twenty
feet (20'). A minimum of ten feet (10') on a private street.
   B.   Side yard setback, adjacent to commercially zoned property: No
requirement except as required in the building code.
   C.   Rear yard setback, adjacent to commercially zoned property: No
requirements except as required in the building code.
   D.   Side yard setback, adjacent to residentially zoned property: Ten feet
(10').
   E.   Rear yard setback, adjacent to residentially zoned property: Ten feet
(10').
   F.   Lot area and width: One acre with a minimum of two hundred feet (200')
of frontage for commercial. Such requirements may be waived if the development
is part of an overall plan for a commercial complex that is ten (10) acres or
larger and is shown on the site plan.
   G.   Maximum height: No requirement except when adjacent to residentially
zoned property then maximum of thirty feet (30') in height is allowed.
   H.   Minimum height: Ten feet (10') or one story, whichever is greater.
   I.   Parking requirements: See supplementary regulations (section
17.44.150 of this title).
   J.   Reasonable transitions between uses may be required. The city may
require fencing, screening, setbacks, height transitions, landscaping and other
buffers based on the use.
   K.   Residential use shall not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of
the gross acreage of the entire project.
   L.   Residential - Townhouses:
      1.   Front setback twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side setback fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Rear setback fifteen feet (15').
      4.   No more than four (4) units shall be attached.
      5.   Separation between non-attached units sixteen feet (16').
      6.   Height shall not exceed two levels above grade level and a maximum
height of thirty-five feet (35').
      7.   Each residential unit shall have a two-car garage designed for
parking side by side.
      8.   Parking Requirements: Visitor parking shall be provided at a rate of
0.5 stalls per residential unit in addition to required parking per unit.
   M.   Residential - Apartments:
      1.   Apartments may not occupy more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the
gross acreage.
      2.   The development agreement will define housing density not to exceed
thirty-five (35) units per acre.
      3.   Buildings are not to exceed three (3) stories in height.
      4.   Front setback twenty feet (20').
      5.   Side setback twenty feet (20').
      6.   Rear setback twenty feet (20').
      7.   The development must satisfy at least one strategy of the Moderate-
Income Housing requirements as defined in the Farr West City General Plan.
(Ord. 2024-13: Ord. 23-01: Ord. 13-10)
17.38.070: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
   A.   All uses proposed may only be established in conformance with
development review procedures of the city. Applicants shall follow the
procedures and requirements of city codes regarding development review in the
preparation and review of development proposals. Site plan approval shall be
required.
   B.   All uses shall be conducted according to the approved plan or plat and
any conditions of approval. Plans or plats shall not be altered without prior
approval of the city.
   C.   Development agreements may be required and included in the development
approvals.
   D.   Shared boundaries with neighboring municipality: When a development
proposal crosses a boundary with Pleasant View, a mutual process of approval
shall be required. (Ord. 13-10)
17.38.080: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Area requirements: An area of not less than ten percent (10%) of the
site as depicted on the site plan shall be landscaped. Detention basins shall
not be included as part of the landscaped area.
   B.   Screening; Visual/Noise: Landscaping prescribed by the Planning
Commission to accomplish other requirements of this title, as in visual
screening, noise abatement or other needs based on site conditions may be
required as part of, or in addition to, the ten percent (10%) landscaping
requirement.
   C.   Location: Front setbacks, side setbacks facing a street, and other
areas visible to the public are required to be landscaped.
   D.   Ground Cover: All landscaped area shall be covered with a minimum
three-inch layer of decorative rock to allow water to infiltrate the ground and
inhibit weed growth.
   E.   Detention basins shall also be lined with rock.
   F.   Plant Materials: The landscaped area shall be planted with plants that
are well-suited to conditions at the project site and may include native and
locally adapted shrubs, trees, or ornamental grasses and perennials compatible
with a xeriscape environment. (Xeriscape is a landscaping method developed
especially for arid and semiarid climates that utilizes water-conserving
technique.)
   G.   Watering: The landscape plan shall include a secondary water supply.
Culinary water shall not be used. The irrigation systems shall be designed to
minimize water consumption by using an underground drip or bubbler system with
an automatic controller. Overhead spraying shall not be allowed.
   H.   Maintenance: The preservation and maintenance of the landscaping and
park strip areas are the responsibility of the site property owner/tenant. The
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition, free
of weeds and litter. Diseased or dead plant material shall be removed and
replaced in by June 1 if due to winter kill or October 1 if the plant material
dies during the summer months.
   I.   Completion Requirements: Landscaping shall be completed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or structure with which
it is associated. In the case of inclement weather that prevents the
installation of the required landscaping, the time completion may be extended,
in writing, upon approval of the Building Official. (Ord. 2023-06; Ord. 13-10)
17.38.090: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions shall apply:
   A.   Grading And Drainage: All developments shall be graded according to
city engineering and building requirements to provide adequate drainage on and
off the property. Buildings shall be equipped with facilities for the discharge
of all roof drainage onto the subject lot or parcel in a manner acceptable to
the city. Unless specifically determined otherwise by the city, land drain
systems shall be included. On site retention of runoff is encouraged with
filtration systems such as porous paving, rain gardens, slotted curbs,
bioengineered swales, and the like.
   B.   Maintenance: All developments shall be properly maintained by the
owners including buildings, signs, landscaping, hard surfaces, and
infrastructure as per approved plans.
   C.   Phasing Plan: A project phasing plan shall be submitted for review at
the time of preliminary plat or site plan approval. Development shall be in
accordance with the phasing plan unless a revised phasing plan is approved by
the city. (Ord. 13-10)
17.38.100: USE REGULATIONS:
Uses may be conducted only in accordance with the following regulations:
   A.   Regulations: Only those uses listed as permitted, conditional or
accessory uses as set forth in this chapter may be conducted.
   B.   Uses Within Enclosed Buildings; Exceptions: All uses shall be conducted
within completely enclosed buildings, except those customarily associated with
outside use such as auto sales or unless otherwise allowed in this chapter, or
those temporary uses customarily conducted in the outdoors, including Christmas
tree lots, fireworks stands and parking lot sales associated with an approved
use on the property. Parking lot sales may be conducted up to thirty (30) days
per year.
   C.   Accessory Uses And Buildings: Accessory uses and buildings may be
conducted or used only in conjunction with allowed permitted and conditional
uses. Accessory uses or buildings include, but are not limited to, parking lots
and terraces, properly screened utility and loading areas and other buildings
and activities which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal permitted or conditional use on the premises.
   D.   Storage: There shall be no open storage of trash or debris nor any
used, wrecked or neglected materials, equipment or vehicles. No commercial
materials, goods or inventory may be stored in open areas, except for temporary
display items which may be located only on private property no closer than ten
feet (10') from any public right of way. Outdoor storage of inventory or
products such as firewood, water softener salt, garden supplies and building
materials is permitted only in specific areas approved on the site plan for
such purpose.
   E.   Parked Vehicles: No vehicle, boat or trailer, or parts thereof, which
is in a wrecked, junked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition,
attended or not, may be parked or stored for longer than twenty four (24) hours
unless stored within a completely enclosed building.
   F.   Commercial Vehicles: No commercial vehicles such as earthmoving or
material handling equipment, semitrucks or trailers or any commercial truck,
trailer or vehicle may be stored for longer than twenty four (24) hours, except
in conjunction with an approved use, or approved development or construction
activities on the property.
   G.   Vehicle Storage: Utility trailers and recreation vehicles such as motor
homes, travel trailers, watercraft, campers and all- terrain vehicles, may not
be stored in any area unless part of an approved business, and must be in
accordance with city requirements.
   H.   Access And Street Location: Access to public streets and roads and the
placement of such roads shall adhere to the following:
      1.   UDOT approval shall be required for all access to 2700 North.
      2.   Existing street intersections connecting to 2700 North shall have no
curb cuts closer than one hundred feet (100') to that intersection. Corner lots
on all other streets shall have no curb cuts closer than sixty feet (60') to
the intersection. The city may require greater distances as conditions and UDOT
may dictate. (Ord. 13-10)
CHAPTER 17.40
M-1 MANUFACTURING ZONE
SECTION:
17.40.010: Purpose
17.40.020: Permitted Uses
17.40.030: Conditional Uses
17.40.040: Basis For Issuance Of Conditional Permit
17.40.050: Prohibited Uses
17.40.060: Site Development Standards
17.40.070: Additional Requirements
17.40.080: M-1 Zone Adjacent To A Residential Or Agricultural Zone
17.40.010: PURPOSE:
The M-1 Manufacturing Zone is established to provide areas in the City where
processing, assembling, manufacturing, and warehousing activities may take
place, and for incidental service facilities to serve the manufacturing uses.
The zone is intended to encourage the orderly growth of the city and its
economic base. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2014-04)
17.40.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Zone:
   All permitted uses in the C-2 General Commercial Zone.
   Assembling.
   Boat building and repair.
   Construction services.
   Major and minor Automotive repair, detailing and body work.
   Packaging.
   Building materials sales with no bulk soil, rock, and aggregate sales,
storage, or processing.
   Motor/recreation vehicle sales and service.
   Warehousing and storage units.
   Sexually oriented businesses, subject to the requirements of title 5,
chapter 5.10 of this Code. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2017-04)
17.40.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Permits for conditional uses shall be authorized only upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.
   B.   The Planning Commission review of conditional uses shall be made with
the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and
harmonious development in accordance with existing and future needs of the
city. In making a recommendation on conditional uses, the Planning Commission
shall consider the existing site zoning, the Zoning Ordinances, the approved
General Plan, and the use of the surrounding property; the present and future
requirements for streets, off street parking, and on street parking in relation
to exits and entrances from public streets, pedestrian and vehicular traffic
circulation, availability of water and other utilities, and other public
requirements including the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city. The City Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission or on
its own motion, may impose reasonable conditions as are necessary to protect
the rights of surrounding property owners and tenants and to carry out the
purposes of this chapter and characteristics of this zone.(Ord. 2024-02: Ord.
2018-02: Ord. 17-06)
17.40.040: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit shall not be authorized unless a public hearing is
held, and evidence is presented to establish:
   A.   That the proposed use of the particular location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well-being of the community; and
   B.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case
and the conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of persons nor injurious to property or improvements in the community,
but will be compatible with and complementary to the existing surrounding uses,
buildings, and structures when considering traffic generation, parking,
building design and location, landscaping and signs; and
   C.   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use; and
   D.   That the proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and governing
ordinances and principles and land use of the General Plan for Farr West City;
and
   E.   That the proposed use will not lead to the deterioration of the
environment, or ecology of the general area, nor will produce conditions or
emit pollutants of such a type or of such a quantity to detrimentally affect,
to any appreciable degree, public or private property including the operation
of existing uses thereon, in the immediate vicinity or the community or area as
a whole. (Ord. 2010-03)
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted only after approval has
been given by the City Council upon recommendation by the Planning Commission:
      Contractor’s equipment storage yard or equipment rental.
      Dry cleaning and laundry facilities.
      Indoor firearms/archery range.
      Laboratory.
      Liquor stores.
      Manufacture, compounding, processing and packaging.
      Medical and dental facilities.
      Medical research facility.
      Metal plating, metal anodizing, metal polishing.
      Primary metal industries.
      Processing.
      Public utility production.
      Public and quasi-public uses.
      Research and development.
      Trucking businesses.
      Wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to chapter 17.50 of this
title. (Ord. 2024-02)
17.40.050: PROHIBITED USES:
No residential uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone, except as part of a
business enterprise that is either required by law to always have someone on
site or where such on-site residence is customary in the industry.
Hazardous products: Gaseous or Liquid nonfood products that are, or have the
potential of being combustible, explosive, poisonous or infections, radioactive
or otherwise hazardous or capable of posing a risk to health, safety, property,
or environment. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2017-04)
17.40.060: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Front and side yard setbacks from a public dedicated street: Twenty
feet (20').
   B.   Side yard setback (adjacent to manufacturing or commercially zoned
property): As required in the adopted building code.
   C.   Rear yard setback (adjacent to manufacturing or commercially zoned
property): As required in the adopted building code.
   D.   Side yard setback (adjacent to residentially zoned property): Twenty
feet (20').
   E.   Rear yard setback (adjacent to residentially zoned property): Twenty
feet (20').
   F.   Lot of area and width: As required in the adopted zone.
   G.   Minimum height: Eight feet (8') or one story whichever is greater.
   H.   Maximum height: No requirement.
   I.   Parking requirements: See sections
17.44.130  through
17.44.150  of this title. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2017-04: Ord. 93-003 § 8-6(4))
17.40.070: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Landscaping:
      1.   Area Requirements: An area of not less than ten percent (10%) of the
site as depicted on the site plan shall be landscaped with live plantings. The
perimeter area and slopes of retention/detention basins may be included as part
of the landscape area if landscaped. The park strip between any public street
and the site, whether existing or proposed, is the responsibility of the site
property owner/ tenant to maintain.
      2.   Screening; Visual/Noise: Landscaping prescribed by the Planning
Commission to accomplish other requirements of this title, as in visual
screening, noise abatement or other needs based on site conditions may be
required as part of, or in addition to, the ten percent (10%) landscaping
requirement.
      3.   Location: Front setbacks, side setbacks facing the street, and other
areas visible to the public are required to be landscaped.
      4.   Ground Cover: All landscaped areas shall be covered with a minimum
three (3) inch layer of decorative rock or other approved medium to allow water
to infiltrate the ground and inhibit weed growth. Detention basins shall also
be lined with rock.
      5.   Plant Materials: All Landscaped areas shall be planted with plants
that are well-suited to conditions at the project site and may include native
and locally adapted shrubs, trees, or ornamental grasses and perennials
compatible with xeriscape environment. (Xeriscape is a landscaping method
developed especially for arid and semiarid climates the utilizes water-
conservation techniques.)
      6.   Watering: The landscaping plan shall include a secondary water
supply. Culinary water shall not be used. The irrigation systems shall be
designed to minimize water consumption by using an underground drip or bubble
system with an automatic controller.
      7.   Maintenance: The preservation of the landscaping shall be maintained
in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition free of weeds and litter. Diseased or
dead plant materials shall be removed and replaced by June 1 if due to winter
kill or October 1 if the plant materials die during the summer months. The
preservation and maintenance of the landscaping in the park strip areas are the
responsibility of the property owner/ tenant.
      8.   Completion Requirements: Landscaping shall be completed prior to the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for the building or structure with
which it is associated. In the case of inclement weather that prevents the
installation of the required landscaping, the time of completion may be
extended, in writing, upon approval of the Chief Building Official.
   B.   Outside Storage: Any part of a lot used for the storage of equipment,
merchandise, parts, or other items, if not in an enclosed building or if
visible from the frontage, shall be enclosed by a sight obscuring wall or fence
with a minimum height of six feet (6').
   C.   Dust and weeds shall be controlled in all areas not covered by
landscaping or pavement.
   D.   Miscellaneous: See sections
17.44.130  through
17.44.150  of this title. (Ord. 2024-20: Ord. 2017-04: Ord. 17-02: Ord. 2015-
10: Ord. 93-003 § 8-6(5))
17.40.080: M-1 ZONE ADJACENT TO A RESIDENTIAL OR AGRICULTURAL ZONE:
   A.   Set back from any residential or agricultural zone:
      1.   Setbacks adjacent to any residential or agricultural zone shall be
equal to or greater than the highest point of the building.
      2.   The minimum setback is twenty (20) feet.
   B.   Outside storage and staging of pallets, products, equipment, and
materials are not allowed.
   C.   Lighting:
      1.   Light, other than natural light, shall not negatively impact
residential or agricultural property.
      2.   No exterior light pole or light fixture shall be closer than four
feet (4') from a residential or agricultural property line.
      3.   Light fixtures within twenty feet (20') of a residential or
agricultural property line shall have a solid cover, from the top of the light
fixture and bulb to four inches (4") beyond the bottom of the light fixture and
bulb. The cover shall surround the light fixture and bulb for one hundred
eighty degrees (180°) on the side of the fixture adjacent to the residential or
agricultural property.
      4.   Exterior lighting twenty feet (20') or more from a residential or
agricultural property line shall be directed straight down or away from a
residential or agricultural property line.
      5.   The beam of exterior lighting shall not shine directly onto
residential or agricultural property.
      6.   Other lighting designs and covers may be approved at the sole
discretion of Farr West City.
   D.   Noise Levels:
      1.   Operational noise levels shall be submitted to and approved by Farr
West City prior to final approval of construction documents.
      2.   Noise from a property in a M-1 zone that is determined to be a
nuisance by Farr West City shall be abated by the property owner.
   E.   Walls/barriers: A solid visual wall/barrier at least eight feet (8') in
height shall be erected along all property lines in common with residential or
agricultural zoned property. The type and materials of such wall shall be
approved by the planning commission as a part of the site plan review. See
chapter 17.46  of this title and Ord. 2022-06. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2022-06)
CHAPTER 17.42
M-2 MANUFACTURING ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2011-01)
CHAPTER 17.44
DESIGN AND USE REGULATIONS GENERALLY
SECTION:
17.44.010: Conformance With Codes Required
17.44.020: Chapter Provisions Supplemental To Title
17.44.030: Additional Use Regulations
17.44.040: Additional Main Building Regulations
17.44.050: Additional Yard Regulations
17.44.060: Additional Height Regulations
17.44.070: Building Regulations
17.44.080: Fence Height Regulations
17.44.090: Lighting
17.44.100: Private Park, Playground Or Recreational Area
17.44.110: Public Utility Substation
17.44.120: Family Swimming Pool
17.44.130: Conservation Of Values
17.44.140: Deep Lot Developments
17.44.150: Off Street Parking
17.44.160: Landscaping Requirements
17.44.170: Permitted Nonconditional Uses For All Residential Zones
17.44.180: Permitted Conditional Uses For All Residential Zones
17.44.190: Site Development Standards For All Residential Zones
17.44.200: Special Provisions For All Residential Zones
17.44.210: Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit
17.44.220: Detached Accessory Dwelling Units (DADU)
17.44.010: CONFORMANCE WITH CODES REQUIRED:
Building and structures shall conform to the following codes as adopted and
modified by the city council: building code, current edition; mechanical code,
current edition; plumbing code, with the Utah supplements, current edition; and
the national electrical code, current edition. (Ord. 93-003 § 2-1)
17.44.020: CHAPTER PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL TO TITLE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as the case
may be, the zone regulations contained elsewhere in this zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 93-003 § 3-1)
17.44.030: ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The requirements of this title as to minimum site development standards shall
not be construed to prevent a use as permitted in a respective zone of any
parcel of land in the event such parcel was held in separate ownership prior to
March 12, 1981. Each such parcel to be developed must have not less than twenty
feet (20') of frontage on a street, or as approved by the appeal authority, and
the density of development may not exceed that permitted by area requirements
in the respective zone. (Ord. 13-05)
17.44.040: ADDITIONAL MAIN BUILDING REGULATIONS:
Every main building shall be located and maintained on a "lot" as defined in
chapter 17.08 of this title, and every lot shall have required frontage on a
"street" as defined in chapter 17.08 of this title, except as follows:
   A.   Where a parcel of land was in separate ownership prior to March 12,
1981, as described in section
17.44.030 of this chapter; and
   B.   Where under special circumstances of design of a parcel of land the
planning commission approves a lot split, as defined and provided for in Farr
West City subdivision ordinance, which may or may not have the required
frontage as provided for in this title. Under no circumstances may the frontage
be less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 06-01 § 7: Ord. 93-003 § 3-3)
17.44.050: ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   No required yard or other open space around an existing building or
which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, shall be considered as providing
a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other
required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or
open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected or established.
   B.   On any lot under a separate ownership from adjacent lots and of record
at the time of the initial enactment of this zoning ordinance and such lot
having a smaller width than required for the zone in which it is located, the
following regulations shall apply:
      1.   For interior lots, each side yard may be equal to, but not less
than, the same percentage of the required side yard width as the lot is of the
required lot width, provided that in no case shall the smaller of the two (2)
side yards be less than five feet (5') or the larger less than eight feet (8').
      2.   On corner lots, each side yard may be equal to, but not less than,
the same percentage of the required side yard width as the lot is of the
required lot width, provided that in no case shall the side yard on the street
side be less than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed
except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary
projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental
features.
   D.   Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and
balconies opening upon fire towers may project into a yard not more than five
feet (5'), and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues are permitted.
   E.   Accessory buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of section
17.44.190, "Site Development Standards For All Residential Zones", of this
chapter.
   F.   No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or
other requirements of this zoning ordinance for a lot or building may be
conveyed away from such lot or building. Any attempted conveyance or lease in
violation hereof shall be void.
   G.   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area
requirements for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger
parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or
development as a lot. (Ord. 09: Ord. 15-05: Ord. 93-003 § 3-4)
17.44.060: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain
building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks and water tanks, wireless or television masts, theater
lofts, silos or similar structures may be erected above the height limits
prescribed in the zone height regulations, but no space above the height limit
shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space, and no
heights are permitted above the maximum allowed under airport area height
provisions.
   B.   Dwelling and accessory buildings shall be constructed in accordance
with the provisions of section
17.44.190, "Site Development Standards For All Residential Zones", of this
chapter. (Ord. 15-05: Ord. 93-003 § 3-5)
17.44.070: BUILDING REGULATIONS:
Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall comply with the Weber County
health department requirements in all applications for a building permit where
either an approved supply or piped water under pressure, or a sewer, is not
available. (Ord. 93-003 § 3-6)
17.44.080: FENCE HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
See chapter 17.46 of this title. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.44.090: LIGHTING:
   A.   Exterior Lighting: No spotlight or floodlight shall be installed in any
way which will permit the direct rays of such light to penetrate into any
residential zone or onto any property used for residential purpose.
   B.   Lights Not To Constitute Traffic Hazard: No light, sign or other
advertising structure as regulated by this zoning ordinance shall be erected at
the intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it
may interfere with obstructing the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device or which makes use of the words, "Stop", "Look",
"Drive-in", "Danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. (Ord. 93-003 § 3-8)
17.44.100: PRIVATE PARK, PLAYGROUND OR RECREATIONAL AREA:
In all residential zones, a private park, playground or recreation area with or
without a swimming pool shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   The lands and facilities used for such purpose shall be owned or leased
and operated by a nonprofit corporation for the exclusive benefit of the
members, their immediate families and nonpaying guests.
   B.   Adequate restrooms and sanitary facilities shall be provided and kept
available for use by members, their families and guests, and shall be
maintained in proper working order and in a clean and sanitary condition and in
full compliance with the reasonable standards, rules and regulations
established by the Weber County Health Department.
   C.   Twenty five (25) off street parking spaces, or one off street paving
space for each four (4) memberships in the operating corporation, whichever is
greater, shall be provided on the lot devoted to the principal use.
   D.   Operation or use of the recreational or other facilities provided is
forbidden between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. next following.
   E.   All facilities, equipment and buildings shall be set back not less than
twenty feet (20') from any property line and shall be located not less than
fifty feet (50') from any main building on an adjoining lot and from any area
upon which any such main building may be constructed upon said adjoining lot if
no such main building is in existence.
   F.   The minimum size of the lot or site used for such recreational or other
purposes shall be one acre.
   G.   Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed in such a
manner that the source of light shall be suitably screened to avoid annoying
illumination of lands outside the premises. (Ord. 93-003 § 3-9)
17.44.110: PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION:
In all residential zones, public utility substations shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   Lot Area: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
located on a lot not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in area.
   B.   Yards: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
provided with a yard on each of the four (4) sides of the building not less
than five feet (5') in width, except that for such stations located on lots
fronting on a street abutted by one or more residential lots, the front yard,
side yards, and rear yards shall equal those required for a single-family
residence in the same zone.
   C.   Street Access: Each public utility substation in a residential zone
shall be located on a lot which has adequate access from a street, alley or
easement.
   D.   Location To Be Approved: The location of public utility substation in a
residential zone shall be subject to approval by the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. 93-003 § 3-10)
17.44.120: FAMILY SWIMMING POOL:
A family swimming pool shall conform to the following requirements:
   A.   The location of a family swimming pool or accessory pool related
machinery or building shall not be less than ten feet (10') from any interior
property line where there is no utility easement or ten feet (10') from any
utility easement running along said property line. On corner lots, the distance
from the pool to the property line facing on a street shall not be less than
the required side yard for an accessory building in that zone.
   B.   A protective barrier or fence shall be installed around the swimming
pool, hot tub/spa, or other artificial water feature which is deeper than
eighteen inches (18") according to the requirements of section
17.46.060 of this title.
   C.   Any lights used to illuminate the pool or its accessories shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises. (Ord. 2018-
01)
17.44.130: CONSERVATION OF VALUES:
   A.   Painting Of Buildings: The outside surface of buildings which are
constructed of wood shall be coated with paint or other wood preservative
within one year from the time such building is occupied or used.
   B.   Maintenance Of Premises: Any lot which is used for dwellings,
businesses or industrial purposes shall be improved and maintained as follows:
      1.   Wherever a front yard or side yard adjacent to a street is required,
such yard shall be planted and maintained according to the definition of
landscaping in this title.
      2.   Driveways leading from a street to a commercial parking lot or other
off street parking space shall be paved with hard surfacing. Paved surfacing
shall be completed within one year from the date of the occupancy of the
building.
      3.   No trash, rubbish, weeds or any combustible material shall be
allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any residential
or commercial zone. No junk, debris, abandoned or dismantled vehicle or similar
material shall be sorted or allowed to remain on any lot in any residential,
planned commercial, commercial or M-1 Manufacturing Zone, and no junk, debris,
dismantled automobiles or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain
on any lot in any M-1 Manufacturing Zone outside of an enclosed building or
sight obscuring fence or wall of at least six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 93-003
§ 9-1)
17.44.140: DEEP LOT DEVELOPMENTS:
The City Council, based upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, may
approve a deep lot or a flag lot under the provisions of this title subject to
all of the following conditions:
   A.   Deep or flag lot developments shall be restricted to one lot per access
or lot right-of-way. The lot to be developed shall contain at least the minimum
area and lot width for the zone in which the lot is located;
   B.   The lot shall have an access with a width of at least twenty feet (20')
which abuts a publicly dedicated street;
   C.   A deep lot or flag lot is permitted only in locations which, due to
natural or artificial physical constraints, which constraints may not be self-
imposed by the property owner or developer, make it impossible for a publicly
dedicated full width street development either now or in the foreseeable
future. If the property can be developed in any way other than a deep lot or
flag lot, the deep lot development shall not be approved. (Ord. 06-01 § 8: Ord.
93-003 § 9-2)
17.44.150: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   There shall be provided and maintained at the time of erection of any
main building or structure, off street parking space with adequate provisions
for the ingress and egress by standard sized vehicles as hereinafter set forth.
The parking space shall be located on the same lot as the building it is to
serve.
   B.   Whenever existing main buildings are enlarged or increased in capacity,
or are changed in use, additional off street paving space shall be provided
which will meet the requirements applying to such enlargement.
   C.   The number of parking spaces for uses not specified herein shall be
determined by the Planning Commission, being guided where appropriate by the
regulations set forth herein for uses of buildings which, in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, are similar to the use of building
under consideration.
      1.   In any residential zone, no private or public parking lot shall be
located within the front setback which faces on a public street. In all zones,
outside parking space shall be paved surface with bituminous material or
concrete.
      2.   Space allocated to comply with these regulations shall not be used
later for additional structures or uses unless other space so complying is
provided.
      3.   For the purpose of this chapter, a space of not less than nine feet
by twenty feet (9' x 20') of lot area with access to public streets by standard
sized automobiles shall be deemed to be parking space for one vehicle.
      4.   In the case of mixed uses in the same building or structure, the
amount of off street parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
required under this title for the principal use together with a reasonable
amount for all accessory uses. The reasonable amount shall be determined in
light of the uses, location and circumstances of the building or structure and
in consideration of the provisions of this title.
   D.   Parking spaces for individual uses shall be provided as follows:
Commercial:   
Commercial:                                                      
                                                                 1 space for
                                                                 each 4 seats
                                                                 or 4 person
                                                                 seating
   Churches                                                  capacity,
                                                                 based upon
                                                                 maximum use of
                                                                 all facilities
                                                                 at the same
                                                                 time.
                                                                 1 space for
                                                                 each employee
   Manufacturing                                             or work
                                                                 station,
                                                                 whichever is
                                                                 greater.
                                                                 1 space for
   Offices, businesses, and professional storage and lumber  each 200
sales                                                            square feet of
                                                                 floor area.
                                                                 51/2 spaces
                                                                 for each 1,000
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 floor area for
                                                                 each enclosed
   Outside sales area                                        retail
                                                                 building plus
                                                                 1/4 space for
                                                                 each 1,000
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 outside sales
                                                                 area.
                                                                 51/2 spaces
   Retail                                                    for each 1,000
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 floor area.
   Schools:                                                   
                                                                 2 spaces for
      Grades K through 8                                  each teaching
                                                                 station.
                                                                 4 spaces for
      Grades 9 through 12                                 each teaching
                                                                 station.
                                                                 1 space for
   Warehousing or storage                                    each 1,000
                                                                 feet of floor
                                                                 area.
                                                                 1 space for
   Wholesale                                                 each 1,000
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 floor area.
                                                                 2 parking
Residential                                                     spaces per
                                                                 dwelling unit.
 
(Ord. 93-003 § 9-3)
17.44.160: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
All required setbacks and areas not used for a building, parking or access are
required to be landscaped before occupancy of the building or site is allowed
except for single-family homes. If occupancy is to occur during the winter
months then the landscaping must be installed before the beginning of the
upcoming June. For single-family homes the front yard area is required to be
landscaped within twelve (12) months of occupancy. If a building or site,
including single-family homes, is built and suitable for occupancy but not yet
sold or rented the builder is responsible for landscaping per this chapter.
Suitable landscaping may include plants, shrubs, trees, lawn, xeriscaping or
similar landscaping materials that are common to and fit the character of the
surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.44.170: PERMITTED NONCONDITIONAL USES FOR ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Permits for the following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be
authorized in all residential zones:
Agricultural production buildings and uses.
Buildings and uses commonly and customarily associated with residential uses
including, but not limited to: fences, garages, tool and yard maintenance
equipment sheds, swimming pools, arbors, gazebos and similar structures and use
and development requirements.
Household pets; no more than two (2) each.
Internal Accessory dwelling unit.
"Residential facility for elderly persons" as defined in section
17.08.010 of this title.
"Residential facility for persons with a disability" as defined in section
17.08.010 of this title.
Single-family detached houses. (Ord. 21-10: Ord. 2014-02)
17.44.180: PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES FOR ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Permits for conditional uses shall be authorized only after approval thereof
has been given by the city council upon recommendation by the planning
commission.The planning commission’s review of conditional uses shall be made
with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted
and harmonious development in accordance with existing and future needs.
In making a recommendation on conditional uses the planning commission shall
consider the existing zoning, use of the surrounding property, the present and
future requirements for street, off street parking and off street parking in
relation to exits and entrances from public streets, pedestrian and vehicular
traffic circulation, availability of water and other utilities and other public
requirements.
The city council, upon recommendation from the planning commission or on its
own motion, may impose reasonable conditions as are necessary to protect the
rights of surrounding property owners and tenants and to carry out the purposes
of this chapter and characteristics of this zone.
Conditional uses may include, but are not restricted to, the following:
   Athletic fields and swimming areas (other than private residential swimming
pools).
   Churches.
   Parks and playgrounds.
   Schools, both public and private.
In addition to the conditional uses listed above, the following are permitted
conditional uses only for the A-1 and A-1-R zones:
Nurseries and greenhouses provided the sale of goods is limited to materials
produced only on the premises and there is no retail shop operation where items
previously purchased are resold.
Fruit or vegetable stands for fruit or vegetables produced only on the premises
and there is no retail shop operation where items previously purchased are
resold.
Animals and eggs produced only on the premises and there is no retail shop
operation where items previously purchased are resold.
Any signs for the above three uses must comply with the requirements of Section
17.56.050 of the Farr West City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2023-12; Ord. 2014-02)
17.44.190: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   A.   Single-Family Dwellings:
 
                                   A-1            A-1-R          R-1-15
Minimum lot area                   43,560 sq. ft. 43,560 sq. ft. 15,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width measured at a
distance of 30 feet back from the  150 ft.        115 ft.        100 ft.
front property line
Minimum lot width for corner lots  150 ft.                       115 ft.
(on both sides facing street)
 
  All Residential Zones
                                      All Residential Zones
Minimum setbacks from property line1:  
 Side total                          24 ft.
 Side minimum                        10 ft.
 Interior side (corner)              15 ft.
 Front: city road                    30 ft.
 Front: state road                   40 ft.
 Rear                                30 ft.
 Side facing street (corner)         20 ft.
 Rear (corner)                       15 ft.
Height of buildings:                   
 Minimum height                      8 ft. or 1 story, whichever is greater
 Maximum height                      35 ft.
                                      The ground floor area of any single-
                                      family dwelling shall be not less than
Size of buildings                     900 square feet for multilevel housing
                                      and 1,200 square feet for rambler style
                                      housing exclusive of open porches,
                                      carports and garages
 
Note:
   1.   Setback is measured from the foundation wall, carport support posts or
the edge of a doublewide parking pad.
   2.   For lots located within a cul-de-sac, the required front setback shall
be measured from a line drawn between the intersections of each side property
line with the front property line.
   B.   Accessory Buildings:
  All Residential Zones
                                         All Residential Zones
Minimum setbacks from property line:      
 Front or side facing street: city road 30 ft.
 Front or side facing street: state     40 ft.
  road
                                         4 ft. for structures 14 ft. or less in
                                         peak height. For structures in excess
 Rear                                   of 14 ft. in peak height, the setback
                                         is 4 ft. plus 1 ft. for each foot or
                                         portion thereof in excess of 14 ft in
                                         peak height.
                                         4 ft. for structures 14 ft. or less in
                                         peak height. For structures in excess
 Side                                   of 14 ft. in peak height the setback
                                         is 4 ft. plus 1 ft. for each foot or
                                         portion thereof in excess of 14 ft in
                                         peak height.
Height of buildings:                      
 Minimum height (at peak)               8 ft.
 Maximum height (at peak)               20 ft. on lots less than 1 acre
                                         25 ft. on lots 1 acre and larger
 Maximum height (exterior walls)        15 ft. on lots less than 1 acre
                                         18 ft. on lots 1 acre and larger
 
   C.   Additional Accessory Building Requirements: In no case may an accessory
building or group of accessory buildings on the same lot cover more than twenty
percent (20%) of a rear yard or any portion of a building extend beyond
property lines.
Carports and other detached accessory buildings not having walls shall follow
the defined minimum setbacks.
Accessory buildings built forward of the rear build line of the main dwelling
shall have an architectural style, building materials, and color compatible and
consistent with the architectural style, building materials, and color of the
main dwelling. Minimum setbacks shall be maintained between buildings and from
property lines.
Accessory buildings with a footprint larger than two thousand (2,000) square
feet require a conditional use permit and may require additional setback and/or
height limits.
In no case shall the construction of an accessory building be commenced
previous to twenty-five percent (25%) completion of the primary residence on
the same lot as determined by the Farr West City building official.
   D.   Main Buildings Other Than Dwellings: (For churches, schools,
clubhouses, civic centers, etc., see section
17.08.010, "Definitions", of this title.)
  All Residential Zones
                                     All Residential Zones
Minimum setbacks from property line:  
 Side total                         24 ft.
 Side minimum                       10 ft.
 Interior side (corner)             15 ft.
 Front: City road                   30 ft.
 Front: State road                  40 ft.
 Side facing street (corner)        20 ft.
 Rear                               10 ft.
 Rear (corner)                      10 ft.
Height of buildings:                  
 Minimum height                     8 ft. or 1 story, whichever is greater
 Maximum height                     35 ft.
 
(Ord. 20-07: Ord. 19-04: Ord. 2018-03: Ord. 15-05: Ord. 2014-02; Ord. 21-14,
11-18-2021)
17.44.200: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The following special provisions shall apply in all residential zones:
   A.   Free Of Refuse And Debris: The yard space around buildings and
structures shall be kept free of refuse and debris.
   B.   Utilities: All structures requiring utilities, including water (both
culinary and secondary), electricity, gas and sewer, shall be serviced by an
entity providing that particular utility or service to Farr West City.
   C.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided and maintained
as required under off street parking requirements in this title.
   D.   Landscaping: The front yards of all lots on which buildings are located
shall be landscaped. See section
17.44.160, "Landscaping Requirements", of this chapter.
   E.   Miscellaneous: See sections
17.44.130 through
17.44.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-02)
17.44.210: INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT:
The primary owner of the residence shall reside in a residence that contains an
internal accessory dwelling unit as their primary residence.
One accessory dwelling unit may be created within a single-family dwelling.
Accessory dwelling units shall comply with all applicable building, health, and
fire codes.
Internal accessory dwelling units shall be designed in a manner that does not
change the appearance of the primary dwelling as a single-family dwelling.
Include a minimum of one additional on-site parking space regardless of whether
the primary dwelling is existing or new construction.
Replace and/or add all required on-site parking if the internal accessory
dwelling unit is created within a garage or carport.
The applicant for a permit to offer for rent an internal accessory dwelling
unit shall obtain a building permit for any construction required to create an
internal accessory dwelling unit.
Obtain an Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit permit from the city before offering
for rent an internal accessory dwelling unit.
Internal accessory dwelling units are prohibited in mobile homes, in home on
lots smaller than six thousand (6,000) square feet in size, and in homes served
by a failing septic tank.
Farr West city prohibits the rental or offering for rental of an internal
accessory dwelling unit for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
Violation of this ordinance may result in penalties, fines, and liens as
outlined by law (UCA 10-9a-530). (Ord. 21-10)
17.44.220: DETACHED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (DADU):
   A.   A request for a DADU does not constitute the creation of a flag lot or
the subdivision of an existing residential property.
   B.   The DADU shall be a single-family unit with slab on grade construction.
No duplex or multifamily dwelling is permitted.
   C.   The DADU shall be designed to look like a single-family residence.
   D.   The DADU shall require a city conditional use permit and must comply
with all city building, health, and fire code requirements for residential
structures.
   E.   Prefab units are to be placed on approved footings and foundations.
   F.   Metering of utilities for the DADU shall be determined at the
discretion of the utility companies.
   G.   The DADU shall be constructed at least six feet (6') behind the primary
dwelling and at least six feet (6') from any other existing structure.
   H.   The minimum rear and side setbacks from property lines shall be ten
feet (10').
   I.   In no case may a DADU or group of accessory buildings on the same lot
cover more than twenty percent (20%) of a rear yard.
   J.   The DADU shall have a minimum size of four hundred (400) square feet
and a maximum size of one thousand (1,000) square feet. The maximum peak height
shall be twenty feet (20') and shall not exceed that of the primary dwelling.
   K.   The DADU shall provide two (2) additional spaces for off-street parking
on a hard surface with managed drainage.
   L.   Corner lots may provide a second access to the DADU provided all
setback requirements are met. The DADU must be set back a minimum of thirty
feet (30') from the street.
   M.   The owner of the DADU shall reside in the primary residence except for
bona fide temporary absences.
   N.   Farr West City prohibits the rental or offering for rental of a DADU
for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
   O.   Persons shall make application for a DADU on the forms provided by the
city.
   P.   The application for a DADU shall contain: completed application form,
the floor plan, exterior elevations, and the plan for off-street parking.
   Q.   Violations of this ordinance may result in criminal or civil penalties,
fines, and liens as permitted under the ordinances of Farr West City or the
laws of the State of Utah. (Ord. 2025-02)
CHAPTER 17.46
FENCES
SECTION:
17.46.010: Subdivisions
17.46.020: Front Yards
17.46.030: Side And Rear Yards
17.46.040: Corner Lots
17.46.050: Corner Lot Obstructions; Clear View Zone
17.46.060: Swimming Pool Fences
17.46.070: Commercial, Manufacturing And Retail Zones
17.46.080: Fences In Street, Antenna And Utility Easements
17.46.090: Nonconforming Conditions
17.46.100: Double Frontage Lots
17.46.010: SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   A subdivider shall install a six foot (6') chainlink fence along all
adjoining open ditches, canals or waterways, nonaccess streets, open
reservoirs, bodies of water, or railroad rights of way.
   B.   A subdivider whose subdivision is zoned R-1-15 shall provide a six foot
(6') chainlink or vinyl fence along all adjoining property which meets the
state of Utah 1969 farmland assessment act (greenbelt) requirement for
agricultural use.
   C.   A subdivider whose subdivision is zoned A-1-R shall provide a six foot
(6') chainlink or vinyl fence along all adjoining property which meets the
state of Utah 1969 farmland assessment act (greenbelt) requirement for
agricultural use unless the adjoining property owner or owners and said
subdivider provide to the city council an agreement signed by all parties
abovementioned requesting an exception. In the event such an agreement is
presented to and approved by the city council, the city council shall require a
five foot (5') stock fence in lieu of the six foot (6') chainlink or vinyl
fence.
   D.   A subdivider whose subdivision is zoned A-1 shall provide a five foot
(5') stock fence along all property which meets the state of Utah 1969 farmland
assessment act (greenbelt) requirement for agricultural use. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.020: FRONT YARDS:
   A.   Front Yard Requirements: No fence, hedge, or other similar structure
shall be erected in any front yard of a dwelling to a height in excess of three
and one-half feet (31/2') or within the "clear view zone", as defined below.
   B.   Height Exception: Archways and gates for driveway access are permitted
under the following conditions:
      1.   Built on a minimum lot size of one acre;
      2.   The width between the side supports must be a minimum width of
twelve feet (12') at a minimum vertical clearance of thirteen and one-half feet
(131/2') above the ground. (See figure 17.46.020B2 of this section.)
 FIGURE 17.46.020B2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1383.png]
 
      3.   No part of the structure may obstruct the view of vehicles exiting
the driveway of any passing motorist or pedestrian. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.030: SIDE AND REAR YARDS:
   A.   No fence, hedge or other similar structure shall be erected in any side
or rear yard to a height in excess of six feet (6').
   B.   No fence, hedge or other structure shall be erected on any side yard
that would obscure the line of sight of one entering upon the street or
intersection from the driveway or garage of an adjacent lot.
   C.   Six foot (6') fencing in a rear yard shall not be located closer than
thirty feet (30') from the front property line. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.040: CORNER LOTS:
On corner lots, no fence, hedge or other similar structures shall be erected to
a height in excess of three and one-half feet (31/2') along any yard bordering
a street or front yard of an adjoining lot that has the driveway or access to
the garage on the side adjacent to the yard to be fenced, except that in any
rear or side yard of a corner lot, a fence may be erected to a height not to
exceed six feet (6') upon a finding by the Farr West City building official
that the height of the fence will not obscure the line of sight of one entering
upon the street or intersection from the driveway or garage access bordering
said corner lot. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.050: CORNER LOT OBSTRUCTIONS; CLEAR VIEW ZONE:
On any corner lot in a residential zone, no fence, hedge or other similar
structure in excess of three and one-half feet (31/2') in height as measured
from the top of the curb or edge of the hard street surface, shall be placed on
any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and
a line connecting street property lines at points twenty feet (20') from the
intersection of the street property lines. This area shall be identified as a
"clear view zone". (See figure 17.46.050A of this section.)
FIGURE 17.46.050A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dddb5ff8c673a8660de704486dee555643235d6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1385.png]
 
(Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.060: SWIMMING POOL FENCES:
   A.   Protective Fence Or Barrier Required: All swimming pools, hot tubs/
spas, wading pools, or other artificial water features deeper than eighteen
inches (18") shall be surrounded by a protective fence or barrier. This
includes permanent in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot
tubs and spas. Temporary or portable swimming or wading pools are not subject
to the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Fence Or Barrier Requirements: The design of fences and barriers are
intended to protect against potential drownings and near-drownings by
restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, and other artificial
water features. All outdoor swimming pools, including in-ground, above-ground
and on-ground pools, hot tubs, spas, or other artificial water features more
than eighteen inches (18") deep shall be surrounded by a fence or barrier which
shall comply with the following:
      1.   The top of the fence or barrier shall be at least six feet (6')
above grade measured on the side of the fence or barrier which faces away from
the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom
of the barrier shall be two inches (2"), measured on the side of the barrier
which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is
above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level
or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier or fence is mounted
on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of
the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four inches (4").
         a.   Openings in the fence or barrier shall not allow the passage of a
four inch (4") diameter sphere.
         b.   Solid fences or barriers which do not have openings, such as a
masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions, except
for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
         c.   Where the fence or barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members, spacing between the vertical members shall not exceed one and three-
fourths inches (13/4") in width and spacing between the horizontal members
shall not exceed one and three- fourths inches (13/4") in width. Where there
are decorative cutouts within vertical members or horizontal members spacing
within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches (13/4") in
width.
         d.   Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a two and one-
fourth inch (21/4") square, unless the fence has slats fastened at the top or
the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than one and three-fourths
inches (13/4") in width.
         e.   Where the fence or barrier is composed of diagonal members, such
as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall
not be more than one and three-fourths inches (13/4") measured at the widest
part of opening.
         f.   Access gates shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device.
Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool, shall be self-
closing and have a self-latching device. Gates, other than pedestrian access
gates, shall have a self- latching device. The gate and barrier shall have no
opening larger than one-half inch (1/2") within eighteen inches (18") of the
release mechanism.
   C.   Prohibited Barrier Locations: Barriers shall be located to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb
them.
   D.   Indoor Pools: Access to indoor pools shall be restricted by the
surrounding structure in a manner that is at least as secure as provided for
outdoor pools. (Ord. 2018-01)
17.46.070: COMMERCIAL, MANUFACTURING AND RETAIL ZONES:
   A.   Any commercial business or operation that borders residentially zoned
property shall erect a decorative wall, hedge, or full privacy fence a minimum
of six feet (6') in height along the common property boundary or boundaries.
The preferred fencing material is full privacy vinyl. Other options such as
chainlink with full privacy slats or precast decorative concrete/stone wall may
be required if a more durable fence is needed due to the nature of the business
or operation.
   B.   Any business or operation that meets the following criteria shall erect
a decorative wall, hedge or full privacy fence a minimum of seven feet (7') in
height that surrounds the entire property or area affected:
      1.   Dismantling Or Storage: Dismantling or storage of automobiles,
trucks, heavy equipment, surplus materials, or building materials.
      2.   Safety Risk: Storage of any items or material deemed to constitute a
safety risk.
      3.   Public Nuisance: Storage of any items or material deemed to be a
public nuisance.
      4.   Exceptions: Retail automobile sales, displaying automobiles for
sale. Vehicles in various stages of repair are not part of this exception.
   C.   The City building official shall make the initial determination
regarding items or operations that pose a safety risk, and/or qualify as a
public nuisance.
   D.   All fencing material shall be appropriate to the nature of the
commercial business or operation as determined by the Planning Commission with
the advice of the City building official. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.080: FENCES IN STREET, ANTENNA AND UTILITY EASEMENTS:
   A.   Street Easement: Fences are not allowed to cross or be erected within a
street easement.
   B.   Utility Easement: Fences are allowed in utility easements, however the
property owner is responsible for all costs to repair or replace any fencing
damaged by the City or utility company in the course of accessing the easement
to repair or service utility lines, storm drains, sanitary sewer lines, etc.
   C.   Telecommunication Towers: All telecommunication towers shall be fenced
for security purposes as required in this section.
      1.   Fencing: All telecommunication towers, accessory equipment, and
other apparatus associated with the antenna and antenna support structures,
shall be enclosed with a six foot (6'), as a minimum, high vinyl coated
chainlink or other appropriate fence unless located within a building.
      2.   Development Standards, Conditional Use: The development standards of
this chapter shall apply to a wireless telecommunication facility established
as a conditional use except as otherwise modified by this section.
   D.   Fencing And Screening Requirements: Specific fencing and screening
plans for each facility shall be submitted to the Farr West City Planning
Commission in conjunction with a conditional use permit application. Higher
grade fencing, more aesthetic fence designs or additional landscaping may be
required. (Ord. 2015-10)
17.46.090: NONCONFORMING CONDITIONS:
New fences, repairs and additions to existing fences shall meet the existing
requirements at the time of the construction, addition or repair. (Ord. 2015-
10)
17.46.100: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
   A.   As defined in section
17.08.010 double frontage lots have two (2) street frontages and two (2) front
yards. Fencing requirements for both frontages shall follow the provisions of
17.46.020. The street frontage designated as the rear of the lot may have a six
foot (6') tall fence located no closer than thirty feet (30') from the property
line.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   With approval of the building official, double frontage lots, where
a street frontage is designated as the rear of the lot or the backyard, are
adjacent to lots that also have their rear or backyards on that same street
frontage, a solid or view obstructing fence, not to exceed six feet (6') in
height, may be installed to enclose the rear or backyard of the lot.
      2.   Where the street frontage designated as the rear of the lot or
backyard is located on a street where one (1) or more adjacent lots have their
front yards or primary street access on that same street, a wrought iron fence,
not to exceed six feet (6') in height, may be installed to enclose the rear
yard area of the lot under the following conditions:
         a.   Written approval of all adjacent property owners and the building
official.
         b.   Fence shall not obscure the line of sight of one entering upon
the street or intersection from the driveway or garage of an adjacent lot.
         c.   Clear view zone requirements of
17.46.050 shall be met.
         d.   Front yard setback requirements for accessory buildings shall be
followed. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.48
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
17.48.010: Purpose And Intent
17.48.020: Basis For Issuance Of Conditional Use Permit
17.48.030: Appeals
17.48.040: Building Permit
17.48.050: Permit Expiration
17.48.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   A property owner or owners may request a conditional use permit by
completing and submitting to the city recorder, along with the required fee: an
application for issuance of conditional use permit, a complete legal
description of the property where the conditional use will be applied, and a
list of all adjacent property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
property proposed for a conditional use, including their addresses. The city
will notify these property owners of the public hearing for the proposed
conditional use. Permits for conditional uses shall be authorized only after
approval thereof has been given by the city council upon recommendation by the
planning commission.
   B.   The planning commission review of conditional uses shall be made with
the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development in accordance with existing and future needs. In making
a recommendation on conditional uses, the planning commission shall consider
the existing zoning and use of the surrounding property, the present and future
requirements for street, off street parking, and off street parking in relation
to exits and entrances from public streets, pedestrian and vehicular traffic
circulation, availability of water and other utilities, and other public
requirements. The city council, upon recommendation from the planning
commission or on its own motion, may impose reasonable conditions as are
necessary to protect the rights of surrounding property owners and tenants and
to carry out the purposes of this chapter and characteristics of the respective
zones. (Ord. 15-07)
17.48.020: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit shall not be authorized unless a public hearing is
held and evidence is presented to establish:
   A.   That the proposed use of the particular location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well being of the community; and
   B.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case
and the conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of persons nor injurious to property or improvements in the community,
but will be compatible with and complementary to the existing surrounding uses,
buildings, and structures when considering traffic generation, parking,
building design and location, landscaping and signs; and
   C.   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use; and
   D.   That the proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and governing
principles and land use of the master plan for Farr West City; and
   E.   That the proposed use will not lead to the deterioration of the
environment, or ecology of the general area, nor will produce conditions or
emit pollutants of such a type or of such a quantity so as to detrimentally
affect, to any appreciable degree, public or private property including the
operation of existing uses thereon, in the immediate vicinity or the community
or area as a whole. (Ord. 2010-03)
17.48.030: APPEALS:
   A.   The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city
council by filing such appeal within fifteen (15) days after the date of the
notice of decision sent with the application.
   B.   The city council may uphold or reverse the decision of the planning
commission and impose any additional conditions that it may deem necessary in
granting an appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 97-
10 § 2: Ord. 93-003 § 4-3)
17.48.040: BUILDING PERMIT:
Upon receipt of a conditional use permit, the developer shall take such permit
to the building inspector, who will review the permit and conditions attached.
Based on this review and compliance with any other items that might develop in
the pursuance of his or her duties, the building inspector may approve an
application for a building permit and shall ensure that development is
undertaken and completed in compliance with said permit conditions pertaining
thereto. (Ord. 93-003 § 4-4)
17.48.050: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit within a
period of one year of its issuance, as determined by the planning commission,
the conditional use permit shall expire. The planning commission may grant a
maximum extension of six (6) months under exceptional circumstances. (Ord. 93-
003 § 4-5)
CHAPTER 17.50
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
17.50.010: Purpose
17.50.020: Scope
17.50.030: Definitions
17.50.040: Facilities Site Plan
17.50.050: Permitted Use
17.50.060: Developmental Standards; Permitted Use
17.50.070: Conditional Use
17.50.080: Developmental Standards; Conditional Use
17.50.090: Nonmaintained And Abandoned Facilities
17.50.100: Prohibited Use
17.50.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish use and development regulations for
wireless telecommunications facilities to assure compatible and harmonious land
use within Farr West City to the extent permitted by the telecommunications act
of 1996, as amended. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.020: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to wireless telecommunications
facilities such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal communications system)
communications and paging systems.
   A.   Facility Types: The following types of wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be governed by this chapter:
      1.   Flush mounted and nonflush mounted wall antennas;
      2.   Hidden antennas;
      3.   Lattice towers;
      4.   Monopoles;
      5.   Roof mounted antennas;
      6.   Stealth design antennas; and
      7.   Whip antennas.
   B.   Other Laws: The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to
prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or
other laws, including pertinent regulations of the federal communications
commission and the federal aviation administration. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.030: DEFINITIONS:
   ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that
radiates or captures electromagnetic signals.
   ANTENNA, FLUSH MOUNTED: One or more antennas mounted on a wall surface or a
structure mounted on a wall surface where the entire antenna or structure does
not extend more than one foot (1') horizontally from the wall surface.
   ANTENNA, HIDDEN: An antenna mounted within an existing structure so as to
not be visible from outside the structure.
   ANTENNA, MONOPOLE: One or more antennas mounted on a monopole, which serve
as the antennas' sole source of support. See also definition of Monopole.
   ANTENNA, NONFLUSH MOUNTED: One or more antennas mounted on a wall surface or
a structure mounted on a wall surface where the entire antenna and structure
extend more than one foot (1') but not more than six feet (6'), horizontally
from the wall surface.
   ANTENNA, ROOF MOUNTED: One or more antennas mounted on a roof, mechanical
room, or penthouse of a building.
   ANTENNA, STEALTH DESIGN: An antenna and/or antenna mounting system designed
to be virtually unseen as the result of color schemes, screening, and/or
disguising.
   ANTENNA, WALL MOUNTED: One or more flush mounted or nonflush mounted
antennas attached to the vertical wall of a building.
   ANTENNA, WHIP: A directional or omnidirectional antenna that is cylindrical
in shape and which may vary in size depending upon the frequency and gain for
which it is designed.
   LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting multiple sided, open steel frame structure
used to support telecommunications equipment.
   LOW POWER RADIO SERVICES: See definition of Wireless Telecommunications
Facility.
   MONOPOLE: A single cylindrical steel or wooden pole that acts as the support
structure for one or more antennas.
   ROOFLINE: The highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses
usable floor space (including roof areas for housing mechanical equipment) and
the highest point on any parapet wall if the parapet wall extends around the
entire perimeter of the building.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: An unmanned structure consisting of
antennas, antenna support structures, or other equipment used to provide
personal wireless services as set forth in section 704 of the
telecommunications act of 1996, as amended. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.040: FACILITIES SITE PLAN:
Each person or company desiring to locate a low power telecommunications
facility within the city shall submit a "site location master plan". This plan
shall be submitted and accepted by the city council prior to approving any site
plan or conditional use permit. The plan shall identify existing locations of
facilities, and the approximate proposed locations of new facilities to provide
service within city boundaries and surrounding areas for the ten (10) years
following the date of the plan submitted. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.050: PERMITTED USE:
A wireless telecommunications facility that conforms to the development
standards of section
17.50.060 of this chapter shall be a permitted use in C-2 commercial and M-
1 manufacturing zones only. A separate application shall be required for each
proposed facility. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.060: DEVELOPMENTAL STANDARDS; PERMITTED USE:
The developmental standards set forth in this section shall apply to a wireless
telecommunications facility established as a permitted use. The standards in
each subsection are not mutually exclusive; thus the requirements of more than
one subsection may apply in any given case.
   A.   General Requirements: The following development standards shall be
applicable to all facilities regardless of the facility type or zone within
which the facility is proposed to be located:
      1.   The proposed facility shall be located on an approved structure and/
or site in conformance with this code. If a proposed facility site does not
conform to this code, the carrier shall submit and have approved by the city
planning commission a plan to bring the structure and/or site into conformance
with the code prior to completion and operation of the proposed facility. This
plan shall be submitted with a permitted use application.
      2.   Applicants for a telecommunications facility permit shall collocate
their facilities on existing facility towers, unless it can be shown, by a
preponderance of evidence, that all existing towers are inadequate to serve the
applicants' reasonable needs due to location, height or other significant
reason, and shall pay a reasonable compensation to the owner of the existing
tower to fairly share past and future costs.
      3.   Telecommunication facility towers shall be located, designed, and
constructed to be as unobtrusive and few in number as possible. They shall be
subject to any requirements that minimize the impact on surrounding properties
and the city. No telecommunication facility shall exceed sixty feet (60') in
height from the finished grade of the ground to the highest point on the
structure.
      4.   Each application for a permitted use to construct a
telecommunication facility and tower shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer that the design of the facility meets all applicable
standards of the facility including, but not limited to, electrical safety,
material and design integrity, wind and seismic safety. The professional
engineer shall certify that the tower meets the acceptable design criteria or
standards to withstand one hundred (100) mile per hour winds.
      5.   Any associated mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
completely screened from view, from public rights of way, on site parking areas
and adjacent properties, with a fence and/or landscaping.
      6.   The proposed facility, including associated mechanical and
electrical equipment, shall not be located within a public right of way.
      7.   The proposed facility shall conform to the requirements of this
title, this code, and other laws, including pertinent regulations of the
federal communications commission and the federal aviation administration.
      8.   Copies of required permits from pertinent federal agencies
establishing compliance with applicable federal regulations shall be filed with
the city prior to the issuance of a permit for a proposed facility.
      9.   The proposed facility shall conform to the applicable development
standards set forth in this section.
   B.   Stealth Design Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to
stealth design antennas. The intent of this subsection is to allow creativity
in designing a proposed facility so that it will have essentially no visual
impact.
      1.   Stealth designs may include, but are not limited to, use of the
following:
         a.   Screening, structure, and/or antenna design which blend with the
architecture of the existing structure upon which the antenna will be mounted;
         b.   Screening, structure, antenna and/or location design which blend
with and/or take advantage of existing vegetation and/or features of site; and
         c.   Color schemes that make an antenna less noticeable.
      2.   The city shall have sole authority to determine whether or not a
proposed facility design will have essentially no visual impact.
   C.   Roof Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to roof
mounted antennas:
      1.   Roof mounted antennas shall be permitted on flat roofs and shall be
screened, constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which they are
attached.
      2.   Roof mounted antennas shall be permitted on pitched roof structures
only if determined to be a stealth design as set forth in this section.
      3.   Roof mounted antennas shall be permitted on top of existing
penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms provided the following requirements
are met:
         a.   The antennas and antenna support structures are enclosed by a
structure that creates a visual screen that is architecturally compatible with
the building.
         b.   The screening structure, antennas and antenna mounting structures
do not extend more than eight feet (8') above the existing roofline of a
penthouse or mechanical equipment room.
      4.   Roof mounted antennas not mounted on a penthouse or mechanical
equipment room shall be allowed as follows:
         a.   On buildings without parapet walls, antennas shall be mounted a
minimum of five feet (5') from the exterior wall of a building.
            (1)   Antennas mounted between five (5) and ten feet (10') from an
exterior wall shall have a maximum height directly proportional to the distance
the antenna is set back from the exterior wall, up to a maximum height of ten
feet (10') above the roofline of the building to which the antenna is attached.
            (2)   Regardless of setback from exterior walls, antennas shall not
exceed a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the roofline of the building.
         b.   On buildings with parapet walls, antennas shall be mounted at
least five feet (5') behind the parapet wall.
            (1)   For antennas mounted between five (5) and ten feet (10')
behind a parapet wall, the maximum height of the antenna shall be directly
proportional to the distance the antenna is set back from the wall up to a
maximum of ten feet (10') as measured from the top of the parapet wall.
            (2)   Regardless of setback from parapet walls, no antenna shall
extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the roofline of the building itself
unless approved pursuant to a conditional use permit.
   D.   Wall Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to flush
mounted and nonflush mounted wall antennas:
      1.   Wall mounted antennas shall not:
         a.   Extend above the wall line of the building; and
         b.   Extend more than one foot (1') horizontally from the wall
surface.
      2.   Antennas, equipment and the supporting structure shall be painted to
match the color of the building or structure of the background against which
they are most commonly seen.
      3.   Antennas and the supporting structures on buildings shall be
architecturally compatible with the building.
      4.   Whip antennas shall not be allowed on a wall mounted antenna
structure.
      5.   Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or
mechanical equipment rooms, with no portion of the antenna extending above the
roof or parapet line of such structures, shall be considered wall mounted
antennas.
      6.   The maximum number of carriers per building shall be as follows:
         a.   In commercial and manufacturing zones: One carrier for the front
side of each building and no more than two (2) per side on all other sides of
the building.
      7.   The total antenna area per carrier shall be as follows:
         a.   In commercial and manufacturing zones: Each carrier's total
combined area allowed for wall mounted antennas and supporting structures shall
not exceed forty (40) square feet for each exterior wall of a building or a
total of one hundred (100) square feet per building. The total area is the sum
of the area of each individual antenna face and the visible portion of the
supporting structure as viewed when looking directly at the face of the
building.
   E.   Monopoles With Antennas And Antenna Support Structures: The following
provisions shall apply to monopoles with antennas and antenna support
structures:
      1.   The location of a monopole shall be as follows:
         a.   A monopole may be located in public facilities, commercial, or
manufacturing zones so long as it is not within a required yard, landscaping,
buffering, or parking area.
         b.   A monopole shall be set back as follows:
            (1)   A minimum of two feet (2') for every foot of pole height from
the closest line of any property in an adjacent residential zone.
            (2)   In addition to the minimum setbacks required by the zone and
other locational restrictions of this subsection E, a monopole shall be set
back from all public rights of way the greater of one hundred feet (100') or
one foot (1') for every one foot (1') of monopole height, as set forth in this
subsection E.
            (3)   A monopole shall not be located within five hundred (500)
linear feet from another monopole.
      2.   The height of a monopole shall be as follows:
         a.   The maximum height of a monopole with antennas and antenna
support structures shall be sixty feet (60').
         b.   Height shall be measured from the average finished grade at the
base of the monopole to the top of the highest portion of the facility.
      3.   The maximum visible area of antennas and antenna support structures
on the monopole shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height or fifteen feet (15')
in width as viewed looking directly at the monopole at the same elevation as
the antennas and antenna mounting structures.
      4.   A monopole shall be fenced for security purposes as required in this
section.
      5.   There shall be no climbing pegs located on the lower twenty feet
(20') of any monopole.
      6.   Antennas may be collocated on a single monopole subject to the
development standards of this section.
   F.   Accessory Buildings And Equipment: Accessory buildings and equipment
shall conform to required setback, height, and landscaping requirements of the
zone in which they are located. Accessory equipment not located within an
accessory building shall be fenced.
   G.   Fencing: A monopole, accessory equipment, and other apparatus
associated with antennas and antenna support structures, shall be enclosed with
a six foot (6') high vinyl coated chainlink fence unless located within the
building.
   H.   Undergrounding Of Lines: All communication and power lines to or
between any accessory building, accessory equipment, and antenna structures
shall be located underground.
   I.   Facilities Located In Public Facility, Commercial, And Manufacturing
Zones: The facilities set forth below shall be permitted uses in public
facility, commercial, and manufacturing zones so long as they meet the
requirements of this subsection I and are not located on otherwise undeveloped
property:
      1.   Hidden antenna;
      2.   Stealth design antenna;
      3.   Flush mounted wall antenna;
      4.   Roof mounted antenna that is:
         a.   Completely enclosed from view within an architecturally
compatible screen; and
         b.   Set back at least ten feet (10') from exterior walls of a
building on nonparapet wall buildings, or ten feet (10') from a parapet wall on
parapet wall buildings; and
      5.   Monopole so long as:
         a.   An application is for a second carrier to collocate on an
existing monopole previously approved by a conditional use permit; and
         b.   The height of an existing monopole will be not increased by more
than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.070: CONDITIONAL USE:
A wireless telecommunication facility that does not conform to the development
standards of section
17.50.060 of this chapter may be established in any public facility,
commercial, or manufacturing zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit pursuant to the development standards of section
 17.50.080 of this chapter. Each facility shall require a separate conditional
use permit. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.080: DEVELOPMENTAL STANDARDS; CONDITIONAL USE:
The developmental standards of section
17.50.060 of this chapter shall apply to a wireless telecommunication facility
established as a conditional use except as otherwise modified by this section.
   A.   Antennas And Mounting Structures On Or Over Public Rights Of Way:
Antennas and mounting structures shall not encroach on or over the public
sidewalk or on or over public rights of way unless:
      1.   The facility is approved by conditional use permit on existing
structures located in the right of way;
      2.   Associated mechanical and electrical equipment is not located in the
public right of way;
      3.   The facility is virtually hidden from view;
      4.   The existing structure is proven structurally sound to support the
proposed facility; and
      5.   The carrier signs an agreement with the city which includes
provisions that:
         a.   Hold the city harmless from any liability claims as a result of
the facility;
         b.   Require the carrier to provide, prior to permit issuance, proof
to the city that the carrier has acquired sufficient liability insurance as may
be required by the city; and
         c.   Name the city as cobeneficiary of the insurance policy.
   B.   Fencing And Screening Requirements: Specific fencing and screening
plans for each facility shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with a
conditional use permit application. Higher grade fencing, more aesthetic fence
designs, and landscaping may be required for the purposes of visual screening,
and other impact mitigation. See subsection
17.46.080C of this title.
   C.   Monopoles:
      1.   The height of an existing monopole located in a public facility,
commercial, or manufacturing zone may be increased if approved by a conditional
use permit. No monopole with antennas and antenna support structures shall
exceed a height of one hundred feet (100').
      2.   A monopole may be located within five hundred (500) linear feet from
another monopole if approved by a conditional use permit.
      3.   The maximum height of a monopole with antennas and antenna support
structures may be increased if approved by a conditional use permit for
collocation of a second carrier on an existing monopole. In the event
collocation for the second carrier is terminated, the original carrier shall
reduce the height within thirty (30) days from the date the second carrier
files with the FCC a "notice of abandon" of the facility. The city shall
receive a copy of the "notice of abandon" filed with the FCC.
   D.   Nonflush Mounted Wall Antennas: A nonflush mounted wall antenna may
extend more than six feet (6') horizontally from the wall surface if approved
by a conditional use permit.
   E.   Additional Conditional Use Factors: In addition to conditional use
standards outlined in chapter 17.48 of this title, the following factors shall
be considered in evaluating an application for a conditional use permit:
      1.   Compatibility of the proposed structure with the height and mass of
existing buildings and utility structure;
      2.   For new sites, whether location of the antenna on other existing
structures in the same vicinity such as other towers, buildings, water towers,
utility poles, athletic field lights, etc., is possible without significantly
impacting antenna transmission or reception;
      3.   Antenna location in relation to existing vegetation, topography, and
buildings to obtain the best visual screening; and
      4.   Whether spacing between monopoles creates quantifiable detrimental
impacts to adjoining properties.
      5.   If practical difficulties are demonstrated by the applicant or upon
detailed demonstration by the applicant that a proposed facility can be
effectively screened from view or nearby sensitive land uses, the planning
commission may reduce a required setback from an adjacent residential zone
provided that no monopole shall be closer than one and one-half (11/2) times
the height of the monopole to any dwelling. (Ord. 2015-10: Ord. 04-02 § 1)
17.50.090: NONMAINTAINED AND ABANDONED FACILITIES:
   A.   Letter Agreement: Prior to approval of an application for any facility,
an applicant shall supply the city with a letter agreeing to the requirements
and processes of this section. The letter agreement shall state that if
technology renders the facility obsolete, the facility is not maintained, the
facility is abandoned, or the facility is vacated, the carrier will provide the
city with a copy of a "notice of abandon" to be filed with the FCC and will
remove the facility as set forth in this section.
   B.   Bonding: Prior to construction of any facility, the applicant shall
provide the city with an insurance bond in the amount equivalent to the
estimated cost to remove the facility and restore the site to its original
condition.
   C.   Notice:
      1.   If the city determines that a facility is not maintained, is
abandoned or is vacated, the city shall send the carrier notice of
nonmaintenance or abandonment by certified mail.
      2.   If a facility subject to the foregoing notice requirement has not
been repaired, put into use or removed within thirty (30) calendar days of the
carrier's receipt of the notice, the city may send the carrier a certified
notice of removal, which shall give the carrier thirty (30) calendar days from
the receipt of the notice to remove the facility as set forth in this section.
   D.   Removal Requirement: Within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt
of a notice to remove, a carrier shall:
      1.   Remove from the site:
         a.   All antennas, support structures, and other associated apparatus;
and
         b.   The top three feet (3') of the antenna footing and other building
footings; and
      2.   Restore the site to its original condition including, but not
limited to, grading and revegetation as approved by the city.
   E.   Violation: In the event a facility is not removed as required, the city
may use the bond and/or undertake legal action to enforce removal. (Ord. 04-02
§ 1)
17.50.100: PROHIBITED USE:
A lattice tower or wireless communication antenna other than those allowed
under the provisions of this chapter shall be prohibited except as otherwise
required by applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 04-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.51
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
17.51.010: Use Of Right-Of-Way For Small Wireless Facilities And Utility Poles
17.51.020: Definitions
17.51.030: Restrictions On Small Wireless Facilities
17.51.040: Permits Required
17.51.050: Design Standards For Small Wireless Facilities
17.51.060: Underground Placement
17.51.070: Permitting Application And Review
17.51.080: Administrative Review
17.51.090: Fees
17.51.100: Damage And Repair
17.51.110: Removal Of Small Wireless Facilities
17.51.120: Conflicts, Enforcement, Governing Law
17.51.010: USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND UTILITY POLES:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, within, along, across, upon
or under a public right-of-way, a wireless provider may:
      1.   Collocate a small wireless facility, including collocation on a city
pole;
      2.   Install, operate, modify, maintain or replace:
         a.   A utility pole associated with the wireless provider's
collocation of small wireless facilities;
         b.   A stand-alone pole owned by a wireless provider for use with a
small wireless facility; or
         c.   Equipment described in Utah Code Annotated subsection 54-21-101
(25)(b)(i) through (ix) required for a wireless provider's operation or
collocation of a small wireless facilities.
   B.   An applicant may not install a new utility pole or a small wireless
facility, including any associated equipment, upon or under a residential
street without the city's discretionary written consent.
   C.   This chapter applies to the construction, modification, removal and
operation of small wireless facilities installed in the public right-of-way.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to video service systems, wireline
services, or wireless facilities that are not small wireless facilities.
   E.   All references to small wireless facilities in this chapter shall refer
only to small wireless facilities in the right-of-way and not small wireless
facilities located anywhere outside of the right-of-way.
   F.   No person shall install, construct, modify, or otherwise place any
small wireless facility within the public right-of-way except pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Microwave, macro towers, and other wireless backhaul facilities are not
permitted within the right-of-way.
   H.   The definitions used in this chapter apply only to this chapter. (Ord.
19-08 § 1)
17.51.020: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Except as modified in this section, the terms used in this chapter
shall be defined as provided in the small wireless facilities    deployment
act, section 54-21-101 Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provision.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
 
CITY POLE:    An authority pole owned by Farr West City.
              Does not include private streets; private abutter's alleys;
              utility easements owned by the city, including public utility
              easements shown on a recorded subdivision plat; the interior of
RIGHT-OF-WAY: public parks or other public grounds including internal
              sidewalks, parking areas or roads; or trails and paths that are
              not immediately adjacent to and parallel with a public right-of-
              way.
 
                         A public right-of-way that is not more than 60 feet
                         wide, as shown on a deed, dedication plat, city bible
                         sheet, or other official plat record on file with the
RESIDENTIAL STREET:      office of the Weber County Recorder and that is
                         adjacent to single family residential lots, other
                         multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is
                         designated for residential use by zoning or deed
                         restriction.
                         A type of wireless facility: (a) on which each
                         wireless provider's antenna could fit within an
                         enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume;
                         and (b) for which all wireless equipment associated
                         with the wireless facility, whether ground-mounted or
                         pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic
                         feet in volume, not including any: (i) electric meter;
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: (ii) concealment element; (iii) telecommunications
                         demarcation box; (iv) grounding equipment; (v) power
                         transfer switch; (vi) cut-off switch; (vii) vertical
                         cable run for the connection of power or other
                         service; (viii) wireless provider antenna; or (ix)
                         coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately
                         adjacent to or directly associated with a particular
                         collocation, unless the cable is a wireline backhaul
                         facility.
                         A pole installed by a wireless provider in the public
STAND-ALONE POLE:        right-of-way for use in connection with a small
                         wireless facility.
 
(Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.030: RESTRICTIONS ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   A small wireless facility, including associated equipment and
structures, installed under this chapter may not:
      1.   Obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-
way;
      2.   Interfere with or impair the vision of operators of vehicles at
street intersections;
      3.   Obstruct, damage, or interfere with:
         a.   Another utility facility in a right-of-way; or
         b.   A utility's use of the utility's facility in a right-of-way.
   B.   Construction and maintenance of any pole, equipment or small wireless
facility by a wireless provider shall comply with all applicable legal
obligations for the protection of underground and overhead utility facilities.
   C.   A wireless provider shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend the
City, its officers and employees, from and against all losses, claims,
counterclaims, demands, actions, damages, costs, charges, and causes of action
of every kind or character, including attorneys' fees, arising out of or in
connection with such provider's wireless facilities or use of the public way,
unless and to the extent caused by the city's negligence.
   D.   A wireless provider is solely responsible for establishing electrical
power service for its small wireless facilities and for the payment of all
electrical utility charges associated with the small wireless facility.
   E.   All small wireless facilities and wireless provider-owned structures
shall be maintained by the wireless provider in a clean and good condition,
free of graffiti, and rusting, excessive dirt, and peeling paint. The city
shall have the authority to conduct inspections of the small wireless
facilities and structures at any time to determine whether such facilities and
structures comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.040: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   An applicant shall obtain a permit prior to:
      1.   Collocating a small wireless facility in a public right-of-way;
      2.   Installing a new, modified, or replacement utility pole, authority
pole or standalone pole associated with a small wireless facility in a right-
of-way; or
      3.   Permanently removing a small wireless facility.
   B.   The city will not provide a permit to a wireless provider until the
wireless provider and city have first entered into a master license agreement,
and, if required, a franchise agreement.
   C.   Exceptions to Permitting. Unless the work requires the closing of
sidewalks or vehicular lanes in the right-of-way, an application for a permit
is not required for:
      1.   Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility or support
structures for a small wireless facility;
      2.   The replacement of one small wireless facility with another small
wireless facility of substantially similar or smaller size;
      3.   The installation, placement, operation or maintenance of a micro
wireless facility that is strung on a cable between two existing utility poles
in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; or
      4.   Non-substantial modifications.
   D.   A wireless provider shall give notice to the city of an activity
described in subsection C at least five (5) business days prior to conducting
the activity. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.050: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Integrated Facility Designs
      1.   Small wireless facilities, including equipment associated with the
small wireless facility, shall be integrated into the stand-alone pole, utility
pole or authority pole and generally shall be installed in a manner minimizing
the visual impact. Whether the small wireless facility is collocated or is
placed on its own pole:
         a.   Small wireless facilities should not be readily noticed;
         b.   All equipment, including electric meters, should be located on or
within the pole unless prohibited by the owner of the pole, in which case an
alternative power meter box must be approved by the city engineer.
         c.   A small wireless facility and associated equipment located on the
exterior of a pole shall be enclosed in a shroud or enclosure painted to match
the existing pole color;
         d.   All small wireless facilities shall be constructed out of or
finished with non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only);
         e.   For metal poles:
            i.   Cable runs should be inside of the pole to the maximum extent
practicable;
            ii.   Equipment associated with the small wireless facility should,
where practicable, be enclosed at the base of the wireless support structure in
a space not more than 24 inches in diameter and not more than six feet in
height; and
            iii.   Poles used for collocation shall be designed to separate
different pole users, such as through dual chamber or tri-chamber design.
         f.   If equipment cannot be installed inside of the pole, pole
attachments within 15 feet of ground level shall be positioned on the side of
the pole facing away from approaching traffic in the travel lane closest to the
pole, provided that if the equipment would extend over a sidewalk or road
surface, the equipment shall be positioned in a way to avoid such encroachment;
         g.   Wireless facility equipment on the outside of a utility pole
shall be placed at least eight (8) feet above the public way, unless otherwise
permitted by city;
         h.   Shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or
other applicable governmental authority; and
         i.   Signs located at the small wireless facility shall be limited to
ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if
required) and any other information as required by applicable governmental
authority. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited.
      2.   Antennae:
         a.   Each individual antenna shall be located entirely within a shroud
enclosure of not more than three (3) cubic feet in volume. All antennas
associated with the small wireless facility shall not exceed a combined space
of six (6) cubic feet.
         b.   The diameter of the antenna or antenna enclosure should generally
not exceed the diameter of the top of the wireless support structure pole, and
to the maximum extent practical, should appear as a seamless vertical extension
of the pole.
         c.   In no case shall the maximum diameter of the shroud be wider than
one and one half times the diameter of the top of the pole.
         d.   Where maximum shroud diameter exceeds diameter of the top of the
pole, the shroud shall be tapered to meet the top of the pole
         e.   Unless technologically infeasible or otherwise appropriate based
on neighborhood context, all antenna shall be mounted to the top of the
wireless support structure pole, aligned with the centerline of the structure.
         f.   Antennas shall be generally cylindrical in shape.
         g.   Antennas shall be completely housed within a cylindrical shroud
that is capable of accepting paint to match the wireless support structure.
      3.   Height Limitations: Except for small wireless facilities on a
residential street:
         a.   The height of a structure used for collocation of a small
wireless facility, including the wireless facility, measured at the base of the
structure shall not exceed the lesser of:
            i.   The minimum height needed for the operation of the wireless
facility; or
            ii.   For a new or modified utility pole or authority pole, 50 feet
above ground level together with the minimum antenna height necessary for one
antenna contained within any approved concealment feature.
         b.   A utility pole existing on or before September 1, 2018 that is
used for the collocation of a small wireless facility may, on only one
occasion, be increased by up to ten feet (10') to allow for the attachment of
the small cell wireless antenna together with any approved concealment feature.
         c.   A stand-alone pole shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
      4.   If a ground mounted or buried equipment cabinet is proposed, the
cabinet or vault:
         a.   May be placed above ground in a landscaped park strip or, if
there is no landscaped park strip it shall be placed underground;
         b.   Shall meet the same separation standards as required for a new
utility pole from trees and drive approaches; and
         c.   For an above ground cabinet:
            i.   Shall be secured to a concrete foundation or slab with a
breakaway design in the event of collisions; and
            ii.   Shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, unless special
conditions exist that would result in the cabinet encroaching into the sidewalk
or to within two (2) feet of the curb.
   B.   Collocated Small Facilities
      1.   To the maximum extent practicable, all small cell facilities,
associated equipment and cabling shall be completely concealed from view within
an enclosure, and maybe installed in the following locations:
      2.   Where equipment cannot reasonably be incorporated into the base of
the authority pole, it may be installed within:
         a.   An equipment enclosure mounted to the authority pole; or
         b.   A ground-mounted cabinet physically independent from the
authority pole.
      3.   Equipment enclosures mounted to an authority pole:
         a.   Shall not protrude more than eighteen (18) inches beyond the face
of the pole to the outermost portion of the enclosure.
         b.   Should be installed as flush to the pole as practical. In no case
shall an enclosure be installed more than four inches from the wireless support
structure pole.
         c.   Where multiple enclosures are proposed on a wireless support
structure pole, the enclosures shall be grouped as closely together as possible
on the same side of the pole.
         d.   Small wireless facility equipment enclosures should be the
smallest size practicable to house the necessary facilities and equipment.
         e.   Small wireless facility equipment enclosures shall be cylindrical
or rectangular in shape, and should generally be no wider than the maximum
outside diameter of the pole to which it is attached, to the maximum extent
possible.
         f.   Attachment. The shroud enclosure shall be securely strapped to
the wireless support structure pole using stainless steel banding straps.
Through-bolting or use of lag bolts on publicly-owned wireless support
structures is prohibited. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.060: UNDERGROUND PLACEMENT:
   A.   A wireless provider must place newly constructed lines and cables
underground whenever practicable when building in new residential
   subdivision areas where other utilities have been placed underground.
   B.   A wireless provider shall locate wires, cables, or other facilities
that are not required to be above ground underground.
   C.   Any request by a wireless provider for location of any overhead or
aerial facilities (other than the antennas or other facilities required to
remain above ground in order to be functional) shall only be approved by the
city in accordance with applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.070: PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW:
   A.   All applications for permits shall contain the following:
      1.   An application form signed by the applicant or its authorized
representative;
      2.   Construction drawings which demonstrate the application meets the
minimum requirements of this chapter;
      3.   The appropriate application fee as set forth in Section 3.30.010 of
the Farr West Municipal Code;
      4.   An affidavit or attestation describing the entity that will provide
wireless service using the small wireless facility and that the installation or
collocation of the small wireless facility shall be completed within 270 days
after the day on which the city issues the permit except in the case that:
         a.   The city and the applicant agree to extend the 270 day period; or
         b.   Lack of commercial power or communications transport
infrastructure to the site delays completion;
      5.   An affidavit or attestation that each proposed small wireless
facility, pole, and associated equipment is eligible for an exemption from
environmental or historical assessment under 47 CFR 1.1312(e) or, if not
exempt, evidence of compliance with such required assessment.
      6.   An affidavit or attestation from a Utah licensed engineer that the
proposed wireless facility will be in compliance with the radio frequency
emissions limits established by the FCC.
      7.   For an application that proposes collocation of the small wireless
facility:
         a.   an industry-standard pole load analysis indicating that the
structure on which the wireless facilities will be mounted will safely support
the load; and
         b.   if a small wireless facility cannot be safely installed on the
proposed structure, the applicant shall either replace the structure with a
compliant structure of the same type, or propose a new location.
   B.   Applications for a permit shall be filed with the city recorder on a
form or forms to be furnished by the city building inspector or city engineer,
and shall contain, as applicable:
      1.   The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and email
address of the applicant. Where an applicant is not the owner of the facility
to be installed, maintained or repaired in the public right-of-way, the
application also shall include the name, address, telephone number, facsimile
number and email address of the owner;
      2.   A description of the location, purpose, method of the proposed work,
and surface and subsurface area to be affected;
      3.   A plan showing the proposed location of the work and the dimensions
of any excavation and the facilities to be installed, maintained, or repaired
in connection with the work, and such other details as the city engineer or
building inspector may require;
      4.   The proposed start date of work;
      5.   The proposed duration of the work, which shall include the duration
of the restoration of the right-of-way physically disturbed by the work;
      6.   Written certification that all material to be used in the work and
restoration of the Right-of-Way, will be on hand and ready for use so as not to
delay the work and the prompt restoration of the public way;
      7.   Written certification that the applicant and owner are in compliance
with all terms and conditions of this chapter, the orders, and all applicable
rules and regulations of the city engineer, and that the applicant and owner
are not subject to any outstanding assessments, fees or penalties that have
been finally determined by the city;
      8.   Evidence of insurance as required by either section of this code or
the applicable agreement with the city;
      9.   A scaled site plan, rendering or photo simulation, scaled elevation
view and other supporting drawings and calculations, showing the location and
dimension of all improvements. The submittal must include sufficient
information to determine compliance with the standards and requirements of this
chapter, specifically including information concerning structure height and
location within the right-of-way, compliance with the city's intersection and
driveway sight distance standards, and compliance with the ADA;
      10.   Certification of the applicant and owner's financial ability to
compensate the city for the use of the public right-of-way during the term of
the respective franchise agreement or master license agreement;
      11.   Evidence that the owner (if not the applicant) has provided
permission to perform the work on behalf of the owner and, if applicable,
permission to use or attach to owner's property in the public right-of-way; and
      12.   Any other information that may reasonably be required by the city
engineer or building inspector. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.080: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   City shall review a complete application, including a consolidated
application of up to 25 small wireless facilities, and approve or deny the
application within the time frames and subject to the standards contained in
Utah Code Annotated, section 54-21-302(3) through (9).
   B.   City is a category two authority for purposes of determining the total
number of small wireless facility applications allowed on a monthly basis.
   C.   If construction of an approved small wireless facility has not
commenced within 270 days after an application has been approved, as evidenced
by the applicant obtaining an excavation permit and, where applicable, an
electrical permit, the approval shall lapse and a new application will be
required for the designated location. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.090: FEES:
   A.   Unless a wireless provider is subject to the municipal
telecommunications license tax under Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 4 Utah Code
Annotated, for the right to use and occupy the right-of-way:
      1.   A small wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual fee equal
to the greater of:
         a.   3.5% of all annual gross revenue related to the wireless
provider's use of the right-of-way within the city; or
         b.   $250 annually for each small wireless facility located in the
city.
      2.   Upon request by the city, a wireless provider shall make payments
under subsection A.1. on a monthly basis.
      3.   Annually, a wireless provider shall provide to the city a report
describing gross revenue upon which payments are calculated and a description,
of reasonable specificity, of the small wireless facilities which have
generated the revenue upon which the payment is based.
         a.   The report shall include such information related to such payment
as the city may reasonably request.
         b.   The records of the wireless provider pertaining to the reports
and payment required by this chapter, including but not limited to any records
deemed necessary or useful by the city to calculate or confirm gross revenue,
and all other records of the wireless provider reasonably required by city to
assure compliance by the wireless provider with the terms of this chapter shall
be open to inspection by the city and its duly authorized representatives upon
reasonable notice at all reasonable business hours of the wireless provider.
   B.   With each application to locate a small wireless facility within the
city, a wireless provider shall pay an application fee as established in
Section 3.30.010 of the Farr West Municipal Code.
   C.   A wireless provider shall pay to city an annual fee as established in
Section 3.30.010 of the Farr West Municipal Code.
   D.   Other fees: A wireless provider shall pay all other applicable fees
established by the city, specifically including but not limited to electrical
permit fees and right-of-way permit fees prior to installing an approved small
wireless facility in the right-of-way. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.100: DAMAGE AND REPAIR:
   A.   If a wireless provider's activity causes damage to a right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall repair the right-of-way to substantially the same
condition as before the damage and in accordance with city's engineering
standards.
   B.   If a wireless provider fails to make a repair required by the City
under Subsection A within a reasonable time after written notice, the city may:
      1.   Make the required repair; and
      2.   Charge the wireless provider the reasonable, documented, actual cost
for the repair.
   C.   If the damage described in Subsection A causes an urgent safety hazard,
the city may:
      1.   Immediately make the necessary repair; and
      2.   Charge the wireless provider the reasonable, documented, actual cost
for the repair. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.110: REMOVAL OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Abandoned System: In the event that: 1) the use of any portion of a
small wireless facility is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months, and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City
to the last known address of the wireless provider; 2) b) the term of the
applicable master license agreement has expired; or 3) any small wireless
facility has been installed in the rights-of-way without complying with the
requirements of this chapter or master license agreement; a wireless provider
shall be deemed to have abandoned such small wireless facility.
   B.   Removal of Abandoned Facility: The city, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a wireless provider written permission to abandon, without
removing, any small wireless facility, or portion thereof, directly
constructed, operated or maintained under a master license agreement. Unless
such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, a
wireless provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned small
wireless facility and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was
installed and in accordance with the then adopted engineering standards, so as
not to impair their usefulness. In removing its facilities and equipment, a
wireless provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily
made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good condition as that
prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any
authority pole or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The city shall
have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the rights-of-way,
attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and
insurance provisions of this chapter and any security fund provided in a master
license agreement shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by a wireless provider with the terms and
conditions of this section.
   C.   Transfer of Abandoned Facility to City: Upon abandonment of any small
wireless facility or wireless support structure in place, a wireless provider,
if required by the city, shall submit to the city a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city the ownership of
such poles or equipment allowed to remain within the right-of-way.
   D.   Removal of Above-Ground System: At the expiration of the term for which
a master license agreement is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier
expiration, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the city
shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its expense, all
above-ground portions of small wireless facilities within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   E.   Leaving Underground System: Upon written approval by city, a wireless
provider may abandon underground portions of a small wireless facility in place
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights-of-way
or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
   F.   If a wireless provider defaults under any provision of this chapter and
such default is not cured within 30 days following notice by the city to the
wireless provider of its default, city shall maintain all it rights and
remedies, at law and in equity, including the ability to charge fines, recover
fees and costs. In the alternative, the city may remove the small wireless
facilities and associated equipment and charge the reasonable, documented,
actual cost of removal to the wireless provider. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
17.51.120: CONFLICTS, ENFORCEMENT, GOVERNING LAW:
   A.   In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and
other chapters in the Farr West Municipal Code or any master license agreement
entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
   B.   A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the city to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the
public. A provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the city pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all providers
shall comply with the city zoning and other land use requirements.
   C.   In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the city may
adopt such orders, rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter and are consistent herewith.
   D.   A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any
of the provisions of this Chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.
   E.   This chapter and any master license agreement granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws
of the State of Utah. (Ord. 19-08 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.52
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
17.52.010: Nonconforming Buildings; Maintenance, Repairs And Upkeep
17.52.020: Nonconforming Buildings; Additions, Enlargements And Moving
17.52.030: Nonconforming Buildings; Abandonment By Nonuse
17.52.040: Nonconforming Use Of Buildings
17.52.050: Nonconforming Use Of Buildings; Abandonment By Nonuse
17.52.060: Nonconforming Use Of Land; Abandonment By Nonuser
17.52.070: Nonconforming Use Compliance
17.52.080: Signs Permitted With Nonconforming Uses
17.52.010: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS; MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS AND UPKEEP:
   A.   A nonconforming building or structure may be maintained.
   B.   Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building.
   C.   A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or partially
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or
the public enemy, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building,
structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction
may be continued or resumed, provided that such restoration is started within a
period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 93-003 §
5-1)
17.52.020: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS; ADDITIONS, ENLARGEMENTS AND MOVING:
   A.   A building or structure nonconforming as to use regulations shall not
be added to or enlarged in any manner, unless such building or structure,
including such additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   B.   A building or structure nonconforming as to height, area or yard
regulations shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
addition or enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
   C.   A building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space in
connection therewith as required by this title may be altered or enlarged,
provided, additional automobile parking space is supplied to meet the
requirements of this title for such alterations or enlargements.
   D.   No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other location on the lot, unless every portion of such building or
structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
   E.   All modifications to buildings or structures, excluding complete
removal without intent to rebuild are subject to recommendations from the
planning commission and approval by the city council. (Ord. 93-003 § 5-2)
17.52.030: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS; ABANDONMENT BY NONUSE:
A nonconforming building or structure or portion thereof shall be deemed
abandoned by nonuse during a continuous period of one year. If a nonconforming
building or structure or portion thereof has been or shall be abandoned, the
same shall not thereafter be occupied or used except for a use which conforms
to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 93-003 § 5-3)
17.52.040: NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS:
   A.   The nonconforming use of a building or structure existing at the time
the applicable zoning regulations became or becomes effective may be continued.
   B.   A vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a use
for which the building or structure was designed or intended if so occupied
within a period of one year after the building or structure became
nonconforming.
   C.   A nonconforming use may be extended to include the entire floor area of
the existing building in which it was conducted at the time use became
nonconforming.
   D.   Except by permit or a decision of the appeal authority, the
nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed except to a
conforming use; but where such change is made to a conforming use, the use
shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 13-05: Ord.
93-003 § 5-4)
17.52.050: NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS; ABANDONMENT BY NONUSE:
The nonconforming use of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be
deemed abandoned by nonuse during a continuous period of one year. If a
nonconforming use of any such building or structure or portion thereof has been
or shall be abandoned, the same shall not thereafter be occupied or used except
for a use which conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is
located. (Ord. 93-003 § 5-5)
17.52.060: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND; ABANDONMENT BY NONUSER:
A nonconforming use of a tract of land or portion thereof may not be expanded
or extended either on the same or any adjoining tract of land. A nonconforming
use of land shall be deemed vacant by nonuse immediately upon permanent
discontinuation of the nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use of land has
been or shall be zoned vacant, such land shall not thereafter be used or
occupied except for a use which conforms to the use regulations of the zone in
which the use is located. (Ord. 93-003 § 5-6)
17.52.070: NONCONFORMING USE COMPLIANCE:
Any building, structure or use of which a valid building permit has been issued
and actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof,
or amendments to this title, may be completed and used in accordance with the
plans, specifications and permit on which the building permit was granted.
"Actual construction" is defined to be the actual placing of construction
materials in their permanent position, or fastened in a permanent manner,
actual work in excavating a basement or the demolition or removal of an
existing structure begun preparatory to rebuilding; provided, that in all cases
actual construction work shall be diligently carried on until the completion of
the building or structure involved. (Ord. 93-003 § 5-7)
17.52.080: SIGNS PERMITTED WITH NONCONFORMING USES:
The permitted sign regulations for a nonconforming use, as set forth in chapter
17.56 of this title. (Ord. 93-003 § 5-8)
CHAPTER 17.56
SIGNS
SECTION:
17.56.010: Purpose And Compliance Required
17.56.020: Approval And Permits
17.56.030: Code Administrator
17.56.040: Prohibited Signs (All Zones)
17.56.050: Residential Zones
17.56.060: Construction And Subdivision Developments
17.56.070: Commercial And Manufacturing Zones
17.56.080: Sign Conformity
17.56.090: Electronic Signs
17.56.100: Outdoor Advertising Structures
17.56.110: Signs Not Requiring Permits
17.56.120: Violations And Penalties
17.56.130: Indemnification And Insurance
17.56.140: Special Detailed Instructions Governing Curb Signs
17.56.010: PURPOSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety, enhance the unique
beauty of the city of Farr West, and aid both residents and visitors in
locating civic, business and cultural activities of the city through regulating
the construction and use of signs.
The intent of this regulation is to promote civic order and beauty by
establishing standards and regulations for sign design, location, type, size,
compatibility and aesthetics to create streetscapes of buildings and
landscaping that are functional and attractive to both the residents of the
city and to visitors.
The sign requirements contained in this chapter are the maximum allowable. Sign
types not specifically allowed by this chapter are prohibited. When other
ordinances are in conflict with this chapter, the most restrictive ordinance
will apply. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.020: APPROVAL AND PERMITS:
All commercial and permanent signs require approval by the Farr West City
planning commission and a permit issued by the city recorder. Temporary signs
requiring a permit shall be approved by the city recorder. Application for
permits shall be accompanied by a payment of the fee as prescribed by the fee
schedule (see title 3, chapter 3.30 of this code). If any sign is installed on
any property prior to a sign or site plan approval, the sign permit fee shall
be doubled (see title 3, chapter 3.30, "Fee Schedule", of this code). Payment
of the doubled fee does not relieve the sign owner of any other requirements or
penalties prescribed in this title. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.030: CODE ADMINISTRATOR:
The Farr West City building official is the code administrator and shall
inspect all signs for compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and
conditions from planning commission approval. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.040: PROHIBITED SIGNS (ALL ZONES):
   A.   Off premises signs (see subsection
17.56.070A of this chapter).
   B.   Abandoned signs.
   C.   Misleading, fraudulent, obscene, immoral, indecent or unsightly signs.
   D.   Noise generators of any kind.
   E.   Signs placed on trailers or other vehicles which are parked or located
for the primary purpose of displaying the sign.
   F.   Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or
signals. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.050: RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Only four (4) types of signs are allowed in residential zones: real estate
signs, political signs, curb signs, and signs for the sale of plant or animal
products.
   A.   Real Estate Sign: Advertises the sale, lease or rental of the property
upon which it is displayed. One non-illuminated sign permitted per lot. Signs
shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and not be over five feet (5')
tall. Signs must be removed fifteen (15) days following the sale, rental or
lease of the property.
   B.   Political Sign: Announces, supports or opposes a particular issue,
political party or candidate for public office. May be placed only on private
property (which for purposes of this chapter includes the park or mow strip)
with the permission of the property owner or resident. May not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet in area and shall conform to current "clear view zone"
criteria (see section
17.46.050 of this title). May be placed not more than sixty (60) days prior to
the election or referendum and shall be removed not later than five (5) days
after the election or referendum.
   C.   Curb Signs: Property owners in Farr West are not required to install
curb signs, but are encouraged to do so for the quick identification of a home
or business in the event of an emergency. Curb sign must meet exacting
specifications (see section
17.56.140 of this chapter for detailed specifications).
   D.   Plant Or Animal Products Signs: Signs for the sale of nursery or
greenhouse plants, fruits or vegetables, and/or animals or eggs are permitted
in the A-1 and A-1-R zones. Only one sign permitted per residence. Signs shall
not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and not be over five feet (5')
tall. The setback shall be ten feet (10') from the front curb or property line
and from any side property line. The sign design shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission before approval. Signs shall only be posted when products
are being sold. (Ord. 2024-05: Ord. 16-01)
17.56.060: CONSTRUCTION AND SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENTS:
All commercial signs in Farr West City require permits. Applications are
available from the city recorder upon payment of an application fee (see title
3,
chapter 3.30, "Fee Schedule", of this code). For new developments, the sign
application is part of the required site plan.
   A.   Construction Sign: Construction signs may identify the name of the
business being erected. May also identify an architect, contractor,
subcontractor and/or material supplier participating in the construction on the
property on which the sign is located. This policy is a permitted exception to
the prohibition of off premises signs as defined in section
17.56.070 of this chapter. One sign per street frontage not to exceed thirty
two (32) square feet in area or twelve feet (12') in height is permitted.
Setback shall be ten feet (10') from any property line and must not obstruct
view of traffic for vehicles entering/leaving the site or from vehicles
entering/departing from neighboring properties. May be erected sixty (60) days
prior to the beginning of construction. Must be removed not later than thirty
(30) days following construction completion.
   B.   Subdivision Identification: To identify a recognized subdivision,
condominium complex or residential development. One nonilluminated sign per
street frontage not to exceed forty eight (48) square feet in area and twelve
feet (12') in height. Setback shall be ten feet (10') from any property line
and must not obstruct view of traffic for vehicles entering or departing from
neighboring properties. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.070: COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONES:
   A.   Advertising Signs: Advertising signs are permitted on the premises of
the business or organization which provides or produces a product or service.
Signs advertising for another company are classified as off premises signs and
are not permitted except for I-15 outdoor advertising structures and
construction signs which are permitted within the constraints of sections
17.56.060 and
17.56.100 of this chapter. If construction or exterior building remodeling is
part of a commercial project, the sign application should be included as a part
of the required site plan application. If a sign is being added to an existing
structure or site, a separate sign application is required.
   B.   Freestanding Signs In C-2 Commercial Zones: One freestanding sign per
building regardless of the number of businesses in the building. Sign area
shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of property frontage.
Maximum height shall be twenty five feet (25') in C-2 commercial zones (see
also section
17.56.100, "Outdoor Advertising Structures", of this chapter).
   C.   Freestanding Signs In Commercial Zones With Freeway Access (The Area
Within 500 Feet West Of The Freeway On And Off Ramp Right Of Way, And The Area
East Of A Freeway On And Off Ramp Right Of Way To The Farr West Pleasant View
Boundary): Sign size shall be not more than three (3) square feet per linear
foot of property frontage (not to exceed 300 square feet) and the maximum sign
height shall not exceed eighty feet (80') (see also section
17.56.100, "Outdoor Advertising Structures", of this chapter).
   D.   Sign Size: For purposes of this chapter, the area of a sign computed on
the basis of the smallest rectangle, triangle or circle large enough to frame
the entire display.
   E.   On-Building Signs: On-building signs shall not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the aggregate surface area of the building elevation on the side on
which the sign is installed.
   F.   Directional/Information Signs: Directional/information signs are signs
giving directions, instructions or facility information. Shall contain no
advertising. May contain the logo or name of the business (not to comprise more
than 20 percent of the sign area).
   G.   Political Signs: Political signs are allowed on private property,
including the mow or park strip, regardless of zone. (Ord. 2016-5: Ord. 16-01)
17.56.080: SIGN CONFORMITY:
   A.   Setback: The setback for all freestanding commercial signs shall be ten
feet (10') from the front curb or property line and from any side property
line.
   B.   Clearance: All commercial signs shall have ten feet (10') of clearance
above any walkway or fourteen feet (14') of clearance above any vehicleway.
   C.   Clear View Zones: A clear view zone is established by marking a point
at which the two (2) street property lines intersect, measuring back twenty
feet (20') on each street front, and drawing a line across the two (2) back
points to form a triangulated area (see section
17.46.050 of this title). A clear view zone is required at all intersections
and the entryways and exits from all properties in the city. Note: If the
topography of the corner is unique, safety is paramount and variations of this
calculation may be required by the planning commission to ensure that drivers
of typical small or midsized motor vehicles have a clear view of traffic
approaching the intersection or entry/exit.
   D.   Obstructions: No sign, structure or vegetation exceeding three and one-
half feet (31/2') in height shall be erected or maintained in a clear view
zone.
   E.   Code Compliance: All signs shall comply with the building and
electrical codes and standards as established or adopted by Farr West City (see
section
15.04.010 of this code).
   F.   Illuminated Signs: Signs may be illuminated by indirect lighting or
floodlights only. No lighting shall be installed in any way which will permit
direct rays of such light to penetrate onto any adjoining property used for
residential purposes, or in any manner constituting a nuisance.
   G.   Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs are signs that were erected
legally but which no longer comply with current laws, regulations or
ordinances. Such signs are permitted so long as they are properly maintained
and do not endanger the public in any way. Note: If a nonconforming sign is
modified in any way except making the sign compliant with this title, the
entire sign must be replaced with a conforming sign using the normal sign
application procedures.
   H.   Special Permit: The city council may issue a special permit for a sign
that does not conform to this title for a limited special use or occasion.
   I.   Maintenance Of Signs: Signs must be kept clean, painted, and repaired
as required by this chapter. The city shall attempt to contact the owner of any
sign that appears to be abandoned. If the sign owner does not reply to city
attempts at communication, the sign may be removed by the city.
   J.   Temporary Signs (Including Any Banner Signs): Such signs may be
permitted through the normal sign application process for a period of up to
thirty (30) days or until the event being advertised is completed, whichever
period of time is shorter.
   K.   Governmental Signs: Signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental function, or required by law, ordinance, or other
governmental regulation are allowed in any zone in accordance with applicable
government regulations.
   L.   Emergency Signs: Emergency signs produced or placed to protect the
public and emergency responders are permitted in any zone as dictated by the
circumstances of the emergency. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.090: ELECTRONIC SIGNS:
Electronic signs appear to be the wave of the future, however, advancing
technology threatens safety by making signs as much entertainment as
advertising. Therefore, to promote safety and avoid distractions which might
lead to vehicle accidents, signs which deliver their message electronically
(not including signs which are merely illuminated by electronic means) are
permitted through the same process as other signs with the following
restrictions:
   A.   Video animation shall be prohibited, including text, image or graphic
scrolling and animated advertisement transitions.
   B.   Advertisements shall not blink, flash, pulse, twinkle or anything
similar.
   C.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., electronic signs adjacent to residential areas or any legally occupied
dwelling shall not increase the ambient lighting level more than three-tenths
(0.3) foot-candle when measured by a foot-candle meter, perpendicular to the
digital face at a distance of three hundred feet (300').
   D.   All such electronic signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer
control or other mechanism that automatically controls the sign's brightness
and display period.
   E.   Signs shall comply with the building and electrical codes and standards
as established or adopted by Farr West City (see section
15.04.010 of this code).
Prior to the approval of any permit to operate an electronic sign, the
applicant shall certify that the sign has been tested and complies with the
motion, dwell time, brightness, rotation time and all other curfew requirements
as outlined below for outdoor advertising structures. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.100: OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES:
No outdoor advertising structures, as that term is defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 72-7-502 shall be permitted in Farr West City which were not
permitted as of September 1, 2015. Relocation of outdoor advertising structure
within Farr West City shall not be permitted, except when such relocation is
permitted or required in accordance with Utah Code Annotated sections 72-7-510,
513 and 516. Every outdoor advertising structure shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good condition, suitable for its intended use.
Existing outdoor advertising may be converted to digital outdoor advertising
but may not exceed the height and square footage of the present structure.
Video animation shall be prohibited including text, image or graphic scrolling
and animated advertisement transitions. Any structural changes, including
conversion of any sign faces, require a building permit.
Limitations:
   A.   Digital advertisements shall have a minimum dwell time of eight (8)
seconds and a maximum rotation time of one-fourth (0.25) second.
   B.   Digital advertisements shall not blink, flash, pulse, twinkle or
anything similar, or be lit by an outside light source.
   C.   Digital signs that are within three hundred feet (300') of any legally
occupied dwelling and within a one hundred twenty degree (120°) radius area
measured from the center point of the digital sign face or signs within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of a legally occupied dwelling and within a thirty
degree (30°) radius area measured from the point of the digital sign face and
beginning at the one hundred twenty degree (120°) line, shall adhere to the
curfew requirements between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. daily.
   D.   Digital signs shall not increase the ambient lighting level more than
three-tenths (0.3) foot-candle when measured by a foot- candle meter,
perpendicular to the digital face at a distance of three hundred feet (300').
   E.   All digital signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control or
other mechanism that automatically controls the sign's brightness and display
period.
   F.   Prior to the approval of any permit to operate digital outdoor
advertising, the applicant shall certify that the sign has been tested and
complies with the motion, dwell time, brightness, rotation time and all other
requirements within this regulation.
Prior to the removal of an existing outdoor advertising structure, owners of
the sign shall contact the Farr West building official. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.110: SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS:
The following types of signs are exempted from permit requirements but must be
in compliance with all other requirements of this title:
   A.   Signs used by churches, synagogues or civic organizations.
   B.   Directional/information signs of nine (9) square feet or less.
   C.   Holiday or special events decorations.
   D.   Nameplates of two (2) square feet or less.
   E.   Political signs.
   F.   Governmental signs or notices, or any sign relating to an emergency.
   G.   Real estate signs.
   H.   Window signs.
   I.   Incidental signs. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.120: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter may result in a fine of
up to two hundred ninety nine dollars ($299.00) for each occurrence. If such
assessment is not paid within thirty (30) days of notification, the charge will
become an assessment upon a lien against the property of the sign owner and
will be certified as an assessment against the property. (Ord. 16-01)
17.56.130: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
   A.   City Held Harmless: All persons responsible for the maintenance,
installation, alteration, or relocation of signs near or upon any public right
of way or property shall agree to hold the city harmless and indemnify the
city, its officers, agents, and employees, against any and all claims for loss,
damage, injury or death suffered by any individual as a result of such sign
maintenance, installation, alteration, or relocation.
   B.   Liability Insurance Required: All persons responsible for the
maintenance, installation, alteration, or relocation of permitted signs shall
maintain sufficient insurance and shall file with the city a satisfactory
certificate of insurance to indemnify against any form of liability. (Ord. 16-
01)
17.56.140: SPECIAL DETAILED INSTRUCTIONS GOVERNING CURB SIGNS:
Painting of curb signs shall conform to the following detailed requirements:
   A.   Purpose: Farr West property owners are not required to install curb
signs, but are encouraged to do so for the quick identification of a home or
business by fire/EMS, law enforcement, or other city personnel in the event of
an emergency. Curb signs are for the sole purpose of assisting in identifying
the location of specific homes or businesses. Only one curb sign displaying the
building number is allowed per residence, lot, or business. Street names or
additional street numbers are not allowed. Advertisements, logos, or any other
commercial identifiers are prohibited.
   B.   Materials: All house or business numbers shall be painted using a
nonreflective matte black paint on a solidly filled reflective white paint
background. Numbers are to be in a block type font only. The white background
shall be rectangular in shape with a length no longer than sixteen inches (16")
and a height of no more than six inches (6"). Numbers shall be no more than
five inches (5") in height with a font width of three- fourths (3/4) to one
inch (1"). The numbers shall be spaced one inch (1") apart. The house or
business number, in its entirety, shall be centered on the background allowing
for a minimum of a one-half inch (1/2") contiguous border.
   C.   Location Of The Sign: The sign shall be applied between the approach
(driveway, etc.) and the farthest front edge of the property and centered at a
distance of three feet (3') from the nearest edge of the approach. If the
property has two (2) approaches, either approach may be used as the start of
measuring. If the property is a corner lot, the sign shall be painted on the
curb of the street of which the property is assigned regardless of whether or
not an approach exists. If an approach does not exist, the sign shall be
centered between the corner and the property line. If the approach is the entry
point of a flag lot or if the approach is centered within the lot, the sign may
be painted on either side of the approach. If the distance from a flag lot
approach is less than three feet (3') from the property line, the sign
placement shall be centered midway between the approach and the property line.
   D.   Curb Painting As A Business: Any person who operates or advertises a
curb sign painting business shall obtain a Farr West business license prior to
soliciting or conducting any such work on any property in the city. (Ord. 16-
01)
CHAPTER 17.60
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR THE ELDERLY AND PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
SECTION:
17.60.010: Definitions
17.60.020: Assisted Living Facilities And Residential Facilities For Persons
With A Disability
17.60.030: Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons
17.60.040: Design Standards For Assisted Living Facilities And Residential
Facilities For Persons With A Disability
17.60.050: Limitations, Public Hearing Process
17.60.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to all sections of Farr West City zoning
ordinance and except as provided herein, shall supersede any other definition
contained in the city of Farr West zoning ordinance:
   ADULT DAYCARE: The care and support to three (3) or more functionally
impaired adults through a comprehensive program that provides a variety of
social, recreational and related support services in a licensed healthcare
setting.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A residential facility, licensed by the state of
Utah, with a homelike setting that provides an array of coordinated support
personnel and healthcare services, available twenty four (24) hours per day, to
residents who have been assessed under the Utah department of health or the
Utah department of human services rules to need any of these services. Each
resident shall have a service plan based on the assessment, which may include:
   A.   Specified services of intermediate nursing care;
   B.   Administration of medication; and
   C.   Support services promoting resident's independence and self-
sufficiency. Such a facility does not include adult daycare provided in
conjunction with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
   DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such a problem or being regarded as having such an impairment. The following
definitions are incorporated into the definition of disability:
   A.   Disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to,
any federally controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the controlled
substances act, 21 USC 802, or as defined under title 58, chapter 37, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended;
   B.   A physical or mental impairment includes the following:
1. Any psychological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
2. Any mental or physiological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic
brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities; or
3. Such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing
impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple
sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction
caused by current, illegal use of controlled substances) and alcoholism.
   DOMESTIC STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling
or other residential facility to perform domestic services or to assist
residents in performing major life activities.
   ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
   FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or
guardianship, and may also include up to three (3) additional unrelated
individuals living with the family, such as domestic staff, living together as
a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. "Family" includes the care of foster
children.
   MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES: Functions such as caring for oneself, performing
manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and
working. See also "activities of daily living" in Utah administrative rules
R432-1-3.
   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in any rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. Includes the following definitions:
   A.   Reasonable: A requested accommodation that will not undermine the
legitimate purpose of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit
that the accommodation will provide to a person with a disability.
   B.   Necessary: The applicant must show that, but for the accommodation one
or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal opportunity to
enjoy the housing of their choice.
   C.   Equal Opportunity: Achieving equal results as between a person with a
disability and a nondisabled person.
   RECORD OF IMPAIRMENT: Having a history of or having been classified as
having a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities.
   REGARDED AS HAVING AN IMPAIRMENT: A person is regarded as having an
impairment when:
   A.   The person has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one or more major life activities but is treated by another
person as having such a limitation;
   B.   The person has a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of
others towards such an impairment; or
   C.   The person has none of the impairments defined in this section but is
treated by another person as having such an impairment.
   RELATED: Related by blood, marriage or adoption within the definition of
"family" means a father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, sister, brother,
uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in- law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent, or
grandchild, to include the half as well as the whole blood. Refer to definition
of "relative" in Utah administrative rules R432-1-3.
   RESIDENCE, RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any building or portion thereof where an
individual is actually living at a given point and time and intends to remain,
and not a place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A dwelling unit that is occupied
on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8) or fewer elderly persons
in a family type arrangement. A residential facility for elderly persons shall
not include any of the following:
   A.   A facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility
may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
   B.   A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a healthcare
facility as defined by title 26, chapter 21, section 2, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended; or a facility which is a residential facility for persons
with a disability.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in which
more than one person with a disability resides and which is:
   A.   Licensed or certified by the department of human services under title
62A, chapter 2, of the Utah code, licensure of programs and facilities; or
   B.   Licensed or certified by the department of human health under title 26,
chapter 21, of the Utah code, titled the health care facilities licensing and
inspection act. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.60.020: ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES AND RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS
WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Applicability: This section shall be deemed to govern any facility,
residence, or other structure or circumstance that meets the definition of an
assisted living facility or a residential facility as set forth in this chapter
and the definition of a person with a disability as set forth in this chapter.
The requirements of this section shall govern the same notwithstanding any
other provisions of this code.
   B.   Purpose: The purposes of this section are:
      1.   To comply with title 10, chapter 9a, section 520, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended; and
      2.   To avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities
as provided in the Utah fair housing act and the federal fair housing act as
amended and as interpreted by the courts having jurisdiction over the city of
Farr West.
   C.   Permitted Use: An assisted living facility or residential facility for
persons with a disability shall be a permitted use in any zoning district where
a dwelling is allowed. Each such facility shall conform to the following
requirements:
      1.   The facility shall comply with all applicable building, safety and
health regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, fire regulations, and
all applicable state core standards and licensing requirements, and any
standards set forth in any contract with a state agency. The facility shall
also comply with the city's land use zoning provisions applicable to single-
family dwellings for the zone in which it is to be located, except as may be
modified by the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The following site development standards and parking standards shall
be applicable:
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development
standards applicable to a dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is
located; and
         b.   The minimum number of handicapped parking spaces required shall
be as determined by the international building code, and a parking plan
providing the rationale for the number of nonhandicapped parking stalls shall
be submitted with the site plan.
      3.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a direct threat or
substantial risk to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
      4.   Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed
and/or certified by the Utah department of human services or the Utah
department of health to establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a certified copy of such license and/or certification to
the city recorder;
         b.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for
a business license, that the facility is or will be in compliance with the
Americans with disabilities act;
         c.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for
a business license, that no person will be placed or remain in the facility
whose prior or current behavior, actions and/or criminal incidents or
convictions, have demonstrated that such person is or may be a substantial risk
or direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, or whose said
behavior, actions and/or incidents or convictions have resulted in or may
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. Such affidavit
shall be supplemented and updated not less than one hundred fifty (150) days
nor more than one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of issuance of the
business license and at the time of the application for renewal of the business
license.
      5.   The use permitted by this section is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
         a.   A facility is devoted to or used as other than an assisted living
facility or a residential facility for persons with a disability; or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the department of human
services, department of health or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked; or
         c.   The facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in
this section.
      6.   Residential facilities for persons with disabilities that are
substance abuse facilities, and are located within one thousand feet (1,000')
of a school as measured from nearest property line of the school to the nearest
property line of the proposed facility, shall provide the following in
accordance with rules established by the Utah department of human services
under title 62A, chapter 2, licensure of program and facilities:
         a.   A security plan satisfactory to local law enforcement
authorities;
         b.   Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents; and
         c.   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures.
   D.   Reasonable Accommodations: None of the foregoing conditions shall be
interpreted to limit reasonable accommodations necessary to allow the
establishment or occupancy of an assisted living facility or a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
      1.   Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable
accommodation shall make application to the planning commission. Said
applications shall specifically articulate, in writing, the following:
         a.   The name, mailing address, and phone number of the applicant;
         b.   The nature and extent of the disability;
         c.   An exact statement of the ordinance from which the applicant
needs a reasonable accommodation;
         d.   The applicant's proposed reasonable accommodations;
         e.   A statement detailing why a reasonable accommodation is
necessary; and
         f.   The physical address of the property where the applicant intends
on living;
      2.   When considering whether or not to grant a reasonable accommodation,
the planning commission and city council shall consider the following factors,
among others deemed appropriate and applicable:
         a.   The zoning ordinance applicable to the property;
         b.   The parking, traffic, and noise impact on the neighborhood if the
reasonable accommodation is granted;
         c.   Whether or not the accommodation will be an undue burden or
expense to the city;
         d.   The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit
the applicant;
         e.   The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit
the community;
         f.   Whether or not the accommodation fundamentally alters the
citywide zoning ordinance and whether or not the accommodation would likely
create a fundamental change in the character of a residential neighborhood;
         g.   Whether or not the applicant for reasonable accommodation has
demonstrated that the accommodation will affirmatively enhance the resident's
life, or ameliorate the effects of the resident's disability, or the lives or
disabilities on whose behalf the entity is applying;
         h.   Whether or not, without the accommodation, similar housing is
available in the city of Farr West for the applicant or group of applicants;
         i.   Given the scope of the accommodation requested, what is the
impact on the immediate neighborhood; and
         j.   The requirements of applicable federal and state laws and
regulations;
      3.   Written findings and conclusions of the planning commission shall be
sent to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the decision; and
      4.   If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, such decision
may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.60.030: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with title 10,
chapter 9a, sections 516 through 519, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
   B.   Compliance: "Residential facilities for elderly persons" shall comply
with all requirements of title 10, chapter 9a, sections 516 through 519, Utah
Code Annotated, and also the following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall meet all applicable building codes, safety codes,
zoning regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, and health ordinance
applicable to single-family or similar dwellings; except as may be modified by
the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a substantial risk or
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others;
      3.   Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a
dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is located;
      4.   The facility shall be capable of being used as a residential
facility for elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations that
would change the structure's residential character;
      5.   The use granted and permitted by this section is nontransferable and
terminates if the structure is devoted to any use other than as a residential
facility for the elderly or if the structure fails to comply with the
applicable health, safety, zoning and building codes. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.60.040: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES AND RESIDENTIAL
FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Compliance: Any newly constructed or remodeled facility in a
residential zone or immediately abutting a residential zone shall comply with
the following design standards:
      1.   All setbacks shall be according to the requirements of the
residential zone in which the facility sits, or if the facility is in a
commercial zone abutting a residential zone the setbacks shall be those of the
abutting residential zone;
      2.   In order for new construction to reflect the design and character of
the existing neighborhood, the height and shape of the proposed structure, and
type of exterior materials shall be similar to or of the same type and
appearance as those commonly found in the residential zone where the facility
sits, or if in a commercial zone and abutting a residential zone, in the
residential zone abutting the zone where the facility sits. The structure shall
blend in with the neighborhood where the building is located and not draw undue
attention to the building due to the height, shape, or external materials being
uncharacteristic of the other buildings in the neighborhood;
      3.   To the extent that similar requirements to any contained in this
section are contained in the specific zone in which any facility referred to
herein may be located, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, and the
requirements stated herein shall be considered to be in addition to presently
existing zoning regulations. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.60.050: LIMITATIONS, PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS:
   A.   Limitations: Only such uses and facilities as are specifically
authorized in this chapter and in this title as permitted or conditional uses
shall be allowed. All other uses and facilities are prohibited.
   B.   Public Hearing Process: Prior to approval of a residential facility for
the elderly or for persons with a disability, a public hearing will be held to
receive public comment. (Ord. 2012-03)
CHAPTER 17.70
SENSITIVE LANDS
SECTION:
17.70.010: Purpose
17.70.020: General Provisions
17.70.030: Definitions
17.70.040: Actions Prohibited
17.70.050: Presumption
17.70.060: Preliminary Determination By Building Official And City Engineer
17.70.070: Letter Report; Contents
17.70.080: Geologic Report
17.70.090: Engineer/Geologist Qualifications And Certificate
17.70.100: Postconstruction Inspection And Certification
17.70.110: Appeal From Decision Of City Engineer
17.70.120: Restrictive Covenants Required
17.70.130: Civil And Criminal Fraud
17.70.140: High Water Table And Wetland Area Development Standards
17.70.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate development in sensitive land areas
as identified below in order to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare and promote environmentally sound planning, design and development.
This chapter recognizes that development of land in these areas involves
special considerations and unique situations, which result from the topography
and geology of the land. These areas include, but are not limited to, areas of
natural drainage, high groundwater, and potential floodplains. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
With the enactment of this chapter, Farr West City intends to:
   A.   Protect life and property from all potentially hazardous geologic
conditions such as high groundwater and potential flooding;
   B.   Promote the preservation of scenic and environmental resources of the
landscape by encouraging the maximum retention of prominent natural topographic
features, such as natural drainage swales and streams;
   C.   Encourage innovative site and architectural design and planning to
promote development which adapts to the natural terrain and is harmonious with
the character of the area;
   D.   Minimize stormwater runoff and erosion problems incurred by the
development on and off the site;
   E.   Encourage the preservation, where possible, of natural streams, ponds
and associated riparian vegetation;
   F.   Encourage minimal grading which relates to the natural contour of the
land;
   G.   Require landowners to bear the responsibility and expense of evaluating
the condition of potentially unstable land;
   H.   Implement the Farr West City general plan by restricting the use of
land to those uses which do not present unreasonable risks to persons or
property because of geological and natural hazards and/or geotechnical
limitations;
   I.   Help prevent fraud in land sales relating to the geologic or other
condition of real property; and
   J.   Authorize a governmental function of regulation with the Utah
governmental immunity act. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.030: DEFINITIONS:
   BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a lot or parcel which is eligible to place a
building or structure and complies with the setbacks and other regulations of
the zone where the property is located.
   CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL: City building inspector.
   ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST: A civil engineer registered in the state of Utah with
training and experience in the technical analysis of geological data and risk
assessment of geological hazards.
   EXCAVATION: The mechanical removal of earth material.
   FILL: A deposit of earth material by artificial means.
   GEOLOGIC HAZARD: Those hazards listed in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-
103 as it may be amended, including, but not limited to: a surface fault or
rupture, shallow groundwater, liquefaction, landslide, a debris flow, unstable
soil, a rockfall, or any other geologic condition that presents a risk to life;
a substantial loss of real property; or substantial damage to real property.
   GEOLOGIC REPORT: Report that shall include maps and a report, as required by
section
17.70.080 of this chapter.
   GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A civil engineer registered in the state of Utah with
training and experience in soil engineering.
   GRADING: Any excavating or filling or combination thereof.
   GRADING PLANS: A topographic development plan prepared by a registered civil
engineer showing contours for before and after grading which do not exceed one
foot (1') intervals.
   LETTER REPORT: A simplified geologic report used in relation to areas of
relatively stable soil and rock as required by section
17.70.070 of this chapter.
   NATURAL FEATURES: Nonmanmade land characteristics that include drainage
swales, wetlands and concentrated native stands of large shrubs or trees.
   NATURAL STATE: Portion of any lot or parcel, which cannot be subjected to
grading, removal of vegetation or building development.
   OPEN SPACE: Primary and secondary conservation areas and other land
conserved or set aside from development such as, but not limited to, public or
private parks, trails, landscaped buffers, wetlands, pastures, farm fields and
other lands forming part of the ecologically connected matrix of natural areas.
   POSSIBLE WETLAND AREA (PWA): Lands that are generally inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency or duration to support and that under
normal circumstances to support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
   SENSITIVE LAND AREAS: All areas shown in the city's sensitive land area map,
the city's storm drainage map or identified as a sensitive land area by the
Farr West City engineer or the Farr West City building official.
   SITE: Any lot or parcel of land.
   SURFACE DRAINAGE: Water runoff caused as a result of precipitation or
irrigation.
   WETLANDS: Any lands designated as wetlands by the United States army corps
of engineers (USACE) or other agency of the federal government. Wetlands as
defined in section 404 of the clean water act. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.040: ACTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code it shall be unlawful
to grade, fill or excavate any land in any manner which creates an unreasonable
risk of erosion, flooding or any other unsafe condition.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code it shall be unlawful
to erect any structure which will not be reasonably safe for use as a human
habitation because of:
      1.   A high water table (water close to the surface);
      2.   Surface water;
      3.   Expansive soils;
      4.   Collapsible soils;
      5.   Wetlands;
      6.   Any other unsafe condition. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.050: PRESUMPTION:
Conditions described on the sensitive land area map, any geologic hazard maps
from a state or federal agency and aerial topography maps maintained by the
city engineer, together with explanatory material appurtenant thereto, shall be
presumed to exist. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.060: PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION BY BUILDING OFFICIAL AND CITY ENGINEER:
   A.   Upon application for a commercial development, residential subdivision
or building permit (if no subdivision application is required), the building
official shall identify potential sensitive land areas to the city engineer.
The city engineer shall then make a preliminary determination by reference to
the sensitive land area map and other materials maintained in the city
engineer's office of any geologic hazards that appear to exist on the real
property which is the subject of the application.
   B.   If the city engineer determines that no "geologic hazard" as defined in
section
17.70.030 of this chapter appears to exist in relation to the subject property,
then the application may proceed, as proposed, subject to the other
requirements of this code.
   C.   If the city engineer determines in accordance with this section that a
geologic hazard appears to exist in relation to the subject property, the
developer shall submit a geologic report prepared by a qualified engineering
geologist and/or a soils report prepared by a qualified geotechnical engineer
and comply with the remaining provisions of this chapter.
   D.   With respect to any proposal not requiring a geologic report, the city
engineer may require the developer to submit a letter report to resolve issues
with respect to the geologic condition of the subject property. A letter report
may be required even if the maps and materials maintained in the office of the
city engineer do not show any of the unsafe conditions described in section
17.70.040 of this chapter. The city engineer may withhold the determination
described in this section until the letter report has been received and based
on information on the letter report the city engineer may, for good cause,
require the submission of a geologic report. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.070: LETTER REPORT; CONTENTS:
A letter report is a simplified geologic report used in relation to areas of
relatively stable soil and rock. At a minimum it shall contain the following:
   A.   An analytical geologic description of the subject property in relation
to the development which is proposed thereon and in relation to adjoining
property;
   B.   A description of any requirements or restrictions, which should be
imposed on the proposal to avoid violation of the provisions of section
17.70.020 of this chapter;
   C.   A geologic sketch map and/or a geologic structure section diagram, if
relationships are complex and difficult to describe in writing;
   D.   The original signature and the registration number of the responsible
engineering geologist or geotechnical engineer and a statement of the methods
of study and approximate amount of field time spent by said geologist or
engineer in the preparation of the subject letter report.
   E.   The letter report shall include other information as the city engineer
shall reasonably require. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.080: GEOLOGIC REPORT:
   A.   A geologic report shall include maps and a report containing at a
minimum the following information:
      1.   The maps shall include:
         a.   The site location and regional setting of the subject property.
         b.   A site specific geologic map, which illustrates exposure to
geological and natural hazards, geotechnical limitations as identified in
section
17.70.030 of this chapter. The map shall illustrate the proposed site
modifications relative to geological and natural hazards and/or geotechnical
limitations that may impact the site. Any corrective site modification actions
necessary to mitigate or avoid hazards or limitations shall clearly be
identified on the map.
         c.   Maps shall use a scale of one inch equaling one hundred feet (1"
= 100'), with contour lines at five foot (5') intervals. Existing contours
shall be shown by dashed lines; proposed contours shall be shown as solid
lines. Boring logs, cross sections, and test trench logs, soil sample
descriptions and test results shall be included.
         d.   The city engineer may require additional maps or additional
detail on existing maps as reasonably necessary to evaluate actual or potential
geologic hazards.
      2.   The report shall include:
         a.   A description of the proposed grading, filling, excavation or
structure;
         b.   An analysis of the effects of the proposed grading, filling,
excavation or erection of a structure in relation to the geologic conditions
shown in the geologic maps;
         c.   With regard to a structure, an analysis of the manner in which
the same, as constructed, will be made reasonably safe for human habitation;
         d.   A California bearing ratio (CBR) value when roads are being
constructed and a soil bearing capacity where structures are being erected;
         e.   Any corrective or remedial action necessary to avoid a violation
of section
17.70.020 of this chapter, shall be described and analyzed in detail;
         f.   A list, including title, author and date, of all prior studies or
reports which are relied upon to make this report;
         g.   The city engineer may require additional information or analyses,
which are reasonably necessary to evaluate actual or potential geologic
hazards. This includes submittal of geologic reports to the state geologist for
review and comment.
   B.   In the case of a proposal to grade, fill or excavate, which is not
directly or indirectly related to a proposal to erect a structure for human
habitation, the city engineer may waive compliance with any requirement of this
section not relevant to the proposed grading, filling or excavating. (Ord. 12-
07)
17.70.090: ENGINEER/GEOLOGIST QUALIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATE:
   A.   A letter report (described in section
17.70.070 of this chapter) or a geologic report (described in section
17.70.080 of this chapter) shall be approved and signed by one of the
following, whose primary area of expertise is required to address the
particular issue:
      1.   A geotechnical engineer who shall be a registered professional
engineer in the state of Utah, qualified by training and experience in the
application of the principles of soil mechanics to foundation investigation and
site development; or
      2.   An engineering geologist who shall be a graduate in geology or
engineering geology from an accredited university with at least five (5) years
of professional geologic experience of which at least three (3) full years
shall be in the field of engineering geology.
   B.   A letter report or a geologic report shall contain the following
certificate:
CERTIFICATE I hereby certify that I am a geotechnical engineer or an
engineering geologist, as those terms are defined in Section
 17.70.030 , of the Farr West City Municipal Code. I have examined the letter
report/geologic report to which this certificate is attached and the
information and conclusions contained therein are, with any reasonable
reservation not stated therein, accurate and complete. All procedures and tests
used in said letter report/geologic report meet minimum applicable professional
standards.
       
SIGNATURE/DATE
   C.   In addition to any applicable private civil remedies, it shall be
unlawful to knowingly make a false, untrue or incomplete statement in a letter
report; or a geologic report or to sign the certificate described above knowing
the same to be materially false or not true. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.100: POSTCONSTRUCTION INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION:
For any real property with respect to which development has proceeded on the
basis of a letter report or a geologic report which has been acknowledged by
the city engineer, no final inspection shall be completed or certificate of
occupancy issued or performance bond released until the engineer or geologist
who signed and approved that letter report or geologic report shall further
certify that the completed improvements and structures conform to the
descriptions and requirements contained in said letter or report. Provided,
however, that improvements and structures may, with the consent of the city
engineer, deviate from the descriptions and requirements contained in the
letter report or geologic report because of conditions which are discovered
after acknowledgment by the city engineer of the letter report or geologic
report. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.110: APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CITY ENGINEER:
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the city engineer made under this
chapter, may appeal the same within ten (10) days thereof to the city council
which shall resolve the appeal in accordance with requirements of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-703(2). (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.120: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS REQUIRED:
   A.   If a letter report or a geologic report has been submitted to the city
engineer, no subdivision or other development plat or plan shall be approved
and no building permits shall be issued for construction of a structure until
the owner(s) of the subject real property have signed and delivered to Farr
West City a restrictive covenant in a form suitable for recording containing
not less than the following:
      1.   A complete description of the geologic condition of the subject real
property, including references to relevant reports and studies;
      2.   A description of the grading, filling or excavating or erection of a
structure for human habitation, garage or accessory building approved in the
letter report or geologic report which has been acknowledged by the city
engineer, together with the requirements and restrictions imposed thereon;
A covenant and agreement enforceable by Farr West City, adjoining landowners
and any subsequent owner of the subject real property that only the grading,
filling or excavating or erection of a structure in the acknowledged letter
report or geologic report will be constructed or maintained without further
compliance with this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 12-
07)
17.70.130: CIVIL AND CRIMINAL FRAUD:
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the seller or the seller's
representative, directly or indirectly in connection with the sale or offering
for sale of real property located in Farr West City, to make any untrue
statement of a material fact related to the geologic condition of the subject
property. This section shall be construed to create private and public civil
causes or action in addition to creating criminal liability. (Ord. 12-07)
17.70.140: HIGH WATER TABLE AND WETLAND AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Development in high water table, possible wetland areas and wetlands
shall be subject to all applicable local, state and federal regulations
including, but not limited to, army corps of engineers wetland delineation, the
Farr West comprehensive stormwater ordinance and the following standards:
      1.   Wetlands and natural drainages shall not be included as part of any
buildable development unless allowed to be mitigated pursuant to applicable
law. Lots within the residential or agricultural zones may include wetlands as
part of the lot provided there is sufficient buildable area to accommodate the
proposed use.
      2.   Where determined by the planning commission or city council, wetland
areas may be required to be fenced.
      3.   Prior to the acceptance of an application for preliminary
development plan in the designated area, it must be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the city engineer that the conditions and requirements
contained herein can be met. Such petition, submission or application shall be
made through the city.
      4.   Prior to acceptance by the city of an application for preliminary
development plan in the specified area, it must be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the city that all of the conditions specified in this chapter
have been fully met and accomplished.
   B.   No building shall be allowed to be constructed in a high water table
area of the city where the building proposed to be built includes a basement
(basement equals usable floor area below sidewalk level) except according to
the following. Prior to the issuance of any building permit with a basement,
the developer therefor shall submit to the building inspector a certificate
from a registered professional engineer indicating the method or design to
floodproof the basement except where prohibited by subdivision or development
plat conditions. (Ord. 12-07)
CHAPTER 17.80
WATERWISE LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
17.80.010: Purpose
17.80.020: Commercial and Manufacturing Zones
17.80.030: Residential Zones
17.80.040: Commercial, Manufacturing and Residential Zones
17.80.050: Existing Commercial, Manufacturing and Residential Properties
17.80.060: Conflict Between Code Sections
17.80.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish landscaping requirements which will
promote water conservation practices in all zones. (Ord. 2022-08, 6-2-2022)
17.80.020: COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONES:
   A.   Beginning July 1, 2022 the required setbacks and areas not used for a
building, parking or access are required to be landscaped before occupancy of
the building or site is allowed. If occupancy is approved after October 1st,
then the landscaping must be installed before July 1st of the following year.
   B.   Beginning July 1, 2022 turf is not permitted in parking strips, on
slopes greater than twenty-five percent (25%), or in areas less than eight feet
wide. Turf area shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total landscaped
area. Turf shall not be installed between June 15 and September 1. Drought
tolerant landscaping and a reduction of the use of turf is encouraged. (Ord.
2022-08, 6-2-2022)
17.80.030: RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   A.   Beginning July 1, 2022 the front yard area is required to be landscaped
within twelve (12) months of the approval of occupancy.
   B.   Beginning July 1, 2022, turf is not permitted in parking strips, on
slopes greater than twenty-five percent (25%), or in areas less than eight feet
wide. Turf area shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the front and
side yard landscape area.
   C.   Vegetable garden plots should be irrigated in a manner suitable to the
crop being watered. Exercising prudence in water conservation and abiding by
city and/or Water Conservation District recommendations is encouraged. (Ord.
2022-08, 6-2-2022)
17.80.040: COMMERCIAL, MANUFACTURING AND RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
All commercial, manufacturing and residential development and construction
approved after July 1, 2022, shall comply with the following landscaping
requirements:
   A.   Drip irrigation must be used outside of turf areas excluding vegetable
gardens.
   B.   Irrigation zones shall be established in order to irrigate landscapes
with similar site, slope, and plant materials with similar watering needs and
watering times (i.e., lawn and planting beds shall be irrigated in separate
zones). Drip irrigation systems and sprinklers shall not be located on the same
irrigation zone. Combinations of differing sprinkler heads shall not be located
on the same irrigation zone.
   C.   WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controllers, equipped with rain
delay, shall be installed.
   D.   Mulch or other natural material is encouraged in planting beds. (Ord.
2022-08, 6-2-2022)
17.80.050: EXISTING COMMERCIAL, MANUFACTURING AND RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES:
Farr West City encourages all properties with landscaping installed prior to
July 1, 2022 to:
   A.   Install WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controllers, equipped with
rain delay.
   B.   Remove turf from park strip.
   C.   Only irrigate between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) PM and ten
o’clock (10:00) AM.
   D.   Follow all recommendations for water conservation. (Ord. 2022-08, 6-2-
2022)
17.80.060: CONFLICT BETWEEN CODE SECTIONS:
In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between this Chapter 17.80 and
other chapters of the Farr West City Municipal Code, this Chapter 17.80 shall
govern. (Ord. 2022-08, 6-2-2022)
