CITY CODE
of
FERRON CITY, UTAH
1998
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-5, passed 12-17-2025; and
Res. 2024-3, passed 3-6-2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Ferron, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 2025-5, passed December 17, 2025; and resolution 2024-
3, passed March 6, 2024. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after
said ordinance and resolution supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
FERRON CITY ORDINANCE NO. 10-27-98
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY OF FERRON, UTAH MUNICIPAL CODE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FERRON, UTAH, AS
FOLLOWS:
Section 1:   From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Ferron, Utah, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
Section 2:   There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
Section 3:   All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
Section 4:   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5:   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6:   This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 27 day of October, 1998.
PUBLIC HEARING HELD 10-13-98.
POSTED in three public places this 28 day of October, 1998.
[IMAGE]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Incorporation Of Statutes
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of Ferron. This City Code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the FERRON CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1979 Code § 1-001; amd. 1998
Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1998 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code. (1998 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the City
Recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the City Recorder. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and
shall be returned to the office of the City Recorder when directed so to do by
order of the City Council. (1998 Code)
1-1-5: INCORPORATION OF STATUTES:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this Code,
unless the provisions of this Code specifically include, incorporate or make
the citation or statute part of this Code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the City
Council. (1979 Code § 1-009)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the City passed prior
to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are
included in this City Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances. (1998 Code)
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this Section, shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (1979 Code § 1-003)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1998 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1998 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1979 Code § 1-007; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The use of any
verb in the present tense shall include the future and past tense when
applicable. (1998 Code)
   B.   All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to
the common use and understanding of the language; the technical words and
phrases and such other words and phrases as may have acquired a particular
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such particular
meaning. (1979 Code § 1-005A)
   C.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1998 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BUSINESS: Includes any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or
enterprise for which a license or permit is required by any ordinance of the
City.
CITY: The City of Ferron, Emery County, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of
Ferron, Utah.
CITY RECORDER: The individual appointed to act as the City Recorder of the
City.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Ferron, Utah.
COUNTY: Emery County, Utah.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Ferron".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
HIGHWAY; ROAD: Includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words
"county way", "county road", "common road", and "State road".
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation. The term "license" includes any certificate, permit or license
issued by the City.
LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no
reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or required shall be within
the boundaries of this City.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS OR OFFICIALS: Any elected or appointed person employed by the City,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Whenever reference is made in
this Code to a City officer or official by title only, this shall be construed
as though followed by the words "of the City of Ferron".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done
in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time
for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for the
expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The State of Utah.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places, sidewalks, gutters and culverts, crosswalks and
intersections.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
TIME COMPUTED: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any
ordinance or in any resolution or order of the City, when expressed in days,
shall be determined by excluding the first day and including the last day,
except if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the last day shall
be the day next following such Sunday or legal holiday which is not a Sunday or
legal holiday. When time is expressed in hours, Sunday and all legal holidays
shall be excluded.
WEEK: Shall be construed to mean any seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1979 Code § 1-005; amd. 1998 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1979 Code § 1-006; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 : Unless otherwise specifically
authorized by statute, the City Council may provide a penalty for the violation
of any City ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum Class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301, or by a term of imprisonment
up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The City
Council may prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any City ordinance
and may impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of City property,
including, but not limited to, the use of parks, streets, and other public
grounds or equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially followed.
(1998 Code)
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a Class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a Class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days. (1979 Code § 1-322)
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture, and disqualification, or any combination. (1979
Code § 1-323; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a Class C misdemeanor. (1979 Code §
1-323)
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person convicted of an offense may, in addition
to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a Class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) when the conviction is of a Class C misdemeanor conviction or
infraction conviction. (1979 Code § 1-331; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this Code, or the ordinances of the City, or for an offense
defined outside of this Code over which this City has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a Class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a Class C misdemeanor conviction or for an
infraction conviction. (1979 Code § 3-332; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 10-3-703.
2 2. U.C.A. § 76-3-204.
3 3. U.C.A. § 76-3-205.
4 4. U.C.A. § 76-3-301.
5 1. U.C.A. § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this Code or the
ordinances of this City shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date hereof which involve an
offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance with this
Chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1979 Code § 1-311)
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions. (1979 Code § 1-312)
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this Code or any ordinance of this City when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a Class B
misdemeanor. (1979 Code § 1-313)
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this Code or other
ordinances of this City, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this Code or other ordinances of this City which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction. (1979 Code § 1-314)
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this Code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1979 Code § 1-315)
 
Notes
1 2. U.C.A. § 76-3-104.
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-5-2: Membership; Terms
1-5-3: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-5-4: Municipal Administration
1-5-5: Meetings; Procedure And Conduct
1-5-6: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a City office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately
before the date of the election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the City meets the
residency requirement of this subsection if that person resided within the area
annexed to the City for at least one year before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to City office shall be a
registered voter in the City.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the City shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the City during his term of office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the City establishes
his principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
20A-2-105 outside of the City during his term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected City officer is absent from
the City any time during his term of office for a continuous period of more
than sixty (60) days without the consent of the City Council, the City office
is automatically vacant. (1979 Code § 3-301; amd. 1998 Code)
1-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Composition: The City Council shall be a Council of six (6) persons,
one of whom shall be the Mayor and the remaining five (5) shall be
Councilmembers. (1979 Code § 3-105; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Election; Terms: The election and terms of office of the officers shall
be as follows:
      1.   The offices of Mayor and two (2) Councilmembers shall be filled in
Municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
      2.   The offices of the other three (3) Councilmembers shall be filled in
a Municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
      3.   The offices shall be filled in at-large elections which shall be
held at the time and the manner provided for electing Municipal officers. (1979
Code § 3-205; amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   Where both two (2) year and four (4) year terms are to be filled by
election or appointment, the election ballot or appointment shall clearly state
which persons are to be elected or appointed to the shorter term and to the
longer term. (1979 Code § 3-207; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or City Council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (1979 Code § 3-302; amd.
1998 Code)
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Administration Vested In Mayor: The administrative powers, authority
and duties are vested in the Mayor. (1979 Code § 3-808; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The Mayor shall be the
chairperson and preside at the meetings of the City Council. In the absence of
the Mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act, the City Council may
elect a member of the City Council to preside over the meeting as Mayor Pro
Tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Mayor during his
absence or disability. The election of a Mayor Pro Tempore shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting. (1979 Code § 3-403; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Voting; No Vote Except In Tie: The Mayor shall not vote, except in the
case of a tie vote of the City Council. (1979 Code § 3-402; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Powers And Duties: The Mayor shall:
      1.   Be the chief executive officer to whom all employees of the City
shall report;
      2.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the City;
      3.   Remit fines and forfeitures and may release any person imprisoned
for violation of any City ordinance;
      4.   Report such remittance or release to the City Council at its next
regular session;
      5.   Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
      6.   Ensure that all the laws and ordinances and resolutions are
faithfully executed and observed;
      7.   May at any reasonable time examine and inspect the books, papers,
records or documents of the City or of any officer, employee or agent of the
City;
      8.   Report to the City Council the condition of the City and recommend
for City Council consideration any measures as deemed to be in the best
interests of the City;
      9.   When necessary, call on the residents of the City over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the State and
ordinances of the City; and
      10.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the City Council, persons
to fill City offices or vacancies on commissions or committees of the City.
(1979 Code § 3-809; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   No Veto: The Mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute. (1979 Code § 3-
404; amd. 1998 Code)
1-5-4: MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Prescribe Additional Powers And Duties: The City Council may, by
resolution, prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any
elected or appointed official which are not prohibited by any specific statute,
except that the Mayor may not serve as City Recorder and neither the Mayor nor
the City Recorder may serve as City Treasurer. (1979 Code § 3-810; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Members Of Council May Be Appointed To Administration: The Mayor may,
with the advice and consent of the majority of the City Council, assign or
appoint any member of the City Council to administer one or more departments of
the City and shall by ordinance provide the salary for the administrator. (1979
Code § 3-811; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Change Of Duties: The Mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of
the City Council, change the administrative assignment of any member of the
City Council who is serving in any administrative position in the City
government. (1979 Code § 3-812; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   General Administrative Powers: The City Council shall, from time to
time, prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by the superintendents,
supervisors, department directors and all of its officers and employees. (1979
Code § 3-813; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Personnel Assigned To One Or More Departments: The City Council may
assign any individual to one or more positions in one or more departments.
(1979 Code § 3-814; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Rules And Regulations For Administration: The City Council shall
prescribe rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with the laws of
this State, as it deems best for the efficient administration, organization,
conduct and business of the City. (1979 Code § 3-815; amd. 1998 Code)
   G.   Appointed Officers; Residency Requirements: The City Council may
require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the City.
(1979 Code § 3-816; amd. 1998 Code)
1-5-5: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   The City Council shall conduct two (2) regular meetings, which shall
be held on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at Ferron City Hall.
      2.   The meetings held on the dates specified in the foregoing subsection
shall begin promptly at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided, that:
         a.   If the meeting date is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be
held at the same time and place above described on the next day which is not a
legal holiday or cancelled.
         b.   The City Council may, by resolution, provide for a different time
and place for holding regular meetings of the City Council. (1979 Code § 3-502;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the City requires a
special meeting of the City Council, such meeting may be ordered by the Mayor
or any two (2) members of the City Council. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the City Council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours'
notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the City
Recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice
personally or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The personal
appearance by a Councilmember at any specially called meeting constitutes a
waiver of the notice required in this subsection. (1979 Code § 3-503; amd. 1998
Code)
   C.   Open Meetings: Every meeting is open to the public, unless closed
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-4 and 52-4-5. (1979 Code § 3-601;
amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Quorum:
      1.   Defined: The number of members of the City Council necessary to
constitute a quorum is three (3) or more. (1979 Code § 3-505; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Necessary: No action of the City Council shall be official or of any
effect, except when a quorum of the members is present. Fewer than a quorum may
adjourn from time to time. (1979 Code § 3-504; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Voting:
      1.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the City and in any other case at the request of any member of the City Council
by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance
shall be in writing before the vote is taken. (1979 Code § 3-507; amd. 1998
Code)
      2.   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of votes required to pass
any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the City Council, unless
otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the quorum,
but shall never be less than three (3).
         a.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the City Council having
fewer favorable votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and
invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority
vote of the City Council even though such majority vote is less than that
required herein.
         b.   A majority of the members of the City Council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the City Council. (1979 Code § 3-508; amd. 1998
Code)
      3.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the City Council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the City Council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(1979 Code § 3-509; amd. 1998 Code)
1-5-6: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The City Council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the City shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (1979 Code § 3-702; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Penalty For Violation: Unless otherwise specifically authorized by
statute, the City Council may provide a penalty for the violation of any City
ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum Class B misdemeanor fine under
Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6)
months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The City Council may
prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any City ordinance and may
impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of City property, including,
but not limited to, the use of parks, streets and other public grounds or
equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially followed. (1979 Code
§ 3-703; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the City Council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states "Be it ordained by the City of
Ferron:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
City ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this Section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the Mayor or Acting Mayor to sign the
ordinance;
      9.   A place for the City Recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
Seal of the City; and
      10.   Where the Mayor may disapprove an ordinance passed by the City
Council, the ordinance must show that it was passed with the Mayor's approval
or that if the Mayor disapproved the ordinance, that it was passed over his
disapproval. If the Mayor neither approves nor disapproves an ordinance, the
ordinance should show that it became effective without the approval or
disapproval of the Mayor. (1979 Code § 3-704; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the City Council shall be signed by
the Mayor, or if he is absent, by the Mayor Pro Tempore, or by a quorum of the
City Council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (1979 Code § 3-705; amd.
1998 Code)
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the City Council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance. (1979 Code § 3-712; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days
after final passage by the City Council, whichever is sooner. (1979 Code § 3-
705; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances: All ordinances, except those
enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710,
before taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the City Recorder and
a short summary of the ordinance published at least once in a newspaper
published within the City, or if there is no newspaper published therein, then
by posting complete copies in three (3) public places within the City. Any
ordinance, code or book, other than the State Code, relating to building or
safety standards, City functions, administration, control or regulations, may
be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting, if
reference is made to the code or book and at least three (3) copies have been
filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder
prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the City Council. Any State law
relating to building or safety standards, City functions, administration,
control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting if reference is made to the State Code. The ordinance
adopting the code or book shall be published in the manner provided in Utah
Code Annotated sections 10-3-709 and 10-3-710. (1979 Code § 3-711; amd. 1998
Code)
   F.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage:
      1.   The City Recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the City Council. The City Recorder shall
give each ordinance a number, if the City Council has not already so done.
Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the City
Recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of
passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
(1979 Code § 3-713; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   The City Recorder, insofar as possible, shall assign all ordinances
of a general nature a number, which shall conform to the numbering system used
in this Code and shall indicate upon the face of the ordinance the date
adopted.
      3.   The City Recorder shall keep all ordinances of a local, private or
temporary nature, including franchises, grants, dedication, bond issues and tax
levies, in a separate book of "special ordinances" properly indexed and
organized according to date adopted. The first number of such an ordinance
shall be the last two (2) digits of the year the ordinance is adopted, followed
by a dash which is followed by a number indicating the order in which such
special ordinance was adopted during the year.
      4.   Failure to comply with this subsection shall not affect or render
invalid any ordinance of the City. (1979 Code § 1-008)
   G.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the City Council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) establishing charges for garbage
collection and fees charged for City services; c) establishing personnel
policies and guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the City
property. Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
(1979 Code § 3-717; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the City Council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
(1979 Code § 3-718; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the City Council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (1979 Code § 3-
719; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
1-6-2: Compensation
1-6-3: Bond Requirements
1-6-4: Oaths
1-6-5: Official Neglect And Misconduct
1-6-6: City Recorder And City Treasurer
1-6-7: City Attorney
1-6-8: Private Work Prohibited
1-6-9: Discharge Or Transfer; Appeal Board
1-6-10:    Electronic Meetings For City Council, Boards, Commissions And
Committees
1-6-11:    City Vehicles Driver Qualification Program
1-6-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES:
   A.   Offices Created By Council: The city council may create any office
deemed necessary for the government of the city and provide for filling
vacancies in elective and appointive offices. (1979 Code § 3-901; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Mayor To Appoint And Fill Vacancies: The mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council, may appoint and fill vacancies in all offices
provided for by law or ordinance.
   C.   Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office
until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1979 Code § 3-916; amd.
1998 Code)
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Elected And Statutory Officials:
      1.   Elected Officials: Shall receive compensation in the amount of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per month.
      2.   Mayor: Shall receive compensation in the amount of four hundred
dollars ($400.00) per month.
      3.   Statutory Officials: Beginning compensation will be paid on an
hourly basis. Beginning salary six dollars fifty cents ($6.50) per hour
minimum, nine dollars ($9.00) per hour midrange, and seventeen dollars ($17.00)
per hour maximum. (Ord. 6-22-93, 6-8-1993; amd. Ord. 6-9-98-3, 6-9-1998; 1998
Code; Ord. 2002-4, 6-5-2002)
The compensation for statutory officials shall be determined through a
performance evaluation process conducted by the mayor, using the aforementioned
schedule in coordination with the annual budgeting process. Any changes will be
approved through and included in the annual budget. (Ord. 6-22-93, 6-8-1993)
   B.   Serving Two Or More Positions: Whenever any person serves in two (2) or
more positions either as officers or employees of this city, unless otherwise
specifically provided in the employment agreement, by ordinance or by
resolution, that person shall receive the salary or compensation of the office
or employment paying the greater amount.
   C.   Reimbursement For Travel Expenses: In addition to all other
compensation or salaries, any officer or employee of the city may receive,
following the submission to the city recorder of a claim, travel expenses and
per diem established by the Utah state department of finance for expense
actually incurred by the person for attending any meeting, conference, seminar
or training session, provided attendance shall have been approved by the city
council. (1979 Code § 3-818; amd. 1998 Code)
1-6-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Approval Of Bonds: The bonds of the council members shall be approved
by the mayor and the bond of the mayor shall be approved by the city council at
the first meeting of the city council in January following a city election.
(1979 Code § 3-822; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Premium Paid By City: The premium charged by a corporate surety for any
bond required by the city shall be paid by the city. (1979 Code § 3-823; amd.
1998 Code)
   C.   Additional Bonds: The city council may at any time require further and
additional bonds of any or all officers elected or appointed. All bonds given
by the officers, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be filed with the
City Recorder, except that the bond of the City Recorder shall be filed with
the City Treasurer. (1979 Code § 3-825; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Bond Amounts: Before taking the oath of office and entering on the
duties of their respective office, the following named City officials shall
each give a bond with good and sufficient securities, payable to the City,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their office and the
payment of all monies received by such officers according to law and the
ordinances of the City, in the following amounts:
 
Elected officials Blanket bond
City Treasurer    $50,000.00
City Recorder     20,000.00
 
   (1979 Code § 3-819A; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Treasurer's Bond:
      1.   The City Treasurer's bond, or the bond of any person who acts as
City Treasurer, may be set by resolution or ordinance in any amount, not less
than that established by the State Money Management Council. (1979 Code § 3-
821; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   The Treasurer's bond shall be superseded by any rule, regulation or
directive of the State Money Management Council when such rule, regulation or
directive is binding on the City. (1979 Code § 3-819B)
   F.   Blanket Bond: The bond required in this section may be a blanket bond.
(1979 Code § 3-819D)
1-6-4: OATHS:
   A.   Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or
appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. (1979 Code § 3-827;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be
administered by any judge, notary public or by the City Recorder. Elected
officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering
on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Recorder.
(1979 Code § 3-828; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any City officer shall
be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (1979 Code
§ 3-829; amd. 1998 Code)
1-6-5: OFFICIAL NEGLECT AND MISCONDUCT:
In case any City officer shall at any time wilfully omit to perform any duty,
or wilfully and corruptly be guilty of oppression, malconduct, misfeasance or
malfeasance in office, the person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor 1 , shall
be removed from office and is not eligible for any City office thereafter.
(1979 Code § 3-826; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 76-3-204 for penalty provisions.
1-6-6: CITY RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the Offices of City
Recorder and City Treasurer. (Ord. 2017-1, 7-13-2017)
   B.   Ex Officio Auditor: The City Recorder is ex officio City Auditor and
shall perform the duties of that office.
   C.   Public Treasurer Investment Fund:
      1.   Ferron City participates in the PTIF (Public Treasurer Investment
Fund) account;
      2.   Ferron is required by the Utah Office of State Treasurer to
designate two (2) managers of the PTIF account;
      3.   Ferron City desires for the City Treasurer and City Recorder to
manage the cash flow and funds of the city on a day to day basis as allowed by
their respective job descriptions; and
      4.   Ferron City Council hereby adopts the attached Office of the State
Treasurer Public Entity Resolution designating the City Recorder and City
Treasurer as individuals authorized to make changes and make transactions to
the Ferron City PTIF accounts. (1979 Code § 3-916; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2017-1,
7-13-2017; Res. 2018-6, 6-14-2018)
1-6-7: CITY ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney may prosecute violations of City ordinances, and under State
law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring within the boundaries of the City
and has the same powers in respect to the violations as are exercised by a
County Attorney, including, but not limited to, granting immunity to witnesses.
The City Attorney shall represent the interests of the State or the City in the
appeal of any matter prosecuted in any trial court by the City Attorney. (1979
Code § 3-928; amd. 1998 Code)
1-6-8: PRIVATE WORK PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any employee of the City to authorize or render
services or City equipment for use on any private person's property and which
is a benefit to such private person, including snow removal, sewer or water
line repair or transporting garbage. (1998 Code)
1-6-9: DISCHARGE OR TRANSFER; APPEAL BOARD:
   A.   Applicability: All appointed officers and employees of the City, other
than employees of the Fire Department, heads of departments and superintendents
shall hold their employment without limitation of time, being subject to
discharge or dismissal only as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 5-10-83, 5-10-1983;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Appeal Board:
      1.   Created; Membership: There is hereby created an Appeal Board, to
consist of five (5) members, two (2) of whom shall be members of the City
Council and three (3) of whom shall be employees of the City.
      2.   Conflicts: No member of the Appeal Board shall be employed by or
administer the department for which the appealing employee works or shall be
related to the appealing employee through blood or marriage.
      3.   Employee Members Chosen; Alternate: On the first Tuesday of each new
calendar year, or as needed, the City employees shall choose three (3) of their
members to serve on the Appeal Board. One alternate shall also be chosen in
case one of the three (3) members of the Board is unable to serve due to the
restrictions of subsection B2 of this Section.
      4.   Councilmembers Chosen: At the first regularly scheduled City Council
meeting of each new calendar year, or as needed, the City Council will choose
two (2) of its members to serve on the Appeal Board.
      5.   Right Of Appeal: In all cases where an employee is discharged or
transferred from one position to another for less remuneration for any reason,
the employee shall have the right to appeal such discharge or transfer in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1106, as amended.
      6.   Procedure: All appeals involving discharge or transfer to another
position of less remuneration shall be processed according to the procedure set
forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1106, as amended. (Res. 10-14-97, 10-
14-1997)
1-6-10: ELECTRONIC MEETINGS FOR CITY COUNCIL, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND
COMMITTEES:
It is here by the policy of Ferron City that elected and appointed
representatives, staff and members of Ferron City Council, Boards, Commissions
and Committees may participate in meetings through electronic means. Any form
of telecommunications may be used, as long as it allows for real time
interaction in the way of discussions, questions and answers, and voting.
   A.   Any public body of Ferron City may, by following the procedures and
requirements of this resolution and those outlined by state law, convene and
conduct an electronic meeting.
   B.   Quorum:
      1.   A quorum must be present at the anchor location for a meeting to
take place.
      2.   Members participating via telecommunications are to be considered
present for purposes of establishing a quorum, as defined by law.
      3.   In the event of failure of equipment, or other factors, which causes
a lack of communications with a member(s) causing the lack of a quorum, no
additional business may be conducted until the quorum can be reconstructed.
      4.   Continuances may be granted as set forth by law.
      5.   Business already conducted remains binding.
      6.   At the discretion of the public body, public participation may be
expanded to include electronic participation by members of the public.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   The meeting procedures and meeting notice procedures to be followed
at the electronic meeting shall be the same as those followed by the public
body in a non-electronic meeting.
      2.   A speakerphone, or similar amplifying electronic device, will be
connected in such a manner that comments made by the members participating
electronically will be broadcast at the anchor location.
      3.   Discussions of motions and votes will take place in accordance with
usual procedures with the exception that those resent electronically must
declare their intent verbally with their accompanying name(s).
      4.   Minutes of the meeting shall record the presence of members
participating through electronic means. The roll call for members present will
be taken verbally and recorded.
      5.   If possible, public body members shall give at least twenty-four
(24) hour notice to the City Recorder that they will be attending the meeting
via electronically. (Res. 2016-3, 5-12-2016)
1-6-11: CITY VEHICLES DRIVER QUALIFICATION PROGRAM:
   A.   All employees or volunteers operating Ferron City owned vehicles, or
who may operate any vehicle while conducting business for or on behalf of
Ferron City must be authorized drivers. The authorization process requires an
analysis by the Fleet Manager of the employee's driving record to ensure
compliance with the driver qualification standard as identified in this policy.
The City Recorder, (435)384-2350, recorder@ferroncity.org, is the Fleet
Manager.
   B.   As part of the driver qualification process, all drivers or potential
drivers' Motor Vehicle Record (MVR) will be screened and monitored on an
ongoing basis to ensure the standard is met and maintained. Drivers will be
qualified as “Acceptable,” “Unacceptable” or “Borderline.” Drivers qualified as
“Borderline” may be authorized to drive on a probationary basis as determined
by the Fleet Manager. Drivers whose records do not meet the driver
qualification standard will not be authorized to operate any vehicle on behalf
of Ferron City.
   C.   All drivers must possess a valid Driver's License. Required
endorsements must also be maintained. The driver qualification evaluation will
be based on the driver's MVR and will also take into account the results of
skills assessments and work-related motor vehicle incidents, whether or not the
incident has been recorded on the driver's MVR. All violations recorded on the
MVR, whether they occurred on the job or not, are included in the driver
qualification evaluation.
   D.   “Acceptable” or “Borderline” qualifications will be determined using
the following criteria. Any number of violations or accidents in excess of the
“Borderline” criteria constitutes a failure to meet the driver qualification
standard resulting in revocation of driver authorization. (Note - DUI and DWI
are not evaluated as a standard violation).
      1.   Acceptable:
         a.   Up to two (2) violations recorded on the MVR;
         b.   Up to one (1) at fault work related accident in the prior three
(3) years; or
         c.   A combination of one (1) violation on the MVR and one (1) at
fault work related accident in the last three (3) years.
      2.   Borderline:
         a.   Three (3) violations recorded on the MVR;
         b.   Two (2) at fault work related accidents in the last three (3)
years;
         c.   DUI or DWI with in the last five (5) years; or
         d.   Any violation for Careless, Reckless or Distracted driving.
      3.   Unacceptable:
         a.   No valid driver license;
         b.   Recent DUI conviction; or
         c.   Four (4) or more violations recorded on the MVR.
   E.   A single major violation recorded on the MVR, or resulting from a work
related incident, may result in revocation of the drivers' qualification and
driver authorization. Major violations: include, but are not limited to:
      1.   DUI or DWI in the previous twenty-four (24) months;
      2.   Failure to stop/report an accident;
      3.   Making a false accident report;
      4.   Attempting to elude a law enforcement; or
      5.   Others as determined by the Fleet Manager. (Res. 2021-3, 2-10-2021)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Conduct
1-7-2: Primary Election; When Required
1-7-3: Campaign Finance Disclosure
1-7-1: CONDUCT:
Election for mayor and council members shall be conducted according to the
municipal election section of Utah Code Annotated sections 20A-9-404(1) and
(2). (Ord. 4-11-95, 4-11-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
1-7-2: PRIMARY ELECTION; WHEN REQUIRED:
This section provides for the candidates for mayor and council members to be
nominated at a primary election if required. A primary election will be held
only when the number of candidates filing for an office exceeds twice the
number to be elected. The candidates nominated at the primary election, plus
candidates that were not required to run in the primary are to be placed on the
November ballot. (Ord. 4-11-95, 4-11-1995)
1-7-3: CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE:
   A.   General: All candidates for elective municipal office shall comply with
the campaign finance disclosure requirements set forth in this section.
   B.   Definitions: The following definitions shall be applicable to this
section:
    CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective
office of the city; or is nominated by a committee, party or petition; or
received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person
receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about
such person's nomination or election to such office; or causes on his/her
behalf, any written material or advertisement to be printed, published,
broadcast, distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek
such office.
   CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions such as in-kind
contributions and contributions of tangible things, but shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
   C.   Filing Of Disclosure Reports: Each candidate for elective office who
either receives more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in campaign
contributions or spends more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in
campaign expenses shall file with the city recorder dated and signed financial
reports which comply with this section. Forms shall be made available by the
city. Other forms in substantially the same format are also acceptable.
   D.   Time Of Filing: The reports required by this section shall be filed at
least seven (7) days before both the primary and general elections and at least
once within thirty (30) days following the final election. A candidate losing
in the primary election shall file the final report within thirty (30) days of
the date of the primary election.
   E.   Contents Of Statement:
      1.   The statements filed seven (7) days before the election shall
include:
         a.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received by the candidate, and the name of the donor,
         b.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00)
or less received by the candidate; and
         c.   A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the
campaign period as of ten (10) days before the date of the election, and the
recipient of each expense.
      2.   The statement filed thirty (30) days after the elections shall
include:
         a.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the name of the donor;
         b.   A total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less
received by the candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven
(7) days before the election.
         c.   A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the
candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the recipient of each expense.
      3.   All contributions and expenditures related to the candidate's
candidacy should be accounted for between the pre- election and post-election
statement.
   F.   Penalty For Noncompliance: Any candidate who fails to comply with the
provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2001-1, 3-13-2001)
CHAPTER 8
PURCHASING AND SURPLUS PROPERTY POLICY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Definitions
1-8-2: Administration
1-8-3: Competitive Bidding Requirements
1-8-4: Exemptions To Competitive Bidding Requirements
1-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms as used in this Chapter or the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall have the following
meanings:
ADEQUATE APPROPRIATION BALANCE: Sufficient fund balance which must exist in the
line item appropriation of the account number against which the purchase order
is to be charged.
BIDDING: Procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from
various prospective suppliers of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
CITY PROPERTY: Any item of real or personal property owned by the City.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Public works projects and other professional services
such as auditing, or other consulting services.
ESTIMATES OF REQUIREMENTS: Forecasts of future requirements of supplies,
equipment or contractual services submitted by the Mayor.
PURCHASE ORDERS: Official document used in committing City funds toward the
purchase of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
REQUISITIONS: Standard forms used by the City providing detailed information as
to quantity, description, estimated price, recommended supplier and signature
authorization for requested purchases.
RESPONSIBLE BID: An offer, submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish
supplies, equipment or contractual services in conformity with the
specification, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements included in
the invitation for bids.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who submits a responsible bid; who has furnished,
when requested, information and data to prove that his financial resources,
production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are
adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies, equipment or
contractual services on which he bids; and who has not violated or attempted to
violate any provisions of this Chapter.
SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT: Any and all articles or things which shall
be furnished to, used by, or disposed of by, the City. (Res. 4-14-92-1, 4-14-
1992)
1-8-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The Mayor shall coordinate with the City Recorder to act as the City Purchasing
Agent. The Mayor and City Recorder shall have the authority and it shall be
their duty to perform, except as limited by subsequent sections of this policy;
the following:
   A.   System Management: Administer and maintain the purchasing system and
other rules and regulations established by this Chapter and its authority.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: Recommend to the City such new or revised
purchasing rules and regulations as desirable and in conformance with other
statutory requirements, and to interpret the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Contracts: Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the
purchase of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
   D.   Competition: Seek to obtain as full and open competition as possible on
all purchases.
   E.   Developments: Keep informed of current developments in the field of
purchasing.
   F.   Forms: Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the
operation of this policy.
   G.   Supervision: Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment to
assure conformance with specifications.
   H.   Records: Maintain a bidder's information, vendor's catalog file and
other records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing system.
   I.   Appropriation: See that no purchase is made without an adequate
appropriation balance. (Res. 4-14-92-1, 4-14-1992)
1-8-3: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
Except as hereinafter provided, purchases of supplies, equipment and letting of
contracts shall follow one of the following procedures:
   A.   Formal Contract Procedure: Except as otherwise provided herein,
purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services of an estimated value
greater than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) shall be by written contract
with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure hereinafter
prescribed.
      1.   Approval Of Specifications: Prior to seeking bids for equipment or
contractual services having a unit cost in excess of eight thousand dollars
($8,000.00), action of the Mayor and City Council shall be required to approve
specifications and to authorize advertising for bids.
      2.   Notice Inviting Bids: Notice inviting bids shall include a general
description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.
         a.   Published Notice: Notices inviting bids shall be published at
least five (5) days before the date of the opening of the bids. Notices shall
be published at least once in the newspaper of general circulation or posted in
three (3) public places throughout the community in the same manner public
notices are posted.
         b.   Bidder's Information: Sealed bids shall be solicited from all
responsible prospective suppliers included in the bidder's information or who
have made written request that their names be included in bidding process.
      3.   Disposal Of Surplus Property: Sealed bids shall be solicited from
interested parties for City property deemed to be surplus property. Worthless
or nearly worthless property (which value is set by the City Council) may be
sold to any person willing to remove the property. The City Council reserves
the right to exchange goods for services rendered.
      4.   Bid Opening Procedure: Sealed bids shall be submitted as designated
in the notice with the statement "bid for (item)", bid number, time and date on
the envelope. Bids shall be opened by the City in public at the time and place
stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be opened
for a public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less
than thirty (30) days after bid opening.
      5.   Rejection Of Bids: The City shall reserve the right to accept or
reject all bids or any portion thereof and waive any deficiencies in the
bidding in the interest of the City.
      6.   Award Of Contracts: Except as otherwise provided herein, contracts
shall be awarded by the City to the lowest responsible bidder.
      7.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total
amount of unit price, quality and service being equal and if the public
interest will not permit the delay of the readvertising for bids, the City
shall accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders
at the time of the bid opening.
      8.   Performance Bonds: Before entering a contract, the City shall have
authority to require a performance bond in such amount as it shall find
reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the City. The form and
amount of said bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Res. 4-14-
92-1, 4-14-1992)
   B.   Open Market Procedure:
      1.   One Thousand One To Eight Thousand Dollars: Purchases of supplies,
equipment or contractual services of an estimated value in the amount of one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) to eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00), may be
made upon Mayor and City Council approval in the open market pursuant to the
procedure hereinafter prescribed: (Res. 4-14-92-1, 4-14-1992; amd. 1998 Code)
         a.   Minimum Number Of Bids: Open market purchases shall, whenever
possible, be based on at least three (3) written bids (price quotations).
         b.   Solicitation Of Bids: Bids (price quotations) may be solicited
from prospective vendors by written or telephone requests. (Res. 4-14-92-1, 4-
14-1992)
      2.   One Thousand Dollars And Under: Purchases of supplies, equipment or
contractual service of an estimated value in the amount of one cent ($0.01) to
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be made in the open market by the
Purchasing Agent without bids being solicited.
   C.   Professional Service Contract Procedure: Contracts shall be awarded at
the discretion of the Mayor and City Council based on the evaluation of
professional qualifications, service ability, cost of service and other
criteria deemed applicable by the City Council. (Res. 4-14-92-1, 4-14-1992;
amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Single Vehicles By Authorization: Not withstanding the requirements
hereinabove contained, the Purchasing Agent, after the approval of the Mayor
and City Council, may make a purchase or lease of a single motor vehicle
without using either the formal contract procedure or the open market
procedure. In lieu of such procedures, the City shall obtain from at least
three (3) competitors, telephone bids. Having obtained such bids, the Mayor may
accept the vehicle subject only to ratification by the City Council. (Res. 4-
14-92-1, 4-14-1992)
1-8-4: EXEMPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to award competitive bidding,
such as contracts for items which may only be purchased from a single source,
contracts for additions to and repairs and maintenance of equipment owned by
the City which may be more efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by a
certain person or firm, by reason of the training of the personnel, or an
inventory of replacement parts maintained, shall not be subject to the
competitive bidding requirements of this policy. (Res. 4-14-92-1, 4-14-1992)
CHAPTER 9
RENTAL OF MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND PARKS
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-6, 12-13-2012)
CHAPTER 10
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
SECTION:
1-10-1: Fund Created
1-10-2: Funding
1-10-1: FUND CREATED:
There is created a Ferron City capital improvement fund in accordance with Utah
Code Annotated section 10-6-116(5) for the purpose of accumulating and setting
aside funds for the acquisition, repair and replacement of public property,
structures and other improvements including, but not necessarily limited to,
public safety equipment and facilities, streets, sidewalks, public buildings,
library, parks, equipment and other public property or improvements. (Ord.
2002-6, 11-20-2002)
1-10-2: FUNDING:
The Ferron City capital improvement fund shall be funded from year to year as
funds are available and allocable pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-
116. (Ord. 2002-7, 11-20-2002)
CHAPTER 11
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES
SECTION:
1-11-1: Purpose
1-11-2: Definitions
1-11-3: Guidelines
1-11-4: Analysis
1-11-5: Appeals
1-11-6: Limitations
1-11-7: Legal Action
1-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide advisory guidelines for the city to
assist the city in identifying actions that involve the unconstitutional taking
or damaging of private real property without the payment of just compensation
as required by the constitution of the United States and of the state of Utah.
(Ord. 2003-1, 4-24-2003)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, "constitutional taking issues" means actions involving the
physical or regulatory taking of private real property by the city that might
require compensation to a private real property owner under:
   A.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States;
   B.   Article 1, section 22 of the Utah constitution; or
   C.   Any recent court rulings governing the physical or regulatory taking of
private real property by a governmental entity. (Ord. 2003-1, 4-24-2003)
1-11-3: GUIDELINES:
The following guidelines shall be considered by the city when taking any action
that might result in the physical or regulatory taking of private real
property. The city should review the following to determine and identify
whether a proposed governmental action raises constitutional taking issues. It
is the policy of the city that no individuals bear burdens which, in all
fairness and justice, should be borne by the community as a whole. A "yes"
answer to any of the following questions could raise the implication of a
taking or damaging of private property for which just compensation may be
required:
   A.   Does the action result in a permanent or inevitably recurring physical
occupation of private property?
   B.   Does the action require a property owner to dedicate property or grant
an easement to the city without the payment of just compensation?
   C.   Does the action create or otherwise impose a permanent or ongoing
nuisance, originating on city property, that impacts neighboring lands so that
their owners or occupants sustain a special and unreasonable interference with
the quiet enjoyment of their property?
   D.   Does the action interfere with a fundamental attribute of ownership
such as the right to reasonable access, the right to light, air and view within
the right of way of an abutting public street, or the right to exclude others
from private property?
   E.   Does the action unreasonably interfere with a separately protected and
vested right, such as the right to continue a nonconforming use; the right to
have an application reviewed under the law that was in effect when a complete
application was submitted; legally issued subdivision plat approvals, building
permits, or licenses; or other protected property interests?
   F.   Does the action impose a severe economic burden that is inappropriately
unfair when considered in light of: 1) the burden placed on the property owner,
2) the nature of the government action and benefit, and 3) the property owners'
investment backed expectations?
   G.   Does the action deprive the property owner of all economically viable
use of the property in a situation where the proposed use does not constitute a
nuisance or a severe threat to health and safety?
   H.   Does the action limit the use of private property without substantially
advancing a legitimate public interest?
   I.   Has the city failed to demonstrate, by an individualized determination,
that any conditions, dedications or exactions imposed as a condition of
approval of development applications place only fair and roughly proportionate
burdens on development, offsetting the burdens that the proposed development
places on public utilities, streets and other services but not imposing
additional burdens on development that the community as a whole should bear?
   J.   Does the action discriminate against property owners, imposing
restrictions or burdens on one property owner that other similarly situated
property owners do not bear? (Ord. 2003-1, 4-24-2003)
1-11-4: ANALYSIS:
If the city determines that a governmental action involves constitutional
taking issues, the proposed action should be reviewed by the city to analyze
the possible taking and to determine the action to be taken. In reviewing the
proposed action the following factors may be analyzed:
   A.   The effect the potential taking would have on the use or value of the
private property;
   B.   The likelihood that the action may result in a constitutional taking;
   C.   Any alternatives to the proposed action that would fulfill the city's
lawful objectives and reduce the risk of a constitutional taking;
   D.   The cost to the city for payment of compensation if a taking is
determined. (Ord. 2003-1, 4-24-2003)
1-11-5: APPEALS:
Any owner of private property whose interest in the property is subject to a
physical or regulatory taking by the city pursuant to a final and authoritative
decision or action of the city, may appeal the city's decision or action by
filing a written notice of appeal and statement of the grounds for the appeal
in the city recorder's office within thirty (30) days from the date of the
city's decision or action. The city council or its designee shall hear all
evidence regarding the appeal and render its decision and findings in writing
within fourteen (14) days from the date the appeal was filed. If the city fails
to hear and decide the appeal within fourteen (14) days, the city's decision or
action is presumed to be approved. (Ord. 2003-1, 4-24-2003)
1-11-6: LIMITATIONS:
The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and shall not be construed to
expand, nor limit the scope of the city's liability for a constitutional
taking. The city shall have no legal liability to any person, firm or entity of
any nature whatsoever, and a court may not impose liability upon the city for
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-1, 4-24-2003)
1-11-7: LEGAL ACTION:
A property owner's failure to appeal the action of the city does not
constitute, and may not be interpreted as constituting, a failure to exhaust
available administrative remedies or as a bar to bringing legal action. (Ord.
2003-1, 4-24-2003)
CHAPTER 12
ANTIFRAUD POLICY
SECTION:
1-12-1: Introduction
1-12-2: Scope Of Policy
1-12-3: Definitions
1-12-4: Avenues For Reporting Fraud
1-12-5: Responsibilities
1-12-6: Guidelines For Handling A Report Of Suspected Fraud, Theft, Waste, Or
Abuse
1-12-7: Responsibilities Of The Mayor
1-12-8: Guidelines For The Investigation Of Suspected Fraud
1-12-9: Disciplinary Action
1-12-10: Fraud Awareness Training
1-12-1: INTRODUCTION:
Ferron City requires all elected officials and staff at all times to act
honestly and with integrity and safeguard the public resources for which they
are responsible. Ferron City will not accept any level of fraud or corruption;
consequently, any case will be thoroughly investigated and dealt with
appropriately. Ferron City is committed to ensuring that opportunities for
fraud and corruption are reduced to the lowest possible level of risk. (Res.
2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-2: SCOPE OF POLICY:
This policy applies to any irregularity, or suspected irregularity, involving
employees, as well as consultants, vendors, contractors, volunteers, and
outside agencies doing business with the city. Any investigative activity
required will be conducted without regard to the suspected wrongdoer's length
of service, position/title, or relationship to the city. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-
2008)
1-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
ABUSE: The intentional wrongful or improper use of resources, such as tools,
equipment, vehicles, etc. An example would be taking city equipment for private
use.
FRAUD: Usually used to describe depriving someone of something by intentional
deceit, or using deception to obtain a benefit or advantage or to cause some
benefit that is due to be denied. Examples of fraud include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   A.   Forgery or alteration of a check, bank draft, or any other financial
document;
   B.   Theft of a check or other diversion of a taxpayer payment;
   C.   Misappropriation of funds, supplies, or other assets;
   D.   Improper handling or reporting of money or financial transactions;
   E.   Profiting as a result of insider knowledge of city operations;
   F.   Destruction, removal, or inappropriate use of records, furniture,
fixtures and equipment;
   G.   Inaccurate claims of time worked, rather the misstatement of overtime
or regular pay;
   H.   Funds collected in the name of the city that is held in accounts other
than accounts that are secured by the city treasurer for the safekeeping of
public money;
   I.   The solicitation of donations in the name of the city without written
documentation from the mayor or authorized council member stating the nature of
the donation request and the amount requested.
THEFT: The act of taking something from someone unlawfully. An example would be
taking home a printer belonging to the city and keeping it for personal use.
WASTE: The loss or misuse of city resources that results from deficient
practices, system control, or decisions. An example would be not taking
advantage of discounts whenever possible. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-4: AVENUES FOR REPORTING FRAUD:
Ferron City has in place avenues for reporting suspicions of fraud. Staff
should report suspicions to the mayor or council person over their respective
department, or to the independent auditors. All matters will be dealt with in
confidence and in strict accordance with the law. Vigorous and prompt
investigations will be carried out into all cases of actual or suspected fraud
discovered or reported. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-5: RESPONSIBILITIES:
Each employee is required to report any suspected fraud, theft, waste or abuse
or other dishonest conduct to the employee's supervisor or to the council
member over the department in question.
Council members are required to report suspected fraud, waste or abuse or other
dishonest conduct, including reports from employees or other individuals to the
mayor.
The mayor will determine the merits of a report of suspected fraud with the
assistance of internal auditors and/or police criminal investigations if
necessary.
The identity of an employee or complainant who reports suspected fraud will be
protected to the full extent allowed by the law.
Suspected improprieties and/or misconduct concerning an employee's ethical
conduct should be reported to the mayor and council. Note that there are many
instances of prohibited actions that do not rise to the level of fraud, such as
an improper relationship with a vendor. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-6: GUIDELINES FOR HANDLING A REPORT OF SUSPECTED FRAUD, THEFT, WASTE, OR
ABUSE:
Whether the initial report is made to a supervisor, council member or the
mayor, the reporting individual should receive the following instructions and
information:
   A.   Do not contact the suspected individual in an effort to determine facts
or demand restitution.
   B.   Allow the city to conduct the investigation. Do not further investigate
the allegations.
   C.   Observe strict confidentiality. Do not discuss the case, facts,
suspicions or allegations with anyone unless specifically asked to do so by the
mayor, police investigator or general legal counsel.
   D.   Retaliation will not be tolerated. The city will not tolerate any form
of retaliation against individuals providing information concerning fraud or
suspected fraud.
   E.   Every effort will be made to protect the rights and the reputations of
everyone involved, including the individual who in good faith alleges perceived
misconduct as well as the alleged violator(s).
   F.   The identity of an employee or other individual who reports a suspected
act of fraud will be protected as provided by this policy. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-
2008)
1-12-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE MAYOR:
On receiving a report of suspected fraud, the mayor shall document the incident
and conduct a preliminary investigation to determine the credibility of the
report. If the report is credible, the mayor shall follow the guidelines
outlined in this policy.
The mayor shall make every effort to protect the rights and reputations of
everyone involved in a report of suspected fraud, including the individual who
in good faith alleges perceived misconduct, as well as the alleged violator(s).
However, disciplinary action may be taken as provided by this policy if a
report is made in bad faith.
On determining that the report is not credible or is not a report of fraud, the
mayor shall document this determination. The mayor's documentation shall
include support for the determination. The mayor will refer questions as to
whether an action constitutes fraud to the internal auditors and/or the
criminal investigation department of the Emery County sheriff's office.
In addition of reporting each suspected fraud to internal audit, the mayor is
responsible for reporting confirmed fraud to the state auditor's office in the
manner required by state law.
The mayor is responsible for the administration, revision, interpretation and
application of this policy. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-8: GUIDELINES FOR THE INVESTIGATION OF SUSPECTED FRAUD:
The mayor is responsible for the full investigation and documentation of
suspected fraud. It is the responsibility of the mayor to report any wrongdoing
and all suspected fraud and to coordinate investigative activities with the
appropriate agencies. Each employee involved in the investigation shall keep
the content of the investigation in strict confidence to the full extent
allowed by law. Results of the investigation shall not be disclosed except to
the individuals who have legitimate reason to become informed.
Any investigation initiated shall be done so without regard to the suspect's
length of service, position/title, relationship to agency or any other
perceived mitigating circumstance.
The mayor shall maintain appropriate documentation regarding incidents of fraud
and shall develop and maintain guidelines for access to and security of this
documentation. The mayor shall prepare an incident report of all confirmed
reports of fraud and shall present the report to the legislative body. The
report shall include the content of the investigation, findings, and any
disciplinary action taken as a result of the findings. Any inquiries from the
suspected individual, his or her attorney shall be directed to the mayor. If
necessary, the mayor will direct inquiries to the appropriate division. (Res.
2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-9: DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
Failure to comply with any part of this policy is grounds for disciplinary
action including immediate termination.
An employee who:
   A.   Has engaged in any form of fraud, waste or abuse;
   B.   Suspects or discovers fraudulent activity and fails to report his or
her suspicions as required by this policy;
   C.   Intentionally reports false or misleading information;
is subject to disciplinary action as deemed appropriate by the mayor, which may
include termination. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-2008)
1-12-10: FRAUD AWARENESS TRAINING:
Each employee is required to attend fraud awareness training as requested by
the mayor and/or council. Each employee must sign a form indicating that they
have been given a copy of this policy and that they are aware of and understand
the contents thereof. (Res. 2008-6, 12-11-2008)
CHAPTER 13
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION:
1-13-1:      City Sponsorships And Donation Requests
1-13-1: CITY SPONSORSHIPS AND DONATION REQUESTS:
   A.   Ferron City needs to establish a definitive schedule in order to
determine a fair fee schedule for requests for those citizens residing inside
city limits;
   B.   A corporate purpose, sufficient to justify an appropriation, of money
is anything the City Council decides provides for the safety, health,
prosperity, moral wellbeing, peace, order, comfort, or convenience of the
inhabitants of the city;
   C.   It is necessary that a fee structure be established for these requests;
   D.   Adoption will enhance the knowledge to the public for whom the
municipality holds a stewardship; and
   E.   The City Council of Ferron City, State of Utah, that a definitive
schedule allowed for sponsorships and donation requests be as follows:
      1.   All individuals that reside within Ferron City limits will be
allowed a maximum donation of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per year.
      2.   All groups with citizens that reside within Ferron City limits will
be allowed a maximum donation of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. (Res.
2019-1, 6-13-2019)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Established
2-1-2: Terms Of Office
2-1-3: Organization
2-1-4: Duties And Powers
2-1-5: Electronic Meetings
2-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Membership: There is hereby created a Planning Commission of a minimum
of three (3) members with a maximum of seven (7) members. Members of the
Planning Commission will be appointed by the Mayor with consent of the City
Council.
   B.   Compensation: Members of the Planning Commission shall receive fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each Planning Commission meeting attended.
   C.   Land Use Authority: The Planning Commission shall be the Land Use
Authority for the City. (Ord. 2018-4, 10-11-2018)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
A member of the Planning Commission shall serve for a term of four (4) years
and until his successor is appointed. Terms of members of the Planning
Commission shall begin on or before the first Monday in February of each year.
The City Council may remove any member of the Planning Commission if he fails
to attend a planning meeting in a 6-month period or for cause and after a
public hearing, if one is required. Vacancies shall be promptly filled in the
same manner as the original appointment for the remainder of the unexpired
term. (Ord. 2018-4, 10-11-2018)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Chairman; Adoption Of Rules: The members of the Planning Commission
shall select from their own members a Chairperson and such other officers as
deemed necessary and shall adopt rules and regulations for their organization
and for the transaction of business and the conduct of their proceedings.
   B.   Reports To City Council: Reports of official acts and recommendations
of the Planning Commission shall be public and made by the Chairperson in
writing to the City Council and shall indicate how each member of the Planning
Commission voted with respect to such act or recommendation. Any member of the
Planning Commission may also make a concurring or dissenting report or
recommendation to the City Council. (1979 Code § 12-113)
   C.   Meetings: The Planning Commission shall meet as required and at such
other times as the Planning Commission may determine. (1979 Code § 12-113; amd.
1998 Code)
   D.   Quorum: A quorum shall constitute a minimum of three (3) members.
   E.   Minimum Vote Required: A majority of the number of members present.
(Res. 2005-8, 11-17-2005)
2-1-4: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The Planning Commission shall have all of the powers and duties explicitly or
impliedly given planning commissions by the laws of the State. (1979 Code § 12-
114)
2-1-5: ELECTRONIC MEETINGS:
   A.   The Ferron City Council and Planning Commission have determined that it
is in the public’s best interest to allow an electronic meeting to take place.
   B.   The Ferron City Council wishes to adopt standards and procedures for
electronic meetings under limited circumstances.
   C.   Definitions: For the purpose of this resolution, the following
definition shall apply:
      ANCHOR LOCATION: The physical location from which an electronic meeting
originates or the participants are connected.
      CITY: City of Ferron.
      CITY STAFF: Those employees of Ferron City that carry out the functions
of noticing, organizing, and setting up meetings for the City Council and
Planning Commission.
      ELECTRONIC MEETING: A public meeting convened or conducted by means of a
conference using electronic communications.
      GOVERNING BODY: The Ferron City Council and/or the Planning Commission.
      MONITOR: To hear or observe, live, by audio or video equipment, all of
the public statements of each member of the Governing Body who is participating
in a meeting.
      PARTICIPATE: The ability to communicate with all of the members of the
Governing Board, either verbally or electronically, so that each member of the
Governing Board can hear or observe the communication.
   B.   Electronic Meeting Requirements: No meeting of the Governing Body may
be convened and held as an electronic meeting except on the following
conditions:
      1.   A request for an electronic meeting has been made by a member of the
Governing Body at least two (2) days prior to the date of the meeting to allow
for arrangements to be made for the electronic meeting; and
      2.   Notice of the electronic meeting has been given as provided herein.
   C.   Notice of Electronic Meetings: City Staff, upon receiving a request
from a member of the Governing Body for a meeting to be convened as an
electronic meeting, shall make sure that City Staff gives public notice of the
meeting as required by Utah Code section 52-4-202 of the Utah Open and Public
Meetings Act; and post written notice at the anchor location for the meeting.
City Staff shall in addition to giving the public notice required by Utah Code
section 52-4-202, provide notice of the electronic meeting to the members of
the Governing Body at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting so that
they may participate in and be counted as present for all purposes, including
the determination that a quorum is present. The notice to the members of the
Governing Body shall give a description of how the members will be connected to
the electronic meeting. (Res. 2020-3, 3-18-2020)
CHAPTER 2
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
2-2-1: Declaration Of Legislative Intent
2-2-2: Established
2-2-3: Duties
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 17A-3-1301 et seq.
2-2-1: DECLARATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
Recognizing that the historical heritage of this State is among its most valued
and important assets, it is the intent of the legislature that the counties,
cities and towns of this State shall have the power to identify, preserve,
protect and enhance historic and prehistoric areas and sites lying within their
respective jurisdictions as provided in this Chapter and State statute.
Counties, cities and towns are hereby empowered to expend public funds for the
purpose of identifying, preserving, protecting or enhancing historical areas
and sites as provided in this Chapter and State statute. (Ord. 3-27-84, 3-13-
1984; amd. 1998 Code)
2-2-2: ESTABLISHED:
A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby established with the following
provisions:
   A.   Membership; Terms: Five (5) members with a demonstrated interest,
competence or knowledge in historic preservation, appointed for terms of not
less than two (2) years.
   B.   Professionals: To the extent available in the community, two (2)
Historic Preservation Commission members shall be professionals, as defined by
National Park Service regulations, from the disciplines of history and
architecture or architectural history.
   C.   Meetings: The Historic Preservation Commission will meet at least twice
each year and conduct business in accordance with the open public meeting laws
of the State 1 . This includes public notification of meeting place, time and
agenda items.
   D.   Minutes: Written minutes of each Historic Preservation Commission
meeting will be prepared and made available for public inspection. (Ord. 3-27-
84, 3-13-1984)
 
Notes
1 2. U.C.A. § 52-4-1 et seq.
2-2-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Survey And Inventory Community Historic Resources: The Historic
Preservation Commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of the
historic, architectural and archeological resources within the community. The
survey shall be compatible with the Utah Inventory of Historic and
Archeological Sites. Survey and inventory documents shall be maintained and
open to the public. The survey will be updated at least every ten (10) years.
   B.   Review Proposed Nominations To National Register: The Historic
Preservation Commission shall review and comment to the State Historic
Preservation Officer on all proposed national register nominations for
properties within the boundaries of the community. When the Historic
Preservation Commission considers a national register nomination which is
normally evaluated by professionals in a specific discipline and that
discipline is not represented on the Commission, the Commission will seek
expertise in this area before rendering its decision.
   C.   Provide Advice And Information:
      1.   The Historic Preservation Commission shall act in an advisory role
to other officials and departments of local government regarding the
identification and protection of local historic and archeological resources.
      2.   The Historic Preservation Commission shall work toward the
continuing education of citizens regarding historic preservation and the
community's history.
   D.   Enforcement Of Laws: The Historic Preservation Commission shall support
the enforcement of all State laws relating to historic preservation. These
include, but are not limited to: Utah Code Annotated sections 17A-3-1301 et
seq., (Historic District Act) and 9-3-301 et seq., (regarding the protection of
Utah antiquities) and specifically section 9-8-307 regarding notification to
the Division of State History of any known proposed action which will destroy
or effect a site, building or object owned by the State and included on or
eligible for the State or national register. (Ord. 3-27-84, 3-13-1984; amd.
1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
MILLSITE GOLF COURSE ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Established
2-3-2: Terms Of Office
2-3-3: Organization
2-3-4: Duties And Powers
2-3-5: Credit Card Security Policies
2-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Membership: There is hereby created a Millsite golf course advisory
board. The number of members appointed will be as deemed necessary by the mayor
and board. Members of the city council may be appointed to the Millsite golf
course advisory board.
   B.   Compensation: Members of the Millsite golf course advisory board shall
serve without compensation. (Ord. 2005-2A, 2-10-2005)
2-3-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The length of time one serves as a member of the Millsite golf course advisory
board shall be determined by the mayor or board. The city council may remove
any member of the Millsite golf course advisory board by a majority vote.
Vacancies may be filled as deemed necessary by the mayor and board. (Ord. 2005-
2A, 2-10-2005)
2-3-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Chairman And Adoption Of Rules: The members of the Millsite golf course
advisory board shall be chaired by the mayor or council department head unless
otherwise directed.
   B.   Reports To City Council: Reports of official acts and recommendations
of the Millsite golf course advisory board shall be public and made by the
chairperson in writing to the city council and shall indicate how each member
of the Millsite golf course advisory board voted with respect to such act or
recommendation. Any member of the Millsite golf course advisory board may also
make a concurring or dissenting report or recommendation to the city council.
   C.   Meetings: The Millsite golf course advisory board shall meet as
required or as determined necessary. (Ord. 2005-2A, 2-10-2005)
2-3-4: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The Millsite golf course advisory board shall have all the powers and duties
explicitly or impliedly given by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 2005-2A, 2-
10-2005)
2-3-5: CREDIT CARD SECURITY POLICIES:
   A.   The governing body of Ferron City has the need to adopt a credit card
security policy for Ferron City Hall and Millsite Golf Course;
   B.   Ferron City and Millsite Golf Course is required to be in compliance
with PCI DSS;
   C.   Ferron City and Millsite Golf Course is now required to adopt the
policy in order to get a certificate of compliance;
   D.   Ferron City and Millsite Golf Course employees will be required to read
and follow the policy as attached to Res. 2016-7 before they process any credit
card transaction and must be reviewed yearly; and
   E.   The Ferron City/Millsite Golf Course Credit Card Security policies will
be followed by all employees that process any credit card transaction. (Res.
2016-7, 10-13-2016)
CHAPTER 4
AMERICAN LEGION AUXILIARY
SECTION:
2-4-1: Community Covenant Program
2-4-1: COMMUNITY COVENANT PROGRAM:
   A.   Ferron City recognizes the great sacrifice and commitment that military
men and women and their families have made and are continuing to make for our
country, state and city;
   B.   Ferron City recognizes that soldiers from Ferron, and their families
are proud of their country, state and city and their example makes citizens of
this community proud of them;
   C.   Ferron City acknowledges that the price for freedom for all citizens of
our country is paid for by those who serve and defend their country;
   D.   The military men and women of the State of Utah and the City of Ferron,
and their families, have courageously served our country and community and
defended with honor the values upon which our nation was built;
   E.   Ferron City acknowledges an active American Legion Auxiliary who have
supported the men and women of the Armed Forces with packages and letters;
   F.   Ferron City created in 2008, a program in which military families
residing in Ferron may receive discounted services from the city during times
of active over seas deployment; and
   G.   Ferron City is committed to building partnerships that support the
military men and women and their families and is committed to assist in the
implementation of the Community Covenant Program and that Ferron City is
appreciative of the sacrifice of the military men and women and their families
and is forever grateful for their continued service, commitment, honor and
valor in preserving the freedom of our Nation. (Res. 2012-1, 1-12-1012)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Administrator
3-1-3: Business License Required; Penalty
3-1-4: Application For License
3-1-5: License Fee Levied
3-1-6: License Process
3-1-7: Certificate Of License
3-1-8: Transfer Of License Prohibited
3-1-9: Branch Establishments
3-1-10: Joint Business Licenses
3-1-11: Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
3-1-12: Exemptions To License
3-1-13: Temporary And Special Events
3-1-14: Consent To Inspections
3-1-15: Insurance
3-1-16: Sublicense Business Activities
3-1-17: Criminal History Checks
3-1-18: Violations; Hearing; Enforcement And Revocation
3-1-19: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in within the city carried on for the
purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering
service to employers shall not be included in the term business, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
BUSINESS LICENSE ADMINISTRATOR: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible
for receiving from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed
application and either granting, suspending or denying the applicant's
certificate.
EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate establishment or place of
operation, whether or not operating under the same name, within the city,
including a home or other place of lodging if the same is held out by
advertisements, listings or otherwise as the establishment or place of
operation of a person engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal
property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city.
EMPLOYEE: The operator or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed in the operation of said place of business in any capacity and also
any salesperson, agent or independent contractor engaged in the operation of
the place of business in any capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or
property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration
by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or
other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within the city from which business activity is conducted or
transacted.
WHOLESALE: A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail
merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not
include a sale by wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for
resale, except as otherwise specified.
WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale or jobbing business
and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the
purpose of resale. (Ord. 2-10-98, 2-10-1998; amd. Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-2: LICENSE ADMINISTRATOR:
The License Administrator shall have the power to:
   A.   Adopt Forms: Adopt all forms and prescribe the information as approved
by the City Council that is required therein as to all matters relevant for the
issuance of a license hereunder.
   B.   Investigate: Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant
or licensee either at the time of issuance of a license or at any reasonable
time after its issuance in such a manner as may be reasonable and necessary for
the proper administration and enforcement of this title. In the case of persons
licensed by an agency of the State, verification of such licensure shall
suffice without further inquiry into the qualifications therefor. The Emery
County Sheriff, Fire Chief, Health Department, City Attorney and their
authorized officers and deputies are authorized and declared to be
investigators for the License Administrator upon request of the latter. (Ord.
2009-1, 6-25-2009)
   C.   Inspection Of Premises: Shall assign inspections and may accompany
during prospective or existing places of business to ensure compliance with
Building, Safety and Health Codes that are reasonably necessary to the
administration and enforcement of this title; provided that all such
inspections shall be at a reasonable time, upon proper advance notice to the
applicant or licensee, and in full compliance with the laws affecting the right
to inspect.
   D.   Give Notice: Notify the applicant of the acceptance or denial of the
application, declare home businesses a no-impact home business and, in the
event of denial, upon the request of the applicant, state in writing the reason
for denial. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-8-2018)
   E.   Request Enforcement: Request the City Council and City Attorney to seek
revocation of a license and/or to file a complaint against any applicant or
licensee who conducts a business without the license required by this chapter.
   F.   Good Standing: Where permitted by law, require that the applicant or
licensee be not in default under the provisions of the City ordinance, nor
indebted nor obligated in any manner to the City utilities operated by it, nor
to be in violation of any City zoning regulations.
   G.   Require Affidavits: Require, when legally appropriate and considered
necessary in the discretion of the License Administrator, affidavits regarding
the license history of the applicant indicating whether such person, in
previous business operations in this or another state, has had a business
license revoked or suspended, together with the reasons therefor; to request
the Sheriff to obtain a record of any prior convictions of the applicant or
licensee when determined by the License Administrator to be necessary and
desirable. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED; PENALTY:
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to establish or carry on any business,
trade, profession or calling, to operate a vending, pinball or coin operated
machine, to engage in the rental of apartments or trailer spaces, without first
receiving the class or type of license required by the City. It shall be
unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to continue a business
or nonprofit enterprise when a license pertaining thereto has been suspended or
revoked. No license shall be issued to a person required to comply with any
other law, regulation, or licensing requirements in the conduct of his business
or nonprofit enterprise until the applicant demonstrates the fact of such
compliance. Compliance with zoning laws is required in all cases. (Ord. 2009-1,
6-25-2009)
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All applications shall include:
      1.   The name and address (physical address and mailing address if
different) including phone numbers and e-mail address of the person desiring a
license.
      2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on.
      3.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number and complete mailing address for such
business.
      4.   Listings and copies of all State licenses, certificates, tax
identification numbers required by any other entity in order for the licensee
to conduct business within the Municipality or within the state and any such
other information as the license administrator may deem necessary. (Ord. 2009-
1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEE LEVIED:
   A.   General Business License Fee: The license fee for all businesses shall
be in such amount as established by resolution by the city council. Fees shall
be due and payable to the city treasurer at the time the application is
submitted to the license administrator. Annual license fees shall be due on
January 1 of each year. The license fee of any business commenced after July 1
of the first year in business shall be reduced by one-half (1/2).
   B.   Late Penalty: If any license fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of
the due date, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of such license fee
shall be added to the original amount thereof for each month of delinquency. No
license shall be issued until all penalties legally assessed have been paid.
   C.   Rebate Of Fee: No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof
shall be made by reason of the nonuse for such license or by reason of change
of location or type of business rendering the use of such license ineffective,
except in the following instances:
      1.   When a license fee is collected in error.
      2.   When a licensee has been prevented from enjoying the full license
term due to death or physical incapacity to engage in business.
      3.   When a licensee is rendered unable to conduct business because he
has entered the armed services of the United States.
      4.   When the licensed business is destroyed by fire or other casualty
through no fault to the licensee. In the event of the applicability of an
exception, the rebate shall be reduced by one-half (1/2) if the cause for the
exception occurred after July 1 of the license year.
   D.   Receipt In Lieu Of License: In the event the license administrator has
not completed any of the steps set forth in section
3-1-2 of this chapter that appear necessary at the time the applicant or
licensee pays for a license or renewal thereof, the city treasurer may issue a
receipt for the money paid but it shall not be construed as the approval of the
license administrator for the issuance of a license, nor shall it entitle or
authorize the applicant or licensee to open or maintain any business until such
time as the license itself has been issued. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-6: LICENSE PROCESS:
It shall be the responsibility of the person engaging in business within the
city to voluntarily apply for and maintain in full force and effect a valid
business license. The agents or their representatives of nonresidents who are
doing business in this city shall be personally responsible for the compliance
of their principals and of the businesses they represent with the terms of this
title. Applicants shall follow the procedure as outlined:
   A.   Obtain the application form from the license administrator.
   B.   Obtain the required inspections and submit the application for
necessary zoning approvals to the planning commission.
   C.   Completed and approved applications for home occupations and businesses
within the central commercial zone shall be presented to the license
administrator for verification and issuance of license. Applications for
businesses within the highway commercial zone shall require a review and
approval from the city council. Council approved applications will be submitted
to the license administrator for issuance of license.
   D.   All signs shall be removed from vacated businesses within thirty (30)
days of business closure. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-7: CERTIFICATE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All certificates of license shall be attested by the city
recorder, and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name: The name of the person to whom such certificate has been
issued.
      2.   Amount: The amount paid.
      3.   Type: The type of license and the class of such license, if licenses
are divided into classes.
      4.   Term: The term of the license with the commencing date and the date
of its expiration.
      5.   Location: The place where such business, calling, trade or
profession is to be conducted.
   B.   Display Of License:
      1.   Required: Every certificate of license issued under this chapter
shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the
building, room or office of the place of business so that the same may be
easily seen. When such certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed
by the licensee from such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate
of license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
upon the wall or any part of any room within the place of business. If the
licensee's business is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the
transient or mobile nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the
license on his person, ready to be shown upon request by an authorized officer
during all such time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the
business for which a license is granted.
      2.   Coin Operated Machine: In the event the license is for a coin
operated machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or displayed in
the immediate vicinity of the machine for which it has been issued. (Ord. 2-10-
98, 2-10-1998)
3-1-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license granted or issued under any ordinance of the city shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person. It shall not be deemed to authorize any
person other than therein named to do business or to authorize any other
business, calling, trade or profession than is therein named, unless by
permission of the city council. (Ord. 2-10-98, 2-10-1998)
3-1-9: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each separate place of business in the
city and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the
business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such
license; provided, that warehouses and distributing places used in connection
with or incident to a business licensed under this chapter shall not be deemed
to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 2-10-98, 2-
10-1998)
3-1-10: JOINT BUSINESS LICENSES:
Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same
location within the city, such person shall not be required to obtain separate
licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but shall be issued one
license which shall specify on its face all such businesses. The license tax to
be paid shall be computed at the highest license fee applicable to any of the
businesses being conducted at such location. The sale of beer or any other
product or service requiring an additional license shall be subject to such
additional licensing requirement. Where two (2) or more persons conduct
separate businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a
license for such business and pay the required license tax for such business.
(Ord. 2-10-98, 2-10-1998)
3-1-11: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION; DELIVERY OF GOODS:
   A.   Exceptions: No license shall be required for operation of any vehicle
or equipment in the city when:
      1.   Such vehicle is merely passing through the city.
      2.   Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate
commerce.
   B.   Delivery Of Property: No license shall be required by this chapter of
any person whose only business activity in the city is the mere delivery in the
city of property sold by him at a regular place of business maintained by him
outside the city where:
      1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by
the Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated;
and
      2.   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of the
city making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms, as are granted by this section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority
of the city for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by the
city; and
      4.   The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made
prominently displays at all times a license plate or symbol issued by the said
licensing authority to evidence such business license. Such plate or symbol
shall identify the licensing authority by which it is issued, shall indicate
that it evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term
for which it is effective.
   C.   Certification Of Section: The business license administrator shall, at
the request of any person, certify a copy of this section to any municipality
or county of the state to which a copy has not previously been certified. (Ord.
2-10-98, 2-10-1998)
3-1-12: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSE:
   A.   Tax Exempt Businesses: No license fee shall be imposed under section
3-1-5 of this chapter on any person engaged in business for solely religious,
charitable, eleemosynary or other types of strictly nonprofit purpose which is
tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the
state, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business
specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the
United States or the state; nor shall any license fee be imposed upon any
person not maintaining a place of business within the city who has paid a like
or similar license tax or fee to some other taxing unit within the state and
which taxing unit exempts from its license tax or fee, by reciprocal agreement
or otherwise, businesses domiciled in the city and doing business in such
taxing unit.
   B.   Reciprocal Agreements With Other Agencies: The license assessor and
collector may, with approval of the city council, enter into reciprocal
agreements with the proper officials of other taxing units, as may be deemed
equitable and proper, in effecting the exemption provided for in subsection A
of this section. (Ord. 2-10-98, 2-10-1998)
3-1-13: TEMPORARY AND SPECIAL EVENTS:
   A.   Definition: "Temporary business" means the conduct of business which is
conducted from a single designated site or premises without a permanent
foundation or location from which goods, merchandise or services are sold on a
temporary or seasonal basis. A temporary business may include a concert, fair,
rally, bazaar or city celebration in which vendors are present. The license
shall not exceed one hundred (100) consecutive days.
   B.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in,
promote or carry on a temporary business within the city, without first making
application for and obtaining a temporary license from the city.
   C.   Application: An application for a temporary license must be submitted
with the following information:
      1.   Site plan delineating where the temporary business will be located
and the parking area available for patrons or the designation by the city or
the event provider of a location with respect to special events such as listed
in this chapter.
      2.   Written permission from the property owner where the temporary
business will be located in a form acceptable to the city.
      3.   Acceptable evidence of a current sales tax permit, license or
special event sales tax number issued by the state.
   D.   Inspection Of Merchandise: The city, the Emery County sheriff and the
local health department shall have the right to inspect all goods and
merchandise to be sold pursuant to a temporary business license.
   E.   Compliance To Laws: Temporary license holders shall comply with all
applicable laws and ordinances of the city and state governing the operation of
its business.
   F.   License Fees: Temporary and special event license fees shall be set by
the city council. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-14: CONSENT TO INSPECTIONS:
As a condition of his right to do business in the city, each applicant and
licensee accepts all regulations and provisions of the ordinances of the city
as they may apply to any aspect of the applicant or licensee's business and
agrees to comply with the same. The applicant or licensee shall permit all
lawful and reasonable inspections of business operations and premises as
provided hereunder for the purpose of ascertaining such compliance with the
laws and regulations of the city in areas of health, fire prevention, and
safety and consumer protection. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-15: INSURANCE:
Where the license administrator deems it necessary and advisable, the license
administrator may require the applicant or licensee to maintain causality or
liability insurance in an amount and of a nature to be prescribed during all
periods that the licensee engages in business in the city in order to afford
adequate protection to those who patronize such business, and an applicant or
licensee accepts such requirement as a further condition of the licensee's
right to do business in the city. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-16: SUBLICENSE BUSINESS ACTIVITIES:
Where a licensee provides facilities for lease by others who intend to vend a
product or provide a service, a sublicense shall be obtained by each such
lessee of facilities in advance of doing business in the city for the purposes
of registration and accountability. Both the property owner and lessee shall be
required to follow the licensing procedure as outlined in this title. (Ord.
2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-17: CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS:
Wherever in this title there is a requirement for review of the criminal
history of an applicant for a license or an employee of such applicant, the
consent and authorization of such individual for a criminal history check shall
be provided on an authorization form supplied by the city. After request by the
license officer, no license, permit, certification or approval shall thereafter
be issued until such consent and authorization is provided and the criminal
history check is completed, and the individual shall be so advised. A
reasonable fee may be charged to the applicant by the sheriff's department for
checking criminal history. Any individual shall have the right to refuse such
authorization, but in that event the city shall not be required to issue the
license, permit or certificate requested by the individual or his employer.
(Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-18: VIOLATIONS; HEARING; ENFORCEMENT AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Provisional Order To Comply; Hearing: Upon receipt of a violation of
the provisions in this title or conduct that may violate any other applicable
city ordinance or state law, the license administrator may consult with a
council representative and issue in writing an order to comply, which shall be
personally addressed to the address contained on the business license
application, and which shall advise the licensee of the specific violation. The
order to comply shall require compliance or arrangements with the license
administrator for a hearing before the city council. The time frame set for
required compliance shall be reasonably established by the license
administrator with the counsel of the mayor or council representative assigned
to oversee business licensing. If the licensee fails to comply within the time
allowed in the order, the license administrator may request the council to
declare the license revoked unless a hearing has been requested.
      1.   For a hearing, request must be made in writing and delivered to the
license administrator within ten (10) days after the mailing of the order to
comply.
      2.   The license administrator shall then advise the licensee of a
hearing date which shall be within at least ten (10) working days of the filing
of the request.
      3.   The hearing shall be public and the licensee shall be given full
opportunity to present evidence that the licensee is in compliance or does not
need to comply with the order. After such hearing, the city council may dismiss
the order or demand compliance within no more than five (5) more days. The
determination of the city council will be final and conclusive.
      4.   If the licensee fails to comply, the license shall be revoked.
   B.   Civil Suit: The city attorney may institute a civil suit to enjoin the
operation of any business being operated without the license required
hereunder, or he may seek the criminal sanctions provided in this chapter.
   C.   Revocation Without Hearing: Any business license may be revoked without
hearing for any violation of the law made in the course of business where such
violation is proved or admitted in a court of law.
   D.   Wrongful Acquisition Of License: Any license required hereunder that is
obtained by deceit, fraud or misrepresentation or other crime is null and void.
   E.   State Law Applicability: Enforcement provisions hereunder shall not
apply to any aspect of regulation where enforcement is preempted by state law.
   F.   Licensing After Denial Or Revocation: No person who has been denied a
license or whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this title
shall be granted a license under the provisions of this title for a period of
six (6) months following such denial or revocation. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-1-19: PENALTY:
Violations of any of the provisions of this title shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: License Required; Penalty
3-2-3: Application For License
3-2-4: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2-5: License Fees
3-2-6: Classifications And Privileges
3-2-7: Department Of Health Permit
3-2-8: Transfer Of License
3-2-9: Inspection Of Premises
3-2-10: Display Of License
3-2-11: Restrictions
3-2-12: Renewal Of License
3-2-13: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meanings specified in
the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act 1 , unless a different meaning is
clearly evident. (1979 Code § 9-412; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 32A-1-105 for definitions.
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; PENALTY:
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to engage in the business of the sale of
light beer at retail, in bottles or draft, without first having procured a
license therefor from the City Council and paid the license fee required by
this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-411A; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Verification; Filing: All applications for licenses authorized by this
Chapter shall be verified and filed with the Business License Administrator.
The applications must state the applicant's name in full and that he
understands and has read and complied with the requirements and possesses the
qualifications specified in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and this
Chapter. If the applicant is a copartnership, the names and addresses of all
partners and if a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and
directors, must be stated.
   B.   Applicant Subscription: The application must be subscribed by the
applicant, who shall state under oath that the facts therein contained are
true. (1979 Code § 9-417; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Referral To County Sheriff: All applications filed in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter shall be referred to the Emery County Sheriff's
Department for inspection and report. The Sheriff's Department shall, when
possible, within twenty (20) days after receiving such application, make report
to the City Council of the general reputation and character of the persons who
habitually frequent such place, the nature and kind of business conducted at
such place by the applicant or by any other persons or by the applicant at any
other place; whether the place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and
orderly manner; the nature and kind of entertainment, if any, at such place;
whether gambling is or has been permitted on the premises or by the applicant
at any other place; and the proximity of such premises to any school or church.
The Sheriff's Department shall also add to such report their recommendation as
to whether or not the application should be granted. (1979 Code § 4-418; amd.
1998 Code)
3-2-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No license shall be granted to any retailer to sell light beer or to any brewer
or wholesaler, unless he shall be of good moral character, over the age of
twenty one (21) years, and a citizen of the United States, or to anyone who has
been convicted of a felony or of any violation of any law of the State or
provision of the ordinances of the City relating to intoxicating liquors, or of
keeping a gambling or disorderly house, or who has pleaded guilty to or has
forfeited his bail on a charge of having committed a felony or of having
violated any such law or ordinance, or to any partnership, any member of which
lacks any of the qualifications set forth in this Chapter or to any corporation
of which lacks any of such qualifications. (1979 Code § 9-420)
3-2-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Required: Applications provided for in this Chapter shall be
accompanied by the fees provided in this Section. The fee shall be returned to
the applicant if the application is denied. (1979 Code § 9-415)
   B.   Enumerated: In addition to any other business license fee which any
person or place of business may be required to pay, there is hereby levied upon
the business location of every person engaged in the sale or other dispensing
of beer, the following annual license fees:
 
Beer License License Fee
Class A      $ 50.00
Class B      100.00
Class C      100.00
             25.00 for each 30-day
Seasonal     period or fraction
             thereof.
 
(1979 Code § 4-414)
3-2-6: CLASSIFICATIONS AND PRIVILEGES:
Retail licenses issued hereunder shall be of the following three (3) kinds and
shall carry the following privileges and be known as Class A, Class B, Class C
and seasonal licenses:
   A.   Class A: Class A retail licenses shall entitle the licensee to sell
beer on the premises licensed in original containers for consumption off the
premises in accordance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the
ordinances of the City.
   B.   Class B: Class B retail licenses shall entitle the licensee to sell
beer in the original containers on the premises for consumption on or off the
premises in accordance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the
ordinances of the City.
   C.   Class C: Class C licenses for retail shall entitle the licensee to sell
draft beer for consumption on or off the premises and to sell beer in
accordance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the ordinances of
the City.
   D.   Seasonal: Seasonal licenses of any class may be issued for a period of
time not to exceed one year, which period shall be determined by the City
Council (1979 Code § 9-413; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-7: DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH PERMIT:
No license under this Chapter shall be issued until the applicant therefor
shall have first procured from the Department of Health a permit which shall
show that the premises to be licensed are in a sanitary condition and that the
equipment used in the storage, distribution or sale of light beer complies with
all the health regulations of the City and of the State. (1979 Code § 9-422;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not be transferable, and if
revoked by the City Council, the fee paid by the licensee to the City for the
license shall be forfeited to said City. (1979 Code § 9-423)
3-2-9: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
   A.   Authority: All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any
officer, agent or peace officer of the City or the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission, or the State Board of Health, and every licensee shall, at the
request of the Board of Health, furnish to it samples of beer which he shall
have for sale.
   B.   Revocation: Any license granted pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked
on a finding by the City Council that the licensee has had ten (10) days' or
more notice from the Board of Health that the licensee is violating one or more
health ordinances, rules or regulations of the City or of the Utah Division of
Health and has failed to comply with such health ordinance, rule or regulation.
   C.   Close Of Business: The City Council may direct the Emery County
Sheriff's Department to close down any business licensed under this Chapter
where the Board of Health has determined that continued operation of the
business presents an imminent danger to the health of the community or persons
who may eat or drink at the business. (1979 Code § 9-426; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the license
shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall
refer or for which it shall be issued. All licenses shall comply with the Utah
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Commission. (1979 Code § 411C; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-11: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Dance Halls, Intoxicated Persons, Gasoline Sales: It is unlawful for
any person to sell beer at any public dance or to any person intoxicated, or
under the influence of any intoxicating beverage. It is unlawful for any person
to sell beer in any dance hall or theater, and a Class B or C license to sell
beer shall not be granted to any person to sell beer at any business or
premises where gasoline for the use in motor vehicles is sold. (Ord. 11-22-83,
11-22-1983)
   B.   Location To Church Or School: No license shall be granted to sell beer
in any dance hall, theater or within two hundred (200) yards of any church or
within five hundred (500) yards of any school, as measured from front door to
front door.
   C.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class B or Class C beer
license or employees or agents of said holder, to sell, dispense, furnish or
give beer to any person after the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight,
Monday through Thursday and after the hour of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Friday
and Saturday.
      2.   Licensees must close the entire business operations, empty the
premises of all persons, personnel and customers, and lock the facility during
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Monday
through Thursday and from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
on Friday and Saturday, except that the closing hour on the day following
December 31 of any year shall be three o'clock (3:00) A.M. (Ord. 5-26-87, 5-26-
1987)
      3.   Any person having a Class B or C beer license or his agents or
employees, shall remove or cause to be removed from the licensed premises all
patrons, customers or individuals not employed on the premises by the time
above stated in subsection C1 of this Section.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person having a Class B or C beer
license or for his agents or employees to permit any patron, customer or
individual not employed on the premises to remain on such premises after the
closing time above provided; provided however, no licensed premises may employ
more than two (2) persons on the premises after the closing hour without the
permission of the Emery County Sheriff's Department or the Mayor.
   D.   Illumination; Advertising: Licensed premises shall be kept brightly
illuminated at all times while it is occupied or open for business, and no
booth or kind of stall shall be maintained unless all tables, chairs and
occupants are kept open to full view from the main floor and the entrance of
such licensed premises. It shall be unlawful to advertise the sale of beer,
except under such regulations as are made by the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission of Utah; provided, that a simple designation of the fact that beer
is sold under City license may be placed in or upon the window or front of the
licensed premises.
   E.   Manner Of Sales: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer,
except in the manner for which he has been so licensed, pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 4-424; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Number Issued: The total number of Class B and Class C beer licenses
issued in the City shall not exceed four (4) and the number of Class A beer
licenses shall be at the discretion of the City Council; provided, that the
Ordinance codified in this Chapter shall not operate to reduce the number of
businesses now licensed to sell beer, whether issued by the City or by the
County, if such business is annexed, nor shall it affect reapplications for
such licenses. (Ord. 5-9-89, 5-9-1989)
   G.   Minors:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to allow anyone in any establishment possessing
a Class B or Class C beer license under the age of twenty one (21). It shall
also be unlawful to sell beer to any person under the age of twenty one (21) or
to sell beer for consumption on the premises unless so licensed, or to permit
the drinking of liquor on such premises. (Ord. 4-14-87, 4-14-1987)
      2.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to enter or be
in or about any premises licensed as a Class C beer license or to drink beer,
or any other intoxicating liquor, in said licensed premises.
      3.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability for any licensee of a Class C beer license, or any operator, agent or
employee of such licensee, to permit any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to remain in or about such licensed premises.
      4.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be in or
around any lounge or bar area in a premises licensed for the sale of beer.
      5.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability for any licensee of a license for the sale of beer, or any operator,
agent or employee of said licensee, to permit any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to be in or about the lounge or bar area of such licensed
premises.
      6.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase,
accept or have any beer or liquor; provided, that this subsection shall not
apply to persons under twenty one (21) years of age who are bona fide employees
of a Class A licensed premises while in the discharge of their employment
therein or thereabouts. (Ord. 11-14-89, 11-14-1989)
   H.   Lawful Purchase: It is a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any licensee to purchase or acquire or to have or
possess for the purpose of sale or distribution, any beer except that which he
shall have lawfully purchased from a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the
provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (1979 Code § 9-416; amd.
1998 Code)
3-2-12: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All applications for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing licenses
shall be filed with the Business License Administrator at least thirty (30)
days prior to the expiration date of the then issued license. Any person who
fails to file such application within the time limit shall close his licensed
premises on the expiration date of the then issued license and shall keep the
premises closed for any and all business for the sale of beer until the date
his new license is issued by the City Council. (1979 Code § 9-419; amd. 1998
Code)
3-2-13: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: The City Council may, after a hearing, revoke or suspend any
beer license on a finding by it that the licensee or his officers, agents or
employees have violated any provision of this Chapter or any ordinance of the
City, whether now or hereafter enacted, which in any way relates to the
operation of the business or the safety of the public.
   B.   Hearing: A hearing may be requested by any person:
      1.   That is denied or refused a beer license by any officer, agent or
employee of the City.
      2.   Whose beer license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited from
that for which it was first issued.
   C.   Request For Hearing: The request for hearing must be made in writing to
the Mayor or City Recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date
notice denying, refusing, removing, qualifying, restricting or revoking the
beer license is mailed by the City to the applicant or license holder at his
address as it appears on the application or license.
   D.   Time And Place; Witnesses; Decision: Following receipt of a request for
hearing, the City Council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the
time and place the hearing is to be held. At the hearing, the aggrieved party
shall have the right to hear and examine any witnesses the City may produce to
support its decision and to present his own evidence in support of its
contention. The City Council shall, within ten (10) days following the
conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who requested the
hearing of the decision of the City Council. (1979 Code § 9-427)
   E.   Limitations Of Hearing: This Section shall not be construed so as to
afford any aggrieved party more than one hearing before the City Council, nor
shall the hearing provided in this Section apply to any criminal complaint or
proceeding. (1979 Code § 9-427; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Penalty: It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to sell beer after the revocation of the
license issued pursuant to this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-411B; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Title
3-3-2: Purpose
3-3-3: Effective Date
3-3-4: Tax Imposed
3-3-5: Penalty
3-3-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
FERRON. (Ord. 1-23-90, 1-23-1990)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Authorization Of Tax: The Forty Eighth Session of the Utah Legislature
authorized municipalities of the State of Utah to enact sales and use tax
ordinances imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
   B.   Tax Established: It is the purpose of this Chapter to conform the sales
and use tax of the City to conform to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax
Act, Utah Code Annotated chapter 12, title 59, as currently amended. (Ord. 1-
23-90, 1-23-1990)
3-3-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Chapter shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M., January 1, 1990. (Ord. 1-23-90, 1-23-1990)
3-3-4: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   From and after one minute after the effective date hereof, there is
levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of
tangible personal property, services and meals made within the City at the rate
of one percent (1%).
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the City of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the operative date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property.
      3.   For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out-of- State designation. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the
State Tax Commission. Public utilities, as defined by Utah Code Annotated title
54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any county
or municipality where public utilities are rendered, but the place of sale or
the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the City shall be
as determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula
and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   B.   Adoption Of State Codes; Provisions:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, and in
force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales
taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted
and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in subsection B of
this Section shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City
for the word "State" when the word is used as part of the title of the State
Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of the State of Utah, nor shall the name
of the City be substituted for that of the State in any section when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the State
Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this Chapter.
      3.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by
reason of this Section.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer.
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sales transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the State under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by
that county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act. (Ord.
1-23-90, 1-23-1990)
3-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1-23-90, 1-23-1990; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Tax Imposed
3-4-4: Exemptions To Tax
3-4-5: Existing Franchise Agreements
3-4-6: Contract With State Tax Commission
3-4-7: State Statutes Incorporated
3-4-8: Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
3-4-9: Effective Date Of Levy
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the City to adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to and in conformance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq., the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act. (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the municipal energy sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: A. A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
      2.   Any combination of subsections A or B of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE: A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for
sale or use in the City and includes:
      1.   The value of the energy itself; and
      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service
charges or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable
form to each class of customer in the City.
   B.   Delivered value does not include the amount of a tax paid under Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1 or part 2.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the State Tax Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX: A. A franchise tax;
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combinations of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this State,
any county, city, municipality, district, or other local governmental entity of
the State, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any
purpose, except sale in the regular course of business.
USE: A. The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
   B.   Use does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the
taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity. (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
3-4-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling three percent
(3%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax. (Ord. 2006-5, 8-24-
2006)
   A.   Calculation: The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the
taxable energy to the consumer.
   B.   Additional Tax: The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on
taxable energy imposed by the city as authorized by Utah Code Annotated title
59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-
1997)
3-4-4: EXEMPTIONS TO TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b);
notwithstanding an exemption granted under Utah Code Annotated section 59-1-
104.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject
to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
federal law, the United States constitution or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
city.
   C.   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt
from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter, provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
state authorized by Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 3; and
      2.   The City is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this Chapter, if the
tax due under this Chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
3-4-5: EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   No Alteration: This Chapter shall not alter any existing franchise
agreements between the City and energy suppliers.
   B.   Credit Against Tax Due: There is a credit against the tax due from any
consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the City
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-
1997)
3-4-6: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   Required; Authority Of Mayor: On or before the effective date hereof,
the City shall contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions
incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and
use tax, in accordance with this Chapter. This contract may be a supplement to
any existing contract with the Commission to administer and collect the local
sales and use tax, as provided in this Code. The Mayor, with the approval of
the City Council is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the State
Tax Commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Ordinance enacted by this
Chapter.
   B.   Monthly Payments By Supplier; Conditions: An energy supplier shall pay
the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers
directly to the City on a quarterly basis.
   C.   Deduction Of Franchise Fees: An energy supplier paying the municipal
energy sales and use tax directly to the City may deduct any contractual
franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and
remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-307(4). (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
3-4-7: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   A.   Specified; Exemptions: Except as herein provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 10,
chapter 1, part 3, Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act, as well as this
Chapter, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12,
part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof,
insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and
59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes
levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as if fully
set forth herein.
   B.   Substitution Of Terms: Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code
Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the State is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of the City shall be substituted,
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City for the word
"State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax
Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the City be
substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of such a
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Chapter.
   C.   Amendments: Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the City for the
purposes of carrying out this Chapter are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
3-4-8: ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this Chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord.
6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
3-4-9: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
This Chapter was reviewed and approved by the City Council on June 10, 1997 in
compliance with legislation approved by the State. The municipal energy sales
and use tax shall be levied beginning one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M., July 1, 1997. (Ord. 6-10-97, 6-10-1997)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: Registration Of Solicitors
3-5-4: Application Form
3-5-5: Fee
3-5-6: Written Disclosure
3-5-7: Exemptions
3-5-8: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
3-5-9: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-5-10: Denial Of License
3-5-11: Duties Of Solicitors
3-5-12: No Solicitation Notice
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage
in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that person is a
competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a home
solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or services.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services
by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation regardless
of:
   A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
   B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or similar designation.
SOLICIT OR SOLICITING OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities shall be
deemed solicitation:
   A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought.
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications.
   C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity.
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services.
   E.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a solicitor license.
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-3: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a license. (Ord.
2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-4: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use of the
registration of solicitors. Upon request, any person or entity may obtain in
person, by mail, or facsimile, a copy of the application form. Each application
form shall require disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following
information and fee:
   A.   Contact Information:
      1.   The applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former
names or aliases used during the past ten (10) years;
      2.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
   B.   Proof Of Identity: An in person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of the applicant:
      1.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      2.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      3.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      4.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
   C.   Proof Of Registration With The Department Of Commerce: The applicant
shall provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or
entity, has registered with the Utah state department of commerce.
   D.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known registered or trademark names;
      2.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
   E.   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide an original or copy
of the original BCI background check, dated no more than one hundred eighty
(180) days prior to the date of the application, that has been completed by
either: 1) Utah department of public safety bureau of criminal identification
verified criminal history report personal to the applicant; or 2) verification
by the Utah department of public safety bureau of criminal identification that
no criminal history rising to the level of a disqualifying status exists for
the applicant.
   F.   Responses To Questions Regarding Disqualifying Status: The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      1.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide,
b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, d) sexual assault of any kind, or e)
burglary or home invasion;
      2.   Are criminal charges currently pending against the applicant for: a)
felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, d) sexual assault
of any kind, or e) burglary or home invasion;
      3.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony in the last
ten (10) years;
      4.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the last five (5) years;
      5.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or
(a)(19);
      7.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      8.   Does the applicant have any outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      9.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-5: FEE:
The applicant shall pay such fee as determined applicable by the city, which
shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application and issuing
the certificate and identification badge. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-6: WRITTEN DISCLOSURE:
The application form shall be accompanied by a written disclosure notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify any and all information submitted on the application. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-
25-2009)
3-5-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from registering as a solicitor:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer
goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a legitimate charitable organization. The
charitable exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to
finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural
programs, provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the
school administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture
student identification from the educational institution for which they are
soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in section
3-5-8 of this chapter while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-8: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
Should the licensing officer determine that the applicant is entitled to a
license the license administrator shall:
   A.   Issue the applicant a business license certificate that shall list the
name of the solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the
date on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and
signed by the license administrator and shall be carried by the solicitor at
all times.
   B.   Each solicitor shall be required to wear an identification badge
provided by the applicant, company or responsible entity. The identification
badge shall contain: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) address and phone number
of the registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the
responsible person or entity as provided; 3) a recent photograph of the
registered solicitor; and 4) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord.
2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-9: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
3-5-10: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a license to
an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The application form is not complete;
      2.   The applicant fails to establish proof of identity, provide a BCI or
pay the required fees;
      3.   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant or
employee of the applicant has a disqualifying status;
      4.   The applicant has previously been denied a license by the city, or
has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying
status under this title;
      5.   The information submitted in the application is found to be
incorrect or incomplete;
      6.   Since the issuance of the license the city received a substantiated
report of misconduct, criminal conviction pertaining to a disqualifying status;
or
      7.   A violation of this chapter or similar federal, state or municipal
laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying status. (Ord. 2009-1,
6-25-2009)
3-5-11: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "no soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "no
solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a certificate of
registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of his duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "no
solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart from that residence.
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with or touch another person without the person's consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2009-1,
6-25-2009)
3-5-12: NO SOLICITATION NOTICE:
Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse solicitors by
displaying a "no solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or near the main
entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading
to the residence. The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to
constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does
not desire to receive and/or does not invite solicitors. Further, it shall be
the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence for the presence of
any such notice and the provisions of this section shall apply also to
solicitors who are exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-25-2009)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: Requirements
3-6-4: Registration To Engage In Business
3-6-5: Job License For Each Contract
3-6-6: Regulations
3-6-7: Records Maintained; Inspection
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a system of imposing license fees
upon persons engaging in business within the limits of the City as contractors.
The licenses are designed to be determined upon the basis of each contract or
job being performed. It is the opinion of the City Council that this method of
determining the amount of fee will result in fair taxation and will not
discriminate against the contractor who performs only a few jobs within the
City limits as distinguished from the contractor who performs many. (1979 Code
§ 9-431)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm, copartnership, corporation, association or other
organization, or any combination thereof, who for a fixed sum, price, fee,
percentage or other compensation other than wages, undertakes any building,
highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development,
or improvement, or any part thereof; provided, that the term "contractor", as
used in this Chapter, shall include anyone who builds more than one structure
on his own property during any one year for the purpose of sale and shall
include subcontractors, but shall not include anyone who merely furnishes
materials or supplies without fabricating the same into, or consuming the same
in the performance of the work of the "contractors", as herein defined.
TYPES OF CONTRACTORS: As an illustrative list of contractors subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, but not in limitation thereof, the following
occupations are subject to this Chapter: general contractors, specialty
contractors of all kinds, such as, but not limited to, those engaged in the
business of installing, repairing or otherwise performing services in
connection with: acoustical tile and roof decking; awnings, storm doors and
windows; air conditioning, dry heating, sheet metal; boilers, steam fitting;
carpentry; cement and concrete; ceramic tile; cabinet and millwork; composition
floor, countertops, tile; carpet; drywall; elevator installation; electrical;
excavating and grading; fencing; floor coverings; fire prevention (structural);
furnaces and burners; glazing; industrial piping; iron and bronze (ornamental);
insulation; landscaping; lathing; lawn sprinklers; masonry; mosaic tile and
terazzo; overhead doors; painting and paper hanging; pest control (structural);
plastering; plumbing and wet heating; roofing and siding; swimming pool; signs,
stone masonry; sewer installation; steel reinforcing and erection; tanks
(structural); waterproofing; weatherstripping; welding; wrecking and
demolition; wood floor laying and finishing. (1979 Code § 9-432; amd. 1998
Code)
3-6-3: REQUIREMENTS:
Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor within the corporate
limits of the City must comply with the two (2) following requirements: (1979
Code § 9-433)
   A.   Registration: Prior to engaging in any subject business activity during
any calendar year, he must register for the calendar year as a contractor by
completing and filing a registration form in the office of the Business License
Administrator.
   B.   License: Prior to the performance of any services in connection with
any specific contract or job, the person shall secure a license to engage in
the performance of service connected with said specific job or contract from
the office of the Business License Administrator. (1979 Code § 9-433; amd. 1998
Code)
3-6-4: REGISTRATION TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS:
   A.   Form; Information Requested: Any person desiring to engage in business
as a contractor shall complete and file in the office of the Business License
Administrator a registration form provided to him by the City which shall show:
(1979 Code § 9-434; amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   The name of the contractor.
      2.   The address and telephone number of the contractor.
      3.   The type of organization, e.g., corporation, partnership or sole
proprietor.
      4.   If a partnership or a corporation or other artificial person, the
name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the functions
of the organization:
         a.   Whether or not licensed under the contractor's license law of the
State; if so, the license number of the contractor.
         b.   Type of business in which registrant seeks to engage, e.g.,
general contractor or one of the specialty contractors.
         c.   Such other information as the City Council may by regulation
require.
   B.   Annual Fee: Any person seeking to register for the privilege of doing
business as a contractor within the limits of the City for any calendar year,
or any part thereof, shall pay an annual registration fee of forty dollars
($40.00). (1979 Code § 9-434)
3-6-5: JOB LICENSE FOR EACH CONTRACT:
   A.   Required: Any person desiring to perform services as a contractor
shall, in addition to registering, as above required, secure a job license
granting to him the privilege of performing the services required of him for
each contract or job which he proposes to complete.
   B.   Form; Information Requested: Any person seeking said job license for a
contractor job shall complete an application therefor, on forms provided him by
the City. The application shall set forth:
      1.   The name and address of the contractor.
      2.   His City registration number.
      3.   The number of his State contractor's license.
      4.   The person by whom he is engaged to perform services as a
contractor.
      5.   The address of said person.
      6.   The location at which the said contractor's services are to be
performed.
      7.   The type of services that are to be performed, e.g., as a general
contractor or one of the specialty contractors.
      8.   The contract amount. (1979 Code § 9-435)
   C.   Fee: Every contractor, for the privilege of engaging in the business of
performing said services, shall pay the amount set forth in the Uniform
Building Code, table 1-A. (1979 Code § 9-436; amd. 1998 Code)
3-6-6: REGULATIONS:
The City Council may adopt such regulations as in its opinion are necessary to
implement this Chapter and the objectives thereof. (1979 Code § 9-438)
3-6-7: RECORDS MAINTAINED; INSPECTION:
All persons registered pursuant to this Chapter for the privilege of doing
business as contractors, and all persons who engage in doing business as
contractors, shall maintain records of all services performed by them as
contractors within the corporate limits of the City. The records shall disclose
the person for whom the services are performed and the contract price or charge
made for the services and such other information as the City Council may, by
regulation, require. The persons shall maintain such records at their office or
principal place of business and shall permit officials or agents of the City to
inspect said records for the purpose of determining whether or not said persons
have complied with the requirements of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-437)
CHAPTER 7
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Intent
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: License Required; Penalty
3-7-4: Application For License
3-7-5: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-7-6: License Fees
3-7-7: Transfer Of License
3-7-8: Inspection Of Premises
3-7-9: Display Of License
3-7-10: Zoning And Location Requirements
3-7-11: Development Standards
3-7-12: Restrictions
3-7-13: Renewal Of License
3-7-14: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-7-1: INTENT:
The intent and objective of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations that govern the licensing and location of sexually oriented
businesses in order to avoid adverse secondary effects which may result from
the operation of such businesses; to regulate signage of such businesses and
prevent inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the community. This
chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests recognized by
this chapter in a manner consistent with protections provided by the United
States constitution and the Utah constitution. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Terms involving sexually oriented businesses shall have the meanings set forth
in this section.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any establishment which conducts as a principal use
of the premises, or as a significant or substantial adjunct to another use of
the premises, the sale, rental, display or other offering of material,
clothing, devices, or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by
its emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as the primary or principal
attraction to the premises. Illustrative examples are, but are not limited to:
adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, adult
cabarets, adult theaters, or nude model studio.
The definition of adult entertainment shall not include an establishment where
a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional
person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized
sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS: Any book, article, magazine, publication or
written matter of any kind, drawing, etching, painting, photograph, motion
picture in any form or sound recording, which depicts sexual activity, actual
or simulated, involving human beings or human beings and animals, or which
exhibits uncovered human genitals or pubic region in a lewd or lascivious
manner or which exhibits human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely covered.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola;
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following:
   A.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not
limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, sadomasochism, or bestiality;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
   D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
   E.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition. (Ord. 2006-
3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; PENALTY:
It shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to engage in the business of the sale of
sexually oriented materials, without first having procured a license therefor
from the city council and paid the license fee required by this chapter. It
shall be unlawful and constitute a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, to misrepresent or make false statements regarding section
3-7-5, "Qualifications Of Licensee", of this chapter, or in making application
for a sexually oriented business license. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Verification; Filing: All applications for licenses authorized by this
chapter shall be verified and filed with the planning commission. The
applications must state the applicant's name in full and that he understands
and has read and complied with the requirements and possesses the
qualifications specified in this chapter. If the applicant is a copartnership,
the names and addresses of all partners and if a corporation, the names and
addresses of all officers and directors, must be stated.
   B.   Applicant Subscription: The application must be subscribed by the
applicant, who shall state under oath that the facts therein contained are
true.
   C.   Referral To County Sheriff: All applications filed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter shall be referred to the Emery County sheriff's
department for inspection and report. The sheriff's department shall, when
possible, within twenty (20) days after receiving such application, make report
to the city council of the general reputation and character of the persons who
habitually frequent such place, the nature and kind of business conducted at
such place by the applicant or by any other persons or by the applicant at any
other place; whether the place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and
orderly manner; and the proximity of such premises to any school or church. The
sheriff's department shall also add to such report their recommendation as to
whether or not the application should be granted. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-5: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No license shall be granted to any retailer to sell sexually oriented materials
or operate a sexually oriented business, unless he shall be of good moral
character, over the age of twenty one (21) years, and a citizen of the United
States, or to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or of any violation of
any law of the state or provision of the ordinances of the city relating to
intoxicating liquors, or of keeping a gambling or disorderly house, or related
to sexually oriented businesses or activities, or who has plead guilty to or
has forfeited bail on a charge of having committed a felony or of having
violated any such law or ordinance, or to any partnership, any member of which
lacks any of the qualifications set forth in this chapter or to any corporation
of which lacks any of such qualifications. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-6: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Required: Applications provided for in this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fees provided in this section. The fee shall be returned to
the applicant if the application is denied.
   B.   Enumerated: In addition to any other business license fee which any
person or place of business may be required to pay, there is hereby levied upon
the business location of every person engaged in the sale of sexually oriented
books, materials, or clothing an additional annual license fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00). If food or beverages are consumed or offered for sale on the
premises of a business subject to this chapter such business shall also be
subject to all additional ordinances, licenses, and fees of the city, county,
and state governing such practices or sale. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, and if
revoked by the city council, the fee paid by the licensee to the city for the
license shall be forfeited to said city. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-8: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
   A.   Authority: All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any
officer, agent or peace officer of the city, county, state, or the state board
of health.
   B.   Revocation: Any license granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked
on a finding by the city council that the licensee has had ten (10) days' or
more notice from the board of health that the licensee is violating one or more
health ordinances, rules or regulations of the city or of the Utah division of
health and has failed to comply with such health ordinance, rule or regulation.
   C.   Close Of Business: The city council may direct the Emery County
sheriff's department to close down any business licensed under this chapter
where the city council, city, county, or state law enforcement agencies or the
board of health has determined that continued operation of the business
presents an imminent danger to the health of the community or persons who may
frequent or eat or drink at the business. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-9: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the license
shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall
refer or for which it shall be issued. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-10: ZONING AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
Any sexually oriented business licensed as an adult business or a seminude
entertainment business shall be permitted only within the zones explicitly
designating sexually oriented businesses as a permitted use.
   A.   No sexually oriented business shall operate within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any of the following:
      1.   A residential zone boundary line as shown on the zone map of Ferron
City;
      2.   The property boundary of any public or private school or educational
institution, child daycare facility, public or private park or plaza, library,
or religious institution; or
      3.   The boundary of any property for which a sexually oriented business
license earlier has been issued and has not expired;
      4.   The boundary of any property on which alcoholic beverages are
offered for sale.
   B.   No public or private school or educational institution, child daycare
facility, public or private park or plaza, library, or religious institution
shall be established closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any sexually
oriented business.
   C.   For the purpose of this section, the distance from any public or
private school or educational institution, child daycare facility, public or
private park or plaza, library, or religious institution, or property on which
alcoholic beverages are sold, shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the line of any property on which a sexually oriented business
is operating, or is proposed to operate, to the nearest residential zone
boundary line or property boundary line of any public or private school or
educational institution, child daycare facility, public or private park or
plaza, library, or religious institution or property on which alcoholic
beverages are sold, as the case may be. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-11: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Each sexually oriented business shall be subject to all development standards
of the underlying zone in which it is located, including, but not limited to,
setbacks, building height, projections, etc.
   A.   Off street parking shall be provided as required for the zone in which
the sexually oriented business is located.
   B.   Signs for each sexually oriented business shall be limited to the
following:
      1.   All signs shall be flat wall signs.
      2.   The maximum area of all signs shall not exceed one square foot of
sign area per foot of building frontage on a public street.
   C.   No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the
premises shall be displayed in window areas or in any area where they can be
viewed from a public sidewalk. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-12: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   Licensees must close the entire business operation, empty the
premises of all persons, personnel and customers, and lock the facility during
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Monday
through Thursday, from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
Friday and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, Saturday until eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. Monday.
      2.   It shall be unlawful and constitute a class C misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person having a license under this chapter or for
his agents or employees to permit any patron, customer or individual not
employed on the premises to remain on such premises after the closing time
above provided; provided however, no licensed premises may employ more than two
(2) persons on the premises after the closing hour without the permission of
the Emery County sheriff's department or the mayor.
   B.   Illumination: Licensed premises shall be kept brightly illuminated,
both internally and externally, at all times while it is occupied or open for
business, and no booth or kind of stall shall be maintained unless all tables,
chairs and occupants are kept open to full view from the main floor and the
entrance of such licensed premises except that such enclosed booths as may be
necessary for customer modesty may be provided for the trying on of garments
offered for sale on the licensed premises.
   C.   Minors:
      1.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
enter or be in or about any premises licensed under this chapter.
      2.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, to sell sexually oriented materials to any person under the
age of twenty one (21).
      3.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any licensee under this chapter, or for any operator,
agent or employee of such licensee, to permit any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to remain in or about such licensed premises.
      4.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
purchase, or accept any sexually oriented material from any establishment
licensed under this chapter.
      5.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability for any licensee to employ any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to work in any premises licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 2006-3,
5-11-2006)
3-7-13: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All applications for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing licenses
shall be filed with the planning commission at least thirty (30) days prior to
the expiration date of the then issued license. Any person who fails to file
such application within the time limit shall close his licensed premises on the
expiration date of the then issued license and shall keep the premises closed
for any and all business until the date his new license is issued by the city
council. (Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
3-7-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: The city council may, after a hearing, revoke or suspend any
sexually oriented business license on a finding by it that the licensee or his
officers, agents or employees have violated any provision of this chapter or
any ordinance of the city, whether now or hereafter enacted, which in any way
relates to the operation of the business or the safety of the public.
   B.   Hearing: A hearing may be requested by any person:
      1.   That is denied or refused a sexually oriented license by any
officer, agent or employee of the city.
      2.   Whose sexually oriented business license is revoked, restricted,
qualified or limited from that for which it was first issued.
   C.   Request For Hearing: The request for hearing must be made in writing to
the mayor or city recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date
notice denying, refusing, removing, qualifying, restricting or revoking the
sexually oriented business license is mailed by the city to the applicant or
license holder at his address as it appears on the application or license.
   D.   Time And Place; Witnesses; Decision: Following receipt of a request for
hearing, the city council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the
time and place the hearing is to be held. At the hearing, the aggrieved party
shall have the right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to
support its decision and to present his own evidence in support of its
contention. The city council shall, within ten (10) days following the
conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who requested the
hearing of the decision of the city council.
   E.   Limitations Of Hearing: This section shall not be construed so as to
afford any aggrieved party more than one hearing before the city council, nor
shall the hearing provided in this section apply to any criminal complaint or
proceeding.
   F.   Penalty: It shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to continue to operate a sexually oriented
business after the revocation of the license issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-3, 5-11-2006)
CHAPTER 8
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Levy Of Tax
3-8-3: Rate
3-8-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption
3-8-5: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3-8-6: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
3-8-7: Procedure For Erroneous Collections
3-8-8: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CUSTOMER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, the person who
is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER: A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purpose of sales and use taxes under Utah code title 59,
chapter 12, sales and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah code
section 59-12-207.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee, or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge on the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act; or
   C.   Interest, a fee, or charge that is charged by a telecommunications
service when payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is defined in the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
MUNICIPALITY: City of Ferron.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where
the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which
shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service
address" means:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection is known, the location of
the telecommunication equipment:
      1.   To which a call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection is known, the location of
the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
      1.   Telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider; information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition, "telecommunications provider" means a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service;
or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates, or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah code section 54-8b-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. Telephone service, as defined in Utah code
section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that
originates and terminates within the boundaries of the state; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah code section 59-
12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 2006-6, 10-26-2006)
3-8-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord.
2006-6, 10-26-2006)
3-8-3: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the telecommunications
providers' gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed
to the municipality pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section
10-1-407. (Ord. 2006-6, 10-26-2006)
3-8-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the
telecommunications providers' gross receipts from telecommunications service
attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 2006-6, 10-26-2006)
3-8-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of April 1, 2007. (Ord. 2006-6,
10-26-2006)
3-8-6: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah code
section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this
municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 2006-6, 10-26-2006)
3-8-7: PROCEDURE FOR ERRONEOUS COLLECTIONS:
A customer may not bring a cause of action against a telecommunications
provider on the basis that the telecommunications provider erroneously
recovered from the customer municipal telecommunications license taxes
authorized by this chapter:
   A.   Unless the customer provides the telecommunications provider written
notice that:
      1.   The customer requests a refund of the amounts paid by the customer
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated subsection 10-1-403(2); and
      2.   Contains the information necessary to determine the validity of the
request described in subsection A1 of this section; and
   B.   Before sixty (60) days from the day on which the telecommunications
provider receives the written notice required by subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 2006-6, 10-26-2006)
3-8-8: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah
code 10-1-203 or Utah code title 11, chapter 26, local taxation of utilities
limitation is hereby repealed.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance
or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality, if the
fee is imposed in accordance with Utah code section 72-7-102 and is not related
to the municipality's loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of
the telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration
of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications on a right
of way nor does this chapter limit the municipality's right to charge fees or
taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications
license tax under this chapter and locate telecommunications facilities, as
defined in Utah code section 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 2006-6, 10-
26-2006)
CHAPTER 9
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definition
3-9-1: DEFINITION:
DEFINITION: “Home occupation” is an occupation of a person or family where they
reside and which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the structure for dwelling and residential purposes and does not change the
residential character of the dwelling or neighborhood, and in connection with
which there is no display and/or stock of merchandise.
The planning commission’s review of an application in arriving at the
affirmative findings to meet the above requirements shall also include the
following standards:
   A.   The home occupation shall not employ any person who is not a member of
the family.
   B.   The home occupation is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is
carried on in the dwelling.
   C.   The home occupation can involve the use of any accessory building as
long as that building is inspected for safety and hazards and does not
substantially change the character of the dwelling or the neighborhood.
   D.   No unusual traffic between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   E.   No parking except for customary automobiles and other traditional
residential vehicles including vans and pickups.
   F.   Signs are limited to one non flashing sign not larger in area than two
hundred twenty-six (226) square inches. If lighted, the light shall be diffused
or shielded.
   G.   Unusual waste, or amounts, residential or otherwise may not be
generated.
   H.   Nonresidential dust, odors, noise, and other contamination may not be
generated.
   I.   Home occupied businesses shall obtain all applicable local, state, and
federal business/occupational licensing and permitting.
   J.   In the opinion of the Planning Commission, the physical appearance,
traffic, and other activities in connection with characteristics of the zone in
which the home occupation is located and does not depreciate surrounding
residential values. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986/ amd. Ord. 2020-5, 11-12-2020)
CHAPTER 10
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Imposition Of Transient Room Tax
3-10-2: Purpose
3-10-3: Administration, Collection And Enforcement
3-10-4: Exemptions
3-10-5: Payments
3-10-1: IMPOSITION OF TRANSIENT ROOM TAX:
Pursuant to this ordinance, the City imposes a one percent (1.00%) tax on
charges for public accommodations and services in the City, as described in
U.C.A. Section 59-12-103(1)(i), as amended. (Ord. 2020-1, 4-1-2020)
3-10-2: PURPOSE:
The Utah State Legislature has authorized municipalities to enact a Transient
Room Tax that may be collected from persons and entities providing public
accommodations in the City. It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide for
the uniform assessment and collection of that tax pursuant to U.C.A. Section
59-12-301, et. Seq., as amended. (Ord. 2020-1, 4-1-2020)
3-10-3: ADMINISTRATION, COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The tax collected under this ordinance shall be in accordance with the
procedures set forth in U.C.A. Section 59-12-302 and Section 59-12-354, as
amended. (Ord. 2020-1, 4-1-2020)
3-10-4: EXEMPTIONS:
No Transient Room Tax shall be imposed under this ordinance upon any person (a)
engaged in business for solely religious, charitable, eleemosynary or other
types of strictly nonprofit purpose who is tax exempt in such activities under
the laws of the United States and the State of Utah; or (b) engaged in a
business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of
the United States or the State of Utah. (Ord. 2020-1, 4-1-2020)
3-10-5: PAYMENTS:
On or before the effective date of this ordinance, the City shall contract with
the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the Municipal Transient Room Tax, in
accordance with provisions of this ordinance. The Mayor of the City is hereby
authorized to enter into agreements with the State Tax Commission that may be
necessary for the continued administration and operation of the Transient Room
Tax enacted by this ordinance (Ord. 2020-1, 4-1-2020)
CHAPTER 11
SHORT TERM VACATION RENTALS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Short Term Vacation Rental Rules And Regulations
3-11-1: SHORT TERM VACATION RENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Short Term Rental Or Vacation Rental definition: To rent, lease, loan, let or
otherwise hire out any dwelling unit for a period of twenty nine (29) days or
less. Regulations and strictions imposed by this section are in recognition of
the premise that a vacation rental provides lodging for a transient population
that may or may not honor neighborhood values or exhibit neighborly
consideration to the same extent as permanent residents. Separation
requirements listed in B, below are based on a desire to maintain the overall
residential character of neighborhoods and the purpose of single-family
residential zones to promote safe locations for residential uses.
   A.   Business License Required: No dwelling in a residential zone shall be
occupied or used as a short-term vacation rental until such time that the owner
has obtained a short-term vacation rental business license issued after meeting
with and being approved by the Planning Commission.
   B.   Conditions for issuance of a Business License for a Short-Term Vacation
Rental: In addition to any other requirement of this section, a short-term
vacation rental business license may be approved by the planning commission if:
      1.   The dwelling unit is located in a single-family dwelling that has
been issued a certificate of occupancy by the date of the adoption of this
ordinance or has been in use as a residential dwelling for at least six (6)
months from issuance of a certificate of occupancy before application is made
for a short-term vacation rental license.
      2.   The property line of another dwelling licensed as a short-term
vacation rental is not located within 600' (six hundred feet), as measured
along the same street or around the corner, of the front property line corners
of the property where the proposed short term vacation rental license is being
sought.
      3.   The application lists the name, address and phone number of the
owner or other person designated by the owner as the property manager as well
as an emergency contact if that is not the same person who shall be responsible
for ensuring compliance with the rules and regulations specified in this
section, and
      4.   The application includes a valid Utah State Tax number for
remittance of transient lodging taxes.
   C.   Parking Regulations: The owner of any property licensed as a short-term
vacation rental shall provide off street parking for guests in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Off street parking shall be provided on the same lot as the dwelling
which is licensed as a short-term vacation rental.
      2.   All guest parking should be contained on the site. Tandem spaces on
a driveway may be used.
      3.   No off-street parking space may be located in front of the living
area of the dwelling unless there is a circular driveway.
      4.   The number of vehicles allowed by the occupants of a vacation rental
home shall be restricted to the number of off-street parking spaces provided by
the owner.
   D.   Maintenance Standards: Any property that contains a dwelling which is
licensed as a short-term vacation rental shall conform to the following
standards:
      1.   Prevention of Noise, Nuisance or Trespass: The owner of any dwelling
licensed as a short-term vacation rental shall be responsible to ensure that
guests or occupants of the short-term rental do not:
         a.   Create noises that by reason of time, nature, intensity, or
duration are out of character with noises customarily heard in the surrounding
residential neighborhood or disturb the peace of surrounding residential
property.
         b.   Interfere with the privacy of surrounding residents or trespass
onto surrounding residential properties.
         c.   Allow pets or animals to violate Ferron City animal control
ordinance.
         d.   Engage in any disorderly or illegal conduct, including illegal
consumption of drugs and alcohol.
      2.   Maximum occupancy in any dwelling licensed as a short-term vacation
rental shall be ten (10) persons at any one time, as per Utah fire code.
      3.   An inspection of a vacation rental property for compliance with
these regulations may be performed prior to receiving a business license.
Additional inspections may be performed by the code enforcement officer with
24-hour notice if deemed necessary by the city.
      4.   The owner of any dwelling licensed as a short-term vacation rental
shall be required to collect and remit on a timely basis transient lodging tax.
   E.   Enforcement Provisions:
      1.   Any owner of any dwelling in a residential zone within the City of
Ferron who allows or permits occupation of said dwelling as a short-term
vacation rental, as defined herein, shall have a business license, or shall be
fined according to Ferron City code.
      2.   Any owner of any dwelling in a residential zone within the City of
Ferron who fails to obtain a business license or having first obtained a
business license for use or occupation of said dwelling as short-term vacation
rental and thereafter operates or permits operation of said short-term vacation
rental in violation of the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty
of an infraction and shall be punished according to the Ferron City Code.
      3.   Any person who occupies a short-term rental as a guest and who
violates any local ordinance or state law shall be subject to arrest, issuance
of a citation, or other criminal process in accordance with all state, federal
or local statutes, rules, or ordinances.
      4.   Violation of any provision of this section regulating short term
vacation rentals shall constitute a separate offense for each day said
violation occurs or continues.
      5.   In the event of three (3) or more violations of this section
committed by an owner or guest or any combination of the two, within any 12-
month period, the city council may, depending on the nature of or extent of the
violations, proceed with revocation of the business license for any short-term
vacation rental property. (Ord. 2021-2, 8-9-2021)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Appointment Of Fire Chief And Officers
4-1-2: Purchasing Policy
4-1-3: Travel Policy
4-1-4: Clothing Allowance
4-1-5: Fire Station Janitorial Responsibilities
4-1-6: Fire Station Snow Removal
4-1-7: Physical Fitness Equipment
4-1-8: Wellness Program Policies
4-1-9: Background Checks
4-1-1: APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF AND OFFICERS:
   A.   The Ferron City Mayor and Council shall appoint the Fire Chief in
January of each even year for a two (2)-year term. Prior to the term ending,
the Council Member over the Department shall meet with the members to review
any questions or concerns before the appointment of the Fire Chief takes place.
If the Chief position should become vacant, individuals interested shall make
application by submitting a letter of interest to the Mayor and Council.
   B.   All other officers in the Fire Department shall be elected by members
of the Department.
   C.   Citizens desiring to join the Fire Department shall contact the Fire
Chief or an Officer in the Department for approval.
   D.   The Fire Chief will be paid seven dollars ($7.00) per building
inspection performed within the Ferron City limits. The Fire Chief will also be
paid seven dollars ($7.00) per hour to attend the monthly Emery County Fire
Chief meeting. It will be the responsibility of the Fire Chief to submit the
request for payment to the City Recorder. The Fire Chief is not required to
attend City Council meetings.
   E.   It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department Officers to
deliver a copy of the Volunteer Fire Department and Emergency Medical
Technicians Policy and Procedures to each Fire Department Member and EMT. (Res.
2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-2: PURCHASING POLICY:
   A.   Purchases in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be approved
by the Fire Chief and the Council Member for prior to the expenditure taking
place as allowed in the adopted Fire Department Budget. Purchases under the one
hundred dollars ($100.00) limit can be made for items approved by the Fire
Chief.
   B.   Purchases requiring immediate action due to an emergency situation
shall be approved by the Fire Chief or by the Fire Department Officer in charge
of the emergency.
   C.   Firework purchases for Peach Day's shall be kept within the approved
Peach Day Budget. This purchase may automatically be performed by the Fire
Chief after he/she has obtained the necessary budget information from the City.
   D.   Purchases for food and drink items shall be made only for active Fire
Department members when on duty. These items are to be kept at a minimum cost
to replenish the energy and dehydration level of the fire fighter. Items
charged to Ferron City accounts shall only be made by individuals pre-approved
by the Fire Chief. No charges or items purchased are allowed to be used for
purposes outside of the Fire Department responsibilities.
   E.   It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief and the City Council
member over the Fire Department to meet on a quarterly basis to review the
expenditures to ensure spending is appropriate and within the approved budget.
(Res. 2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-3: TRAVEL POLICY:
   A.   The Fire Department shall select active members of the department to
attend training as approved in the fiscal year (July 1 through June 30) budget.
The expense for mileage, food, and lodging will be paid from the budgeted
amount. Selection of the members to attend should be rotated so that everyone
receives the same opportunity for training. It shall be the Fire Chiefs
responsibility to oversee that all members are trained properly.
   B.   The travel fees will be paid upon approval according to the Ferron City
Policy. Individuals attending training shall seek assistance from the City
Recorder in making lodging reservations and in filling out travel reimbursement
forms. (Res. 2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-4: CLOTHING ALLOWANCE:
Each active Fire Department Officer, after achieving the proper levels to
become eligible, will be paid the maximum amount of three hundred and fifty
dollars ($350.00) in December of each year to cover damage to personal clothing
during emergency fire calls. All other active Fire Department members that are
eligible will receive a maximum amount of two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00). A Fire Department member must serve on the Department for a minimum
of one (1) year before being eligible to receive the clothing allowance
reimbursement. The maximum amount to be paid out will be reflected in the
annual Fire Department fiscal year budget which must be reviewed prior to
submitting the request for payment. It shall be the responsibility of the Fire
Chief to submit a list of members eligible to receive the reimbursement to the
City Recorder each December. (Res. 2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-5: FIRE STATION JANITORIAL RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the Ferron City Council Member over
the Fire Department and the Fire Chief to oversee the maintenance and cleaning
of the Fire Station both inside and outside of the facility.
   B.   It will be the responsibility of each Fire Department Officer, Member,
City Personnel and EMT to clean up after themselves. This includes but is not
limited to the following: emergencies, meetings, parties, or other activities
and events that may take place at the facility. Clean up includes use of
showers, restrooms, meeting rooms, bay areas, equipment, kitchen area including
cleaning of the refrigerator and stove, etc. It shall be the responsibility of
the Fire Chief and each member to see that the Fire Station is kept in a clean
and orderly manner. (Res. 2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-6: FIRE STATION SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the Ferron City Maintenance
Department to perform snow removal duties at the Fire Station parking lot
keeping it free from any blockage that may interfere in the event of an
emergency.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department Members to remove
snow from all of the sidewalks and other walk areas at the Fire Station
facility keeping it free from any blockage that may interfere in the event of
an emergency. (Res. 2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-7: PHYSICAL FITNESS EQUIPMENT:
   A.   The Physical Fitness Equipment at the Fire Station shall only be used
by current members of the Ferron Fire Department, EMT's, Current City Council
Members and City Employees and their respective spouses.
   B.   Renter(s) of the office space at the Fire Station shall have access to
training rooms, physical fitness rooms, and equipment with prior approval and
scheduling with the Fire Chief.
   C.   Every approved individual desiring use of the physical fitness
equipment is required to sign the Informed Consent and Waiver Form (a copy is
included with this policy) prior to use of equipment. No one under the age of
eighteen (18) is allowed to use the equipment unless special permission is pre-
approved by the Fire Chief and Ferron City Mayor and Council. (Res. 2012-4, 5-
10-2012)
4-1-8: WELLNESS PROGRAM POLICIES:
   A.   Introduction: The Ferron Fire Department has developed a Wellness
program designed to assist members in achieving and maintaining good health and
physical fitness. The Wellness Program participation will assure that each
member is capable of meeting the physical demands of the job, reduce the risk
of illness and injury, improve the health of and extend the health longevity of
active and retired members. The program offers each member the opportunity and
direction to improve his/her personal health and physical fitness to meet
program standards. The program consists of an annual medical examination and an
annual physical fitness evaluation. A health care provider will conduct the
medical examination.
   B.   General Administration of Program:
      1.   The Ferron Fire Department and Wellness Program shall be governed by
and administered through the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP).
      2.   All department members who are subject to the use of self-contained
breathing apparatus (SCBA) shall be required to submit to an annual medical
examination.
      3.   All Fire Department members who are subject to the use of SCBA and
who participate in Fire Suppression Operations shall be required to participate
in the Wellness Program.
   C.   Confidentiality of Program:
      1.   It shall be the responsibility of the Ferron Fire Department and
each individual member to maintain the highest level of confidentiality.
      2.   Personal medical exam results will not be shared with any member of
the Department including Administrative staff. The health care provider will
forward individual medical exam results, including an explanation guide,
directly to the member.
   D.   Physical Fitness Activity: Physical Fitness Activities should include
exercises that are designed to maintain or improve a member's flexibility,
muscular strength, muscular endurance, and anaerobic and aerobic capacity.
   E.   Safety: The Fire Chief is to:
      1.   Provide an orientation session.
      2.   Make sure the crew is familiar with the fitness equipment and
training principles.
      3.   Assure appropriate clothing, including shoes are worn and in good
repair.
      4.   Select an appropriate time to perform the activity.
      5.   Promote the use of sunscreen for outdoor activities.
      6.   Encourage hydration before, during, and after activity.
   F.   Annual Medical Examination:
      1.   The Ferron Fire Department shall encourage an annual medical
examination for members as identified under the General Administration Program
Section.
      2.   The medical examination will include a health risk appraisal, and a
hands-on physical exam.
      3.   In the event the health care provider identifies a health problem or
condition that requires further evaluation, but would not prevent the member
from performing emergency operations, the provider will refer the member to his
or her private licensed health care provider.
      4.   If the health care provider identifies a health condition that
prevents the member from performing emergency operations safely, the member
will immediately notify the Fire Chief. The medical condition will not be
revealed to the Department.
      5.   Members shall have the above medical exam performed by their
personal licensed health care provider.
         a.   The cost of the exam will be the responsibility of the member.
         b.   The exam must be identical or an approved alternative.
         c.   The exam must be completed with in thirty (30) days of the
Department's scheduled exams.
   G.   Does Not Conform: Members, who fail to follow the advice provided may
be subject to disciplinary action. (Res. 2012-4, 5-10-2012)
4-1-9: BACKGROUND CHECKS:
   A.   Ferron City has chosen to require their Fire Department to have a
background check before they can be on the official active roster; and
   B.   The administration needs a standard to follow when evaluating the
background checks;
   C.   That the Ferron City staff will use the following guidelines when
evaluating background checks:
Criminal Arrests and Convictions Disqualification Period
Criminal Arrests and Convictions        Disqualification Period
Felony Conviction (If a felony at time
of conviction or a felony in another    Ten (10) years from completion of
state regardless of the Utah            probation
equivalent)
                                        Five (5) years from conviction date
Misdemeanor Class A Conviction          (with exception of violent misdemeanors
                                        which could be seven (7) years)
Misdemeanor Class B Conviction          Three (3) years from conviction date
Two (2) or more Misdemeanor Class B or  Five (5) years from last conviction
higher-level convictions                date
Misdemeanor Class C - Conviction        Two (2) years from conviction date
(excluding traffic)
DWI or DUI charge with conviction on a
reduced level offense (ex: reckless     Five (5) years from conviction date
driving or blocking roadway)
History of family violence reports
(suspect in three (3) or more incidents Ten (10) years from last incident date
with no convictions)
Two (2) or more Misdemeanor Class B (or Three (3) years from date of last
greater level) arrests                  arrest
Two (2) or more Misdemeanor Class C     Two (2) years from date of last arrest
level arrests
 
(Res. 2021-2, 2-10-2021)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Declaration Of Nuisance
4-2-3: Restroom Or Sewer Facilities
4-2-4: Restrictions On Blocking Water
4-2-5: Nuisances On Property
4-2-6: Abatement Procedure
4-2-7: Penalty For Failure To Comply
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
AUTHOR: Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the
usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord or his agent, the
tenant or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property on
which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors thereof and shall
be equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance shall arise from the
unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business thereon
conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the
continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors.
NUISANCE: Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders
soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome is declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person either as an owner, agent or
occupant to create or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining a
nuisance. (1979 Code §§ 10-311, 10-312; amd. 1998 Code)
4-2-2: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Statement: Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued
in violation of this Chapter, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
abated and punished as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Specified: Nuisances include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Befouling Water: Befouling water in any spring, stream, well or
water source supplying water for culinary purposes. (1979 Code § 10-313)
      2.   Privies, Cesspools: Allowing any privy vault or cesspool or other
individual wastewater disposal system to become a menace to health or a source
of odors or contamination to air or water. (1979 Code § 10-313; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   Garbage Containers, Offensive: Permitting any garbage container to
remain on premises when it has become unclean and offensive.
      4.   Garbage Accumulation: Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter,
filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley,
yard or area, except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal.
      5.   Manure Accumulation: Permitting the accumulation of manure in any
stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard or in any other building or area in
which any animals are kept.
      6.   Slaughterhouses, Feed Yards: Permitting any slaughterhouse, market,
meat shop, stable, feed yard or other place or building wherein any animals are
slaughtered, kept, fed or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition
detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which
flies or rodents breed. (1979 Code § 10-313)
      7.   Discharging Offensive Water Or Liquid Waste: Discharging or placing
any offensive water, chemical spray, liquid waste or refuse of any kind into
any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch,
canal or any vacant lot or which, as the result of continued discharge, will
render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so. (1979 Code §
10-313; amd. 1998 Code)
      8.   Collecting Grease, Offensive Matter: Keeping or collecting any stale
or putrid grease or other offensive matter.
      9.   Flies And Mosquitos: Having or permitting upon any premises any fly
or mosquito producing condition.
      10.   Public Drinking Vessels: Keeping any drinking vessel for public use
without providing a method of decontamination between uses.
      11.   Ablutions Near Drinking Fountain: Permitting or performing any
ablutions in or near any public drinking fountain.
      12.   Boarding House Or Factory, Sanitary Condition: Failing to furnish
any dwelling house, boarding house or factory or other place of employment with
such privy vaults, water closets, sinks or other facilities as may be required
to maintain the same in sanitary condition.
      13.   Cleaning Privy Vaults: Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use
of, clean out, disinfect and fill up all privy vaults and cesspools or other
individual wastewater disposal systems within twenty (20) days after notice
from an enforcement officer or official of the city.
      14.   Stagnant Water; Offensive Substances: Permitting any lot or
excavation to become the repository of stagnant water or any decaying or
offensive substances.
      15.   Obstructing Public Ways, Watercourses, Parks: Obstructing or
tending to obstruct or interfere with or render dangerous for passage any
street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage system, canal or basin, or any
public park without first obtaining the written permission of the city council.
(1979 Code § 10-313)
      16.   Engine Brakes: The use of engine brakes shall be prohibited within
the limits of Ferron City. (Ord. 2002-3, 7-3-2002)
   C.   Enumeration: The types of nuisances above stated shall be deemed in
addition to and in no way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this
chapter. (1979 Code § 10-314)
4-2-3: RESTROOM OR SEWER FACILITIES:
All restroom or sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with Utah law and city ordinances. All such facilities that do not
comply with such provisions are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are
subject to abatement as herein prescribed. (1979 Code § 10-315; amd. 1998 Code)
4-2-4: RESTRICTIONS ON BLOCKING WATER:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any drainage system,
canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and
overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
   B.   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute
a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (1979 Code § 10-316)
4-2-5: NUISANCES ON PROPERTY:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section the term "nuisance" is
defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which
are deleterious or injurious, noxious or unsightly, which includes, but is not
limited to, keeping or depositing on or scattering over the premises any of the
following:
      1.   Lumber, junk, trash or debris. (1979 Code § 10-331)
      2.   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, or
other discarded items not currently in use. (1979 Code § 10-331; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Duty Of Maintenance: No person owning, leasing, occupying or having
charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall
any such person keep or maintain such premises in any manner causing
substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood
in which such premises are located. (1979 Code § 10-332)
   C.   Storage Of Personal Property: Unsheltered storage of old, unused,
stripped and junked machinery, implements, equipment or personal property of
any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was
manufactured, for a period of thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junk
yards) within the city, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to
the public safety. (1979 Code § 10-333)
   D.   Abatement By Owners: The owner, owners, tenants, lessees or occupants
of any lot within the City on which such "storage", as defined in subsection C
of this Section is made, and also the owner, owners or lessees of the above-
described personal property involved in such storage, shall jointly and
severally abate such nuisance by its prompt removal into completely enclosed
and secured yards or buildings to be used for such purposes, or otherwise
remove such property from the City. (1979 Code § 10-334)
4-2-6: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Nuisance Inspector:
      1.   Appointment: There is hereby established the position of Nuisance
Inspector, whose duties it shall be to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
More than one person may be appointed to act as Nuisance Inspector under this
Section. (1979 Code § 10-351; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Duties: The Nuisance Inspector is authorized to:
         a.   Perform all functions necessary to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter.
         b.   Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as needed, all
buildings, structures, lots or places for the purpose of determining whether
such are in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
      3.   Existence Of Objectional Condition: If he concludes there exists an
objectionable condition in violation of this Chapter, the Nuisance Inspector
shall:
         a.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions
of the premises where such objects and conditions constituting a nuisance
exist.
         b.   Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such
premises, either personally or by mailing notice prepaid, addressed to the
owner and occupant at their last known post office addresses as disclosed by
the records of the County Assessor, or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such
owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and
remove the nuisance within such time as the Nuisance Inspector may designate;
provided, that any person notified pursuant to this subsection shall be given
at least ten (10), but not more than twenty (20) days, as determined by the
Nuisance Inspector following the date of service of such notice, to correct the
objectionable condition. The notice shall:
            (1)   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation
and generally describe the premises on which the violation exists.
            (2)   Inform the owner, occupant or other person that in the event
he disagrees with the determination of the Nuisance Inspector and does not wish
to comply with the provisions of the notice or that he objects to the factual
or legal basis for the notice, he may request in writing a hearing before the
City Council at a time and place to be set by the City Council. A written
application for a hearing shall state the time within which the person must
conform to the provisions of the notice.
            (3)   Inform the person that in the event he fails or neglects to
correct the objectionable condition, the City will correct the objectionable
condition and will collect the costs of so correcting the objectionable
condition by either a court action, in which case he will be assessed such
costs, together with reasonable attorney fees and court costs, or will charge
the cost of correcting the violation against the property as a tax.
         c.   In the event the owner or occupant makes such request for a
hearing, the City Council shall set the time and place for hearing objections
and the City Recorder shall notify the owner, occupant or other persons having
an interest in said property on the condition thereof in writing of the time
and place at which they may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be heard
within less than five (5) days from the date of service or mailing of the
notice of hearing. (1979 Code § 10-351)
   B.   Hearing:
      1.   Informal Hearing; Written Decision: At the written request of an
owner, occupant or other person having an interest in property which is the
subject of a notice to remove or abate weeds, objectionable conditions or
objects from the property, the City Council shall conduct an informal hearing
(which need not be reported), wherein such persons may present such evidence
and argument as is pertinent to the question of whether or not the removal or
abatement of the objects or conditions is properly within the purview of this
Chapter. The City Council shall also permit the presentation of evidence and
argument by the Nuisance Inspector and other interested parties. Thereafter,
within not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days, the City Council
shall, over the signature of the Mayor, or such other member of the City
Council as it may designate, render its written decision, a copy of which shall
be mailed to or served upon the owner or any other person to whom the original
notice was given by the Nuisance Inspector.
      2.   Notice Of Decision; Abatement By Owner Or Occupant: In the event the
decision of the City Council upholds the determination of the Nuisance
Inspector, the notice originally given by the Nuisance Inspector as above
provided shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to
remove or abate the objectionable objects or conditions, and he shall have up
to ten (10) days from the date of notice of the decision within which to
conform thereto, unless additional time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, is
authorized by the Nuisance Inspector.
      3.   Time Period For Compliance: In the event that the decision of the
City Council either overrules or modifies the determination of the Nuisance
Inspector, the written decision of the City Council shall apprise the owner or
occupant of that fact and set forth the details and extent to which the owner
or occupant must make removal or other abatement of the objectionable objects
or conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to conform to
the decision of the City Council within ten (10) days after service or mailing
of a copy of the decision, and the decision shall be deemed to be the modified
decision of the Nuisance Inspector, unless additional time is authorized by the
City Council. (1979 Code § 10-352)
      4.   Filing Of Amended Notice: The Nuisance Inspector shall file an
amended notice and proof of service of notice and file the same in the office
of the City Recorder. (1979 Code § 10-352; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Failure To Comply; Abatement By City: If any owner, occupant or other
person having an interest in land described in such notice of decision to whom
the notice was given shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements
thereof relating to the eradication, destruction or removal of such weeds,
garbage, refuse, objects or structures, the Nuisance Inspector shall employ all
necessary assistance to cause such objectionable objects or conditions to be
removed or destroyed at the expense of the City. (1979 Code § 10-353)
   D.   Itemized Statement: The Nuisance Inspector shall prepare an itemized
statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of nuisances,
and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner or occupant, or both, or to persons
having an interest in the property, demanding payment within twenty (20) days
of the date of mailing. The notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed by
registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the property owner,
occupant or persons having an interest in the property. (1979 Code § 10-354)
   E.   Failure To Make Payment: In the event the owner, occupant or person
having an interest in the property fails to make payment of the amount set
forth in the statement to the City Treasurer within the twenty (20) days, the
Nuisance Inspector may either cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court
of law or may refer the matter to the County Treasurer as provided in
subsection F2 of this Section. (1979 Code § 10-355)
   F.   Collection
      1.   Lawsuit: In the event collection of expenses of destruction and
removal are pursued through the courts, the City shall sue and receive judgment
for all of said expenses of destruction and removal, together with reasonable
attorney fees, interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment
in the manner provided by law. (1979 Code § 10-356)
      2.   Taxes: In the event that the Nuisance Inspector elects to refer the
expenses of destruction or removal to the County Treasurer for inclusion in the
tax notice of the property owner, he shall make in triplicate an itemized
statement of all expenses incurred in the destruction and removal of the same,
and shall deliver three (3) copies of the statement to the County Treasurer
within ten (10) days after the completion of the work of destroying or removing
such weeds, refuse, garbage, objects or structures. Thereupon, the costs of the
work shall be pursued by the County Treasurer in accordance with the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-4, as amended, and the recalcitrant owner
shall have such rights and shall be subject to such powers as are thereby
granted. (1979 Code § 10-357)
   G.   Criminal Proceedings: The commencement of criminal proceedings for the
purpose of imposing penalties for violations of this Chapter shall not be
conditioned upon prior issuance of a notice or the granting to the defendant an
opportunity to abate or remove the nuisance. The provisions of this Chapter
relating to notice and abatement shall be deemed merely alternative and
additional methods of securing conformity to the provisions of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 10-358)
4-2-7: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Class C Misdemeanor: Any owner, occupant or person having an interest
in property subject to this Chapter who shall fail to comply with the notice or
order given pursuant to this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor
and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code § 10-359; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Criminal Proceedings: Compliance by any owner, occupant or person to
whom a notice has been given subsequent to the commencement of criminal
proceedings as provided in this Chapter shall not be admissible in any criminal
proceeding brought pursuant to this Section. (1979 Code § 10-359)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition
4-3-2: Standard Of Weed Control
4-3-3: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITION:
Weeds shall include any vegetation commonly referred to as a weed or which
shall have been designated a noxious weed by the Utah Commissioner of
Agriculture. (1979 Code § 10-322)
4-3-2: STANDARD OF WEED CONTROL:
   A.   Conditions Constituting Nuisance: It is hereby declared that the above-
stated weeds constitute a nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of
contamination or pollution of the water, air or property, a danger to health, a
breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life
deleterious to humans or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings.
   B.   Removal: The cut weeds shall be removed from the premises within
seventy two (72) hours after cutting. (1979 Code § 3-323)
4-3-3: PENALTY:
It shall be an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for any person owning or occupying real property to allow
weeds to grow higher on such property than is permitted by this Chapter or not
to remove from such property any cuttings of such weeds or any refuse,
unsightly or deleterious objects after having been given notice from the
Nuisance Officer. (1982 Code § 3-321; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Collection And Disposal Of Garbage
4-4-3: Service Charges; Payment
4-4-4: Regulations
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE: Refers to garbage produced in commercial establishments,
public or quasi-public institutions or establishments, including restaurants,
hotels, motels and similar establishments.
COMMUNITY WASTE: Lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and shrubs, leaves and
trees and tree branches.
CONTAINER OR REGULATION CONTAINER: A type of garbage or trash container of
galvanized metal or other approved material and having a tightfitting lid or
properly and sufficiently treated weather resistant paper bag manufactured
specifically for use in garbage and refuse collection.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, handling, storing, cooking or consumption
of food and food products.
LITTERING: The willful or negligent throwing, dropping, placing, depositing, or
sweeping of solid waste onto any premises other than in approved storage
container and sites.
REFUSE: All waste matter, except garbage, attending or resulting from the
occupancy of residences, apartments, hotels or other places of dwelling and
from the operation of a business. Refuse shall not be deemed to include
industrial waste or waste matter resulting from the construction, demolition or
repair of a building or other structure.
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE: Garbage produced in places of private residence and dining
halls not open to the public.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: Shall include any dwelling unit except for: a) any
residential or apartment complex greater than a fourplex; and b) trailer or
manufactured/mobile homes located in trailer or manufactured home parks.
Residential or apartment complexes greater than fourplexes and trailer or
manufactured/mobile homes located in trailer or manufactured home parks shall
be deemed business or commercial enterprises and not subject to the residential
unit charge. Said complexes and trailer and manufactured/mobile homes shall be
responsible for their own garbage, refuse and waste pick up and disposal. Each
unit or apartment in a duplex, triplex or fourplex shall be considered a
separate residential unit. (1979 Code § 10-411; amd. Res. 8-79, 8-21-1979, eff.
9-1-1979; 1998 Code; Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004; Ord. 2020-2, 6-10-2020)
4-4-2: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Collection And Disposal: The city council may provide for the
collection and disposal of residential garbage, refuse and waste by a
department of the city or by contract with one or more duly licensed
contractors and may establish such rules and regulations as deemed necessary
concerning the manner and frequency of collection and methods of disposal.
   B.   Frequency: Garbage, refuse and waste shall be picked up once each week
in front of each residential unit. The residential owner or other occupant
shall place the garbage containers at the curb or three feet (3') from the
roadside, into the street, in the event there is no curb. (Ord. 8-21-79, 8-21-
1979, eff. 9-1-1979)
4-4-3: SERVICE CHARGES; PAYMENT:
   A.   Charges: A schedule of fees shall be adopted by the city council for
the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and waste, which schedule shall
be filed with the city recorder and may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 8-
21-79, 8-21-1979, eff. 9-1-1979)
   B.   Method Of Payment: Said fees shall be collected monthly as part of the
customer utility billing and shall be paid by all persons who have the service
available to them. Failure to pay fees on time will result in the
discontinuance of any and all utility services. (Ord. 8-21-79, 8-21-1979, eff.
9-1-1979; amd. 1998 Code)
4-4-4: REGULATIONS:
   A.   No Accumulation Of Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate garbage or refuse or cause garbage or refuse to be deposited upon
any street or alley or upon any premises in the city without express permission
from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may permit the feeding
or processing of garbage or refuse upon premises properly equipped and
maintained so as to prevent the creation of a nuisance or a hazard to health,
or permit the depositing of ashes and other dry material for filling purposes
at such places as the zoning administrator may designate and under such
restrictions as the city council may by regulation impose. Additionally, the
zoning administrator may grant to any person permission for sorting, bailing
and marketing trade waste upon premises properly equipped and maintained. (1979
Code § 10-415; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
   B.   Containers: All garbage and refuse shall be placed in suitable and
sufficient garbage receptacles with tightfitting lids or properly and
sufficiently treated water resistant paper bags manufactured specifically for
use in garbage and refuse collection, or plastic bags manufactured specifically
for use in garbage and refuse collection. (1979 Code § 10-416)
   C.   Closing Of Containers Required: All garbage and market waste must be
placed in rainproof and flyproof receptacles. The receptacle shall be tightly
closed in such manner as to prevent offensive odors or flies. (1979 Code § 10-
417)
   D.   Community Waste: Community waste may be disposed of by residents and
business establishments in vehicles provided by them, subject to regulation by
the city council as to the places of disposal and as to the type of vehicle
used to avoid spillage upon the public ways of the city, hazards to safety and
the prevention of nuisances. (1979 Code § 10-419)
   E.   Burning Of Refuse Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
burn garbage, market waste, manure or other refuse in the open air or in any
furnace or stove within the city. (1979 Code § 10-420)
   F.   Dumping Refuse Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit, or dump garbage, ashes, market waste, paper boxes, cartons,
trade waste, manure or night soil, or any other refuse upon any lot within the
city whether such lot is occupied or vacant and whether such person so placing,
depositing or dumping such refuse is the owner, tenant, occupant or lessor
thereof or has the same under his jurisdiction and control. (1979 Code § 10-
421)
   G.   Limitations Upon Dumping: Dumping waste and garbage shall be permitted
only in such places as are designated by the city council. Dumping shall be
subject to such rules and regulations as may be formulated by the city council.
(1979 Code § 10-422)
   H.   Improper Disposal At Approved Residential Collection Site:
      1.   The city may maintain a rural residential collection site solely for
the use of its residential citizens who reside on properties that have paid
garbage fees.
      2.   The willful or negligent throwing, dropping, placing, depositing, or
sweeping of solid waste around the premises of the residential collection site
and throwing, dropping, placing, or depositing any solid waste onto an already
full container is classified as littering.
   I.   Regulation By City Council: The city council may adopt such regulations
as in its opinion are necessary to implement this chapter and its objectives.
(1979 Code § 10-423; amd. Ord. 2020-2, 6-10-2020)
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Defined
4-5-2: Permit Required
4-5-3: Application For Permit
4-5-4: Issuance Of Permit
4-5-5: Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
4-5-6: Existing Businesses And Facilities
4-5-1: DEFINED:
Offensive businesses, within the meaning of this Chapter, shall include but not
be limited to, packing houses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies, junk
or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughter houses, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith shops
or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors, fumes,
smoke, gases or noises. (1979 Code § 10-241B)
4-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or
establishment in or within one mile of the limits of the City without first
filing an application for a permit to do so with the City Recorder. (1979 Code
§ 10-241A)
4-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the business
or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location to which
it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity which
will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (1979 Code § 10-241C)
4-5-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Report And Recommendation: The City Recorder shall cause a study to be
made of the proposed business or relocation of any offensive business or
establishment by the Southeastern District Health Department and by personnel
engaged in the inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report and
recommendation shall be made to the City Council. The City Council, after
review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to be heard and present
additional facts. Thereafter the City Council may: (1979 Code § 10-242; amd.
1998 Code)
      1.   Deny the application.
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof.
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility conform to
standards established by the City Council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be
subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct
his business in the manner specified by the City Council at the time of the
granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the
continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public
nuisance.
   C.   Modification Of Permit: The City Council shall have power to revoke or
modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as
it deems necessary for the public good. (1979 Code § 10-242)
4-5-5: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOWL FACILITIES:
   A.   Location And Management: The City Council shall have the power to
prohibit or control the location and management of any offensive, unwholesome
business or establishment in or within one mile of the City and may compel the
owner of any pigsty, privy, barn, corral, fur-bearing animal farm, feed yard,
poultry farm or other unwholesome or nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate
or remove the same.
   B.   Examination Of Operation: The City Council may, on its own initiative,
and shall, on complaint of a member of the public, examine the operation,
control or location of any business or facility for the purpose of determining
whether or not the operation of such business or facility should be improved so
as to minimize the offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the
business or activity should be moved or abated.
   C.   Notification Of Abatement: In the event that the City Council decides
that the business or facility should be abated, removed or controlled, it shall
notify the owner or operator of the business or facility of such fact. (1979
Code § 10-244)
   D.   Hearing; Limited Permit: After a hearing, the City Council may issue a
limited permit wherein it may prescribe the specifications and standards which
must be followed by the business or facility in order to be permitted to
continue in operation. (1979 Code § 10-244; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Abatement Or Removal: Upon a determination by the City Council that the
business or facility is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement
or removal of the facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to
such order, the City Council shall have power to bring all necessary legal
proceedings to force removal, abatement or adherence to standards. (1979 Code §
10-244)
4-5-6: EXISTING BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Investigation By City Council: The City Council may require an
investigation of any existing offensive business or facility to determine
whether or not it should be permitted to remain in existence in or within one
mile of the City limits. If the City Council determines that the continuation
of the business or facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within
the City limits or that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the
creation of excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases and noise, it shall notify the
owner or operator thereof that the City Council is considering revoking or
modifying the operator's permit.
   B.   Conform To Standards And Specifications: If the City Council decides to
require a modification of the manner in which the business or facility is to be
maintained, it shall specify the standards or specifications to which the
enterprise must conform or otherwise lose its permit to engage thereafter in
the business or activity. (1979 Code § 10-243; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CONTROLLED BURNING
SECTION:
4-6-1: Permit Required
4-6-2: Application For Permit
4-6-3: Dates Permitted
4-6-4: Allowable Materials
4-6-5: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
4-6-6: Penalty
4-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a controlled burn within the
limits of the city without first having procured a permit therefor from the
city. (Ord. 2003-7, 10-9-2003)
4-6-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a permit authorized by this chapter shall be verified and filed
with the city. The application must state the applicant's name in full and that
he understands and has read and complied with the requirements and possesses
the qualifications specified in this chapter and the application for permit.
(Ord. 2003-7, 10-9-2003)
4-6-3: DATES PERMITTED:
Controlled burn permits shall be issued within the burn window set by the state
of Utah and by Emery County unless otherwise approved by the city council and
fire chief. (Ord. 2003-7, 10-9-2003)
4-6-4: ALLOWABLE MATERIALS:
Burning of dry weeds, garden waste, irrigation ditches, and tree and shrub
trimmings less than one inch (1") in diameter are allowable materials. Any
other materials will require approval of the city council and fire chief, or as
allowed in the international fire code. (Ord. 2003-7, 10-9-2003)
4-6-5: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Hours Permitted: Burning is permitted only during the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M., to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Fires must be out by eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M.
   B.   Attendance By Adult: An adult must constantly attend the fire.
   C.   Prohibited Materials: Burning of household waste or trash, scrap lumber
or anything other than the allowed materials listed in section
4-6-4 of this chapter is not permitted.
   D.   Pollution: Burning of materials that cause a dense smoke or odor, such
as tires or lawn clippings, is not permitted.
   E.   Safety Precautions: The following safety precautions must be followed:
Have a water hose, fire extinguisher or other appropriate water source
available.
   F.   Distance To Structures: The fire must be kept a minimum of fifty feet
(50') from any structures.
   G.   Windy Conditions: Burning when windy conditions could cause the fire to
get out of control is prohibited.
   H.   Payment Of Previous Fines Or Penalties: All previous fines and
penalties for uncontrolled or unpermitted burns must be paid before new permits
will be issued.
   I.   County Residents Outside Of Designated Burn Window: Farmers and
citizens living in the county who desire a permit outside of the designated
burn window must contact the Emery County fire warden to obtain a burn permit.
   J.   Permission Of Property Owner: If the applicant does not own the subject
property, permission in writing must be granted by the property owner before
the permit will be issued. (Ord. 2003-7, 10-9-2003)
4-6-6: PENALTY:
Individuals burning without a permit will be subject to a one hundred dollar
($100.00) penalty. Those with a permit who are unable to control the burn and
require assistance from the fire department will be subject to a fifty dollar
($50.00) penalty. Those responsible for burning without a permit and who
require the assistance from the fire department for a burn that has gone out of
control will be subject to a two hundred ninety nine dollar ($299.00) fine.
Those who require assistance from the fire department prior to burning will be
charged twenty dollars ($20.00) for the little pumper and fifty dollars
($50.00) for the larger trucks. (Ord. 2003-7, 10-9-2003)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Animal Control Officer
5-1-3: Animal Pound
5-1-4: Licensing Requirements
5-1-5: Kennels
5-1-6: Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
5-1-7: Dangerous Or Vicious Animals
5-1-8: Control Of Rabies And Rabid Animals
5-1-9: Animals At Large
5-1-10: Dogs At Large; Penalty For Violation
5-1-11: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
5-1-12: Impounding
5-1-13: Estrays
5-1-14: Feeding Wild Animals
5-1-15: Penalty
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall mean:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The custodian selected by the city council to be
responsible for the operation of the dog pound.
AT LARGE: Any dog off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or
keeper thereof and not under the control of such owner, possessor or keeper, or
his agent or servant or a member of his immediate family. A dog shall be deemed
under the control of said owner or family member if it is within immediate
call, or if it is within the immediate view and within distance of call, if it
is on a leash, cord or chain, or if it is within direct command of the owner or
immediate family member.
DOG: Any male, neutered male, female, or spayed female dog of any age.
IMPOUNDED: Having been received into the custody of the city pound or into the
custody of any authorized agent or representative of the city.
OWNER: When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall mean any person or
persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
POUND: An animal shelter, lot, premises or building maintained by or authorized
or employed by the city for the confinement or care of dogs seized either under
the provision of this chapter or otherwise.
UNLICENSED DOG: A dog for which the license for the current year has not been
paid, or to which the tag provided for in this chapter is not attached.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Any dog which is dangerously aggressive, including, but not
limited to, any dog which in a vicious or dangerous manner, approaches any
person in an apparent attitude of attack, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any
public ground.
   B.   Any dog with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack; to cause
injury; or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other animals.
   C.   Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a
human being or domestic animal on public or private property.
WILD ANIMALS: Any animal living in a natural, undomesticated state. (1979 Code
§ 13-241; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2009-2, 10-22-2009; Ord. 2019-1, 6-13-2019)
5-1-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   Created: The position of city animal control officer is hereby created.
(1979 Code § 13-211; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Duties: The animal control officer shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Take into his possession and impound all strays running at large and
dispose of the same as hereinafter provided.
      3.   Enforce the licensing of and control all dogs within the city as
hereinafter provided.
      4.   File complaints in the courts against any person failing to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and obtain licenses when required
thereunder.
      5.   Capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter and impound such dogs in a humane manner.
      6.   Provide for a good and sufficient pound in which all animals duly
committed to his charge or otherwise impounded by him shall be maintained.
      7.   Enter a description thereof in records kept for that purpose stating
the kind of animal, the circumstance under which received or impounded, and a
description thereof sufficient to provide identification, the costs expended
for the maintenance of the animal and amounts received arising out of
maintenance or sale of animals. (1979 Code § 13-212)
   C.   Shall Charge Fees For Services: The animal control officer shall
charge, and the owners of animals taken into his possession for impound
disposal or other services shall pay, such fees and charges for services
performed by the pound or animal control officer as the city council shall
establish from time to time by resolution. All fees received by the animal
control officer shall be paid over to the city treasurer. (1979 Code § 13-214)
   D.   Interference With Animal Control Officer Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere, molest, hinder or obstruct the animal
control officer or any of his authorized representatives in the discharge of
their duties as herein prescribed. (1979 Code § 13-213)
   E.   Authorization Of Officer To Deem An Animal Vicious: The animal control
officer shall have authorization to deem an animal a dangerous or vicious
animal as the result of a witnessed incident in which there is alarm for the
reasonable safety of persons and/or domestic animals. (Ord. 2009-2, 10-22-2009)
5-1-3: ANIMAL POUND:
The city council may contract with some humane person as animal control
officer, with an adjoining municipality or with the county for the purpose of
providing suitable premises and facilities to be used by the city as the animal
pound. It shall be maintained in some convenient location and shall be sanitary
and so operated as to properly feed, water and protect the animals from injury.
(1979 Code § 13-251; amd. 1998 Code)
5-1-4: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Dog Licensing:
      1.   Time For Obtaining License; Effective Date:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain any
dog three (3) or more months old unless such dog has been registered and
licensed in the manner herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep, harbor or maintain more than three (3) dogs over the age of three (3)
months at a residence, unless that person qualifies and maintains a kennel
license.
         b.   The fee due and payable pursuant to this chapter shall be due
January 1 and shall be delinquent after February 1 of each year. A penalty of
fifteen percent (15%) shall be added to delinquent payments.
         c.   The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any
dog which attains licensing age after January 1 of any year shall make an
application for registration and license within thirty (30) days after such
acquisition or dogs attain the above stated age; provided, that the license fee
shall be one-half (½) of that required for new applications received after July
1 of any year.
      2.   Application; Expiration: Application for registration and licensing
shall be made to the animal control officer or such other person as the city
council may authorize to receive such applications. The owner shall state at
the time application is made for such license, his name and address and the
sex, breed, and color of each dog owned or kept by him. The license fee shall
cover the calendar year in which the license was issued, expiring on December
31 of the year of issuance, regardless of the date when issued.
   B.   License Fees 1 : No dog license shall be issued by the city unless the
fee required herein is paid. Until otherwise changed by resolution of the city
council, the following fees shall be charged:
Animal Fees
Animal Fees
Dog License - Spayed or Neutered                    $10.00
Dog License - Non Spayed or Neutered                $30.00
Impound Fee - Doubled on each consecutive offense   $25.00
Unlicensed Fee                                      $20.00
Boarding Fee - Per day Monday - Thursday            $10.00
Boarding Fee - Per day Friday - Sunday and Holidays $25.00
At Large/Nuisance/Trespassing                       $50.00
Dangerous or Vicious Dog                            $200.00
Loud or Offensive Dog                               $75.00
Failure to Confine Female in Heat                   $50.00
Obstruction of Animal Control Officer               $200.00
Unauthorized Breaking into Pound                    $200.00
Possession of Diseased Animal for Sale              $100.00
No Proof of Rabies Vaccination                      $25.00
Harboring a Stray Dog                               $25.00
Cruelty to Animals                                  $150.00
Abandonment                                         $150.00
Willfully Kill or Poison                            $150.00
Failure to Provide Care                             $100.00
Intentionally Exhibit                               $100.00
Harboring more that three dogs Fine per Animal      $25.00
Unlawful Disposition of Dead Animals                $100.00
Euthanasia - Computed on Size of Animal             $15.00 - $35.00
 
   C.   Issuance: A dog license shall be issued by the animal control officer
or such other person as the city council may authorize.
   D.   License Tag:
      1.   Issuance: Upon payment of the license fee, the city recorder shall
issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so
licensed. The tag shall be changed every year and shall have stamped thereon
the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number
on the certificate. Every dog owner, except those operating a kennel, shall
provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag shall be affixed, and
shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. It shall be unlawful to
deprive a registered dog of its collar and/or tag.
      2.   Duplicate Tag: In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate
will be issued by the city recorder upon presentation of a receipt showing the
payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of two dollars
fifty cents ($2.50) for such duplicate.
      3.   Tag Not Transferable: Dog tags shall not be transferable from one
dog to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of
death of the dog, or the owner leaving the city before expiration of the
license period.
   E.   Licensing Or Fee Exemptions:
      1.   Temporary Residents: The provisions of this section shall not be
intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the
city, nor to dogs brought to the city for the purpose of participating in any
dog show nor to commercial kennels.
      2.   Guide Dogs: Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known
as seeing eye dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove
provided; except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to
pay any fee therefor. (1979 Code §§ 13-242B - F, H - J, 13-243; Ord. 2009-2,
10-22-2009; Res. 2022-2, 5-11-2022)
 
Notes
1    See subsection 5-1-12D of this chapter for unlicensed dog fine.
5-1-5: KENNELS:
   A.   Zones Unlawful; Exception: Except for those persons who qualify for and
maintain a license under subsection C of this section, it is unlawful for any
person to maintain a hobby kennel or commercial kennel within zones R-1-10,000,
R-1-7500, R-2-7500 and R-3-7500 of the city. (Res. 2-25-97-1, 2-25-1997; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Definitions: A "hobby kennel" is defined as any premises wherein any
person keeps, harbors, boards, breeds, buys, grooms, lets for hire, trains for
a fee or sells dogs wherein four (4) to five (5) dogs over the age of three (3)
months are maintained. A "commercial kennel" is defined as any premises wherein
any person owns, boards, breeds, buys, grooms, lets for hire, trains for a fee
or sells dogs wherein six (6) or more dogs over the age of three (3) months are
maintained. (Ord. 2009-2, 10-22-2009)
   C.   Commercial Kennel: Anyone desiring to maintain a commercial kennel must
apply for a business license. Only those holding 1996 kennel licenses from the
city at the time of the adoption of the resolution codified herein are eligible
to apply for a commercial kennel business license if they reside in a
residential zone (R-1-10,000, R-1-7500, R-2-7500 or R-3-7500). Otherwise,
commercial kennels may be established in zones RA-1, CC-1, H-1, SC-1 or I-1,
upon compliance with subsections F through K of this section.
   D.   Hobby Kennel; Fee: Anyone desiring to maintain a hobby kennel must
obtain an annual kennel license for a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and comply
with the following:
      1.   Individually license each dog.
      2.   Maintain proof of rabies vaccination for each dog.
      3.   Maintain adequate runs and do not permit the dogs off the premises
unattended.
      4.   Do not allow any dog or premises to become a nuisance.
      5.   Comply with all other provisions of this code.
      6.   Only those people who own or maintain four (4) to five (5) dogs over
six (6) months old at the time of the adoption of the resolution codified
herein shall be eligible to apply for a hobby kennel license if they reside in
a residential zone (R-1-10,000, R-1-7500, R-2-7500 or R-3-7500). Otherwise
hobby kennels may be established in zones RA-1, CC-1, H-1, SC-1 or I-1 upon
compliance with subsections F through K of this section.
   E.   Variance: Those persons maintaining a kennel which does not meet the
requirements set forth hereunder must apply to the board of adjustment for a
variance in accordance with subsection K of this section.
   F.   Standards: All kennels maintained pursuant to this section shall comply
with the following standards:
      1.   Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection
against weather extremes.
      2.   Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an appropriate
material as required by the specific breed of dog and also to permit proper
cleaning and disinfecting.
      3.   Adequate ventilation shall be maintained and an appropriate
temperature provided as required by the specific breed of dog housed therein.
      4.   Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and
turn around without touching the sides or tops of cages.
      5.   Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the
weather.
      6.   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a
sanitary condition.
      7.   The food shall be free of contamination, palatable and of sufficient
nutritive value as to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and
size of the animal.
      8.   Fresh water is to be available at all times. Water vessels shall be
mounted or secured in a manner that prevents tipping and be of the removable
type.
   G.   Location: Before the license can be issued, the following conditions
concerning the location of the kennel must be met:
      1.   Hobby kennels must be one hundred feet (100') away from any
neighboring house and seventy five feet (75') from any road.
      2.   Commercial kennels must be two hundred feet (200') from any
neighboring house and one hundred fifty feet (150') from any road.
   H.   Fee For Commercial Kennel License: The annual fee for a commercial
kennel business license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) due and payable by the
last day of February of each year.
   I.   Revocation: The city, acting through the animal control officer, shall
have the power to revoke the license in the event the license holder is
convicted of the offense of disturbing the peace as a result of barking dogs or
is convicted of any other violation of the city's animal control provisions.
   J.   Inspections: The animal control officer shall have authority to enter
the premises of any person to inspect and assure compliance with this chapter.
   K.   Conditional Use: Kennel licenses are conditional uses under the purview
of the board of adjustment as governed by subsection 10-3-5C of this code. Said
board may grant a variance from the standards as set forth herein when
reasonable and for good cause shown. (Res. 2-25-97-1, 2-25-1997; amd. 1998
Code)
5-1-6: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Treat In Cruel And Inhumane Manner: Overdrive, overload, drive when
overloaded, overwork, torture, cruelly beat, mutilate or needlessly kill, or
carry or transport in any vehicle or other conveyance in a cruel and inhumane
manner, any animal or cause any of these acts to be done. (1979 Code § 13-231A)
   B.   Abandon: Abandon or turn out at large any sick, diseased, or disabled
animal, but such animal shall, when rendered useless by reason of sickness or
other disability, be euthanized by the owner thereof and its carcass disposed
of in such manner as to create no nuisance or hazard to health. (1979 Code §
13-222; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Kill Or Poison: Wilfully kill any domestic animal, or to administer
poison to any such animal or to expose any poisonous substance with the intent
that it shall be taken by any such animal. (1979 Code § 13-224)
   D.   Fail To Provide Care: Fail to provide any animal in his charge or
custody with necessary sustenance, drink and protection from the elements or
cause any of these acts to be done. (1979 Code § 13-231B)
   E.   Intentionally Exhibit: Intentionally exhibit any stud, horse or bull or
other animal indecently, or let any male animal to any female animal for the
purpose of providing entertainment or viewing to any person. (1979 Code § 13-
231D)
   F.   Maintain Place Of Exhibition: Maintain any place where fowl or any
animals are suffered to fight upon exhibition or for sport upon any wager.
(1979 Code § 13-231C)
5-1-7: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Unlawful To Own And Possess: It shall be unlawful for any person to own
and possess a vicious dog within the city, except as stated in subsection C of
this section. Whenever a prosecution for this offense is commenced under this
section, the dog so involved may not be redeemed, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, while awaiting final decision of the court as to the disposition
to be made of such dog. (1979 Code § 13-250; amd. Ord. 2009-2, 10-22-2009)
   B.   Disposition After Conviction Of Offense: Upon the trial of any offense
under this section, the court may, upon conviction and in addition to the usual
judgment of conviction, order the animal control officer or other authorized
personnel of the city to put the dog to death or may order such other
disposition of the dog as will protect the inhabitants of the city. (1979 Code
§ 13-250)
   C.   Vicious Animals: Any vicious animal, as determined vicious by the
animal control officer, shall be confined by the owner within a building or
secure enclosure measuring not less than six feet by eight feet (6' x 8') with
a solid floor and roof, within forty eight (48) hours of being deemed a vicious
animal. Such animal shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the
premises of its owner. (Ord. 2009-2, 10-22-2009)
5-1-8: CONTROL OF RABIES AND RABID ANIMALS:
   A.   Rabies Vaccination Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dog to suffer, allow or permit such dog to be or go upon any sidewalk, street,
alley, public place or square within the city without first having had such dog
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and without there being on
such dog a collar or harness with a license tag thereon showing that such dog
has been so vaccinated and that the vaccination has not expired; and that the
vaccination will not expire during the current calendar year to show such dog
is therefore protected through the current calendar year. (1979 Code § 13-248;
amd. Ord. 3-9-93, 3-9-1993)
   B.   Reporting Of Rabid Animals: Anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts
of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the fact
immediately to the animal control officer or county sheriff's department. The
animal control officer or county sheriff's department shall likewise be
notified of any person or animal bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal.
(1979 Code § 13-228; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Biting Animal Quarantined: Any dog or other animal of a species subject
to rabies, which is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause
an abrasion of the skin, shall be placed in confinement under observation of a
veterinary hospital or the city pound and shall not be euthanized or released
until at least ten (10) working days after the biting or injury has occurred in
order to determine whether or not the animal has rabies. During the ten (10)
day quarantine period the owner is responsible for boarding fees as set out in
subsection 5-1-12D of this chapter. If the animal dies or has been euthanized,
its head shall be removed and immediately taken to the state health laboratory
to be examined for rabies. (Ord. 2001-3, 11-13-2001)
   D.   Bitten Animal Quarantined: Any animal of a species subject to rabies
which has been bitten by a known rabid animal or has been in intimate contact
with a rabid animal shall be isolated in a suitable place approved by the
animal control officer for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or
destroyed. (1979 Code § 13-230)
5-1-9: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
No cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats or swine shall be allowed to run at
large or to be herded, picketed or staked out upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the limits of the city, and all such animals so found
may be impounded. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent
any person from driving cows, horses, mules or other animals from outside the
city limits to any enclosure within the city limits or from any enclosure in
the city to a place outside the city or from one enclosure to another within
limits of the city. (1979 Code § 13-221)
5-1-10: DOGS AT LARGE; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful:
      1.   For the owner or keeper of any dog to permit such dog to run at
large.
      2.   For an owner of a dog to permit such dog to go upon or be upon the
private property of any person without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of such private property.
   B.   Violation Regardless Of Precautions: The owner of any dog running at
large shall be deemed in violation of this section, regardless of the
precautions taken to prevent the escape of the dog and to prohibit it from
running at large.
   C.   Declared Nuisance: Any dog running at large in violation of the
provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to
the public health and safety, and the dog shall be taken up and impounded as
provided in this chapter. (1979 Code § 13-244)
5-1-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Disposition Of Dead Animals; Violation: The owner of any animal or fowl
that has died or been killed shall remove or bury the carcass of such animal
within ten (10) hours after its death; provided, that no horse, cow, ox or
other animal shall be buried within the closely inhabited portions of the city.
(1979 Code § 13-225; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Diseased Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the
city for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell or offer for sale,
any animal which has a communicable disease or which has been exposed to or
which is liable to carry infection from a communicable disease. (1979 Code §
13-226; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Diseased Animals For Human Consumption: It shall be unlawful for any
person to bring into the city for sale or to sell, or offer for sale any
cattle, sheep, swine, fish, game, fowl or poultry which is diseased, unsound,
and unwholesome or which for any other reason is unfit for human food. (1979
Code § 13-227; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Female Dogs In Heat: The owner of a female dog in heat shall cause such
dog to be penned or enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other dogs from
attacking such female dog or being attracted to such female dog so as to create
a public nuisance. (1979 Code § 13-245)
   E.   Harbor Stray Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or
keep within the city any lost or stray dog. Whenever any dog shall be found
which appears to be lost or stray, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify
the city recorder or animal control officer, who shall impound for running at
large contrary to the terms of this chapter. If there shall be attached to such
dog a license tag for the then current fiscal year, the animal control officer
shall notify the person to whom such license was issued, at the address given
on the license. (1979 Code § 13-246)
   F.   Loud Or Offensive Animals: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any
animal which by loud, continued, or frequent barking, howling, yelping, or by
noxious or offensive odors shall annoy, disturb, or endanger the health and
welfare of any person or neighborhood. A violation of this subsection shall be
a class C misdemeanor. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. Such violation must be witnessed by the animal
control officer, or the person making the complaint must file the complaint
with the Emery County sheriff's office. This subsection shall not apply to the
city pound, veterinary hospitals or medical laboratories. (Ord. 2001-3, 11-13-
2001)
   G.   Trespassing Animals: It shall be unlawful for any owner or caretaker of
any domestic fowl or animal to permit such fowl or animal to trespass upon the
premises of another person. (1979 Code § 13-223)
5-1-12: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Duty Of Official To Impound; Certificate Of Registry: It shall be the
duty of every police officer or other designated official to apprehend any dog
found running at large, not wearing his tag, or which is in violation of this
chapter and to impound such dog in the pound or other suitable place. The
animal control officer, or some other designated official, upon receiving any
dog, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and mix of such
dog and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of
the owner and number of the license. (1979 Code § 13-252)
   B.   Interference With Impounding Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to hinder, delay, interfere with, or obstruct the animal control officer
or any of his assistants while engaging in capturing, securing, or taking to
the dog pound any dog or dogs liable to be impounded, or to break open or in
any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of
any dog pound or ambulance, wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting or
conveying of dogs to the dog pound. (1979 Code § 13-256)
   C.   Records Maintained By Animal Control Officer: The animal control
officer shall keep a record of each animal impounded by him, the date of
receipt of such animal, the date and manner of its disposal and if redeemed,
reclaimed, or sold, the name of the person by whom redeemed, reclaimed, or
purchased, the address of such person, the amounts of all fees received or
collected for or because of the impounding, reclaiming or purchasing thereof,
together with the number of any tag and the date of any tag exhibited or issued
upon the redemption or sale of such animal. (1979 Code § 13-253)
   D.   Redemption Of Impounded Dogs: Any dog impounded as a licensed or
unlicensed dog may be redeemed and taken from the pound by the owner or any
authorized person, upon having proof of the following: a certificate of
registry as provided in subsection A of this section, showing that the license
imposed by this chapter has been paid for and upon paying the person in charge
of the pound an impound fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first
offense and doubling for each repeat offense thereafter, with an additional
fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each dog that is unlicensed and boarding
fees of ten dollars ($10.00) per day Monday through Friday and the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day on weekends and holidays, for each and
every day that such dog shall have been impounded. Dogs that are not redeemed
within five (5) days may be euthanized. (Res. 2006-6, 7-11-2006)
   E.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Or Infected Dogs: All impounded dogs not
redeemed within five (5) days of the date of impounding may be destroyed or
sold to the person first making written request for purchase at such price as
may be deemed agreeable. In the case of dogs severely injured or having
contagious disease other than rabies and which in the animal control officer's
judgment are suffering and recovery is doubtful, the animal control officer may
destroy the dog without awaiting the five (5) day period. (1979 Code § 13-255)
   F.   Redemption Of Unlicensed Dogs: Any dog impounded as an unlicensed dog
may be redeemed and taken from the pound by the owner or any authorized person,
upon payment of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) deposit, along with impound fees
specified in subsection D of this section. The owner shall then have ten (10)
business days in which to provide proof of rabies vaccination and current
licensing to the animal control officer, or, upon failure to provide said proof
of rabies vaccination and licensing, the deposit of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be deemed forfeited and the owner liable for the unlawful
harboring of an unvaccinated and unlicensed dog. The city is then authorized to
impound the dog and the animal control officer may destroy the dog without
waiting the five (5) day period. Any owner who requests that the animal control
officer euthanize any unwanted dog will be charged the sum of five dollars
($5.00) to cover the costs of services. The dog may not be left with the owner;
doing so would be in violation of the veterinary practice act. The dog must be
signed over to the city. The city then becomes owner of the animal making it
legal. (Ord. 2005-1, 1-27-2005)
5-1-13: ESTRAYS:
   A.   Definition: Whenever the word "estray" appears in this section, it is
defined to mean any valuable animal, except dogs or cats, not wild, found
wandering from its owner.
   B.   Duty Of Animal Control Officer: It is hereby made the duty of the
animal control officer to take into his possession and impound all estrays
running at large, and to dispose of the same as hereinafter provided. (1979
Code § 13-261)
   C.   Notice Of Sale: Within three (3) days after an estray shall come into
the possession of the animal control officer, he shall advertise the same in a
newspaper published in and having general circulation in the county by
publishing a notice in at least one issue of the newspaper, and by posting
notices for a period of ten (10) days in three (3) public places in the city,
one of which places shall be at or near the post office. He shall immediately
deliver a copy of such notice to the county clerk or mail the same to him by
registered letter. The notice so filed with the county clerk should be
available during reasonable hours for inspection by the public free of charge.
The notice herein provided for shall contain a description of the animals,
including all marks and brands, when taken, and the day, hour, and place of
sale, which shall be not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days
from the time of posting such notice, and may be substantially in the following
form: (1979 Code § 13-262; amd. 1998 Code)
   NOTICE
State of Utah, County of                 
In the                       of                      , I have in my possession
the following described estray animals, which, if not claimed and taken away,
will be sold at public auction to the highest cash bidder at the City pound in
the                  of                  , on               , the           day
of             , 19      , at the hour of                 :
   (Description of animals)
The estrays were taken up by me in the City on the           day of
              , 19     .
                                                             
               Animal Control Officer of the City
               of Ferron, State of Utah
(1979 Code § 13-262)
   D.   Return To Owner Upon Payment: If at any time before the sale of any
estrays, such animals shall be claimed and proved to be the property of any
person, the animal control officer shall release them to the owner upon
receiving from him the cost of impounding, keeping and advertising the same.
(1979 Code § 13-263; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Unclaimed Animals:
      1.   Sold To Highest Bidder: If the animals are not so claimed and taken
away, the Animal Control Officer shall, at the time and place mentioned in the
notice, proceed to sell the same, one at a time, to the highest cash bidder,
and shall execute and deliver a bill of sale transferring said animals to the
purchaser or purchasers thereof, which bill of sale shall be substantially in
the following form:
I hereby certify that in pursuance of the law regulating the disposal of
estrays and trespassing animals, I have this day sold to
                            for the sum of $               he being the highest
bidder,                           head of                       branded with
the City estray brand and otherwise described as follows, to wit:
   (Description of Animals)
Witness my hand this       day of               , 19    .
                                             
                  Animal Control Officer
                  City of Ferron
                  State of Utah
      2.   Bill Of Sale Filed With County Clerk: The Animal Control Officer
shall immediately file a copy of such bill of sale with the County Clerk or
forward the same to him by registered mail. Such bill of sale shall transfer
and vest in such purchaser the full title to the animals thus sold. (1979 Code
§ 13-263)
   F.   Records Maintained By Animal Control Officer: The Animal Control
Officer shall keep an accurate record of all estrays received by him, their
age, color, sex, marks, and brands, the time and place of taking and the
expense of keeping and selling the same, all animals claimed and taken away,
all animals sold and to whom sold and the amount paid, all monies paid to
owners after sale, all monies paid into the Treasury, and all other matters
necessary for compliance with the provisions of this Section. The City Council
shall provide the Animal Control Officer with a suitable book in which shall be
entered the records required by law to be kept by the Animal Control Officer.
Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable
hours, and shall be deposited by the Animal Control Officer with his successor
in office. (1979 Code § 13-264; amd. 1998 Code)
   G.   Regulations For Trespassing Estrays Causing Damage:
      1.   Recovery Of Damages: If any cattle, horses, asses, mules, sheep,
goats or swine shall trespass or do damage upon the premises of any person, the
party aggrieved, whether he be the owner or the occupant of such premises, may
recover damages by an action at law against the owner of the trespassing
animals or by distraining and impounding the animals in the manner provided.
(1979 Code § 13-265)
      2.   Appraisal Of Damages: The owner or occupant of any property may
distrain any or all of said animals trespassing or doing damage thereon. He
shall, within twenty four (24) hours thereafter, deliver said animals to the
Animal Control Officer together with a certificate of the appraisement of the
damage done by such animals. Such appraisement must be made by some
disinterested person. It must state the amount of the damage, the time when
committed, the name of the person damaged, the name of the owner of the
animals, if known, and if not known, it must state that fact together with a
description of the animals, including all visible marks and brands. If the
animals appear to be owned by different parties, a separate appraisement and a
separate certificate thereof shall be made of the damage done by the lot or
group of animals which appear to belong to each of the different owners. In
such cases, the owners shall be notified separately, and each lot or group of
animals shall be advertised and sold separately in the same manner as though
the damage had been done by different animals at different times. (1979 Code §
13-266)
      3.   Owner Notified: The person distraining the animals must, if the
owner of the same be known to him and if he resides within ten (10) miles of
the place of the trespass, immediately deliver to such owner, or leave at his
place of residence if he cannot be found, a copy of such certificate of
appraisement; but if the owner does not live within ten (10) miles of the place
of trespass, the party distraining the animals may at his option deliver a copy
of such certificate to the owner in person, or deposit the same in the nearest
post office in a registered letter addressed to said owner. He shall be
entitled to charge thirty cents ($0.30) a mile one way for the first ten (10)
miles necessarily traveled in delivering such certificate, and twenty cents
($0.20) for each additional mile, to be taxed as costs against the animals.
(1979 Code § 13-267)
      4.   Failure To Notify Owner Waives Damages: If the party distraining any
animals shall fail to deliver them or the certificate of appraisement to the
Animal Control Officer within forty eight (48) hours, or shall fail to deliver
to the owners of the animals, if known, a copy of the certificate of
appraisement within twenty four (24) hours after he receives the same or to
deposit the same in a post office as herein provided, he shall not be entitled
to recover damages under the provisions of this Section. (1979 Code § 13-268)
      5.   Duty Of Animal Control Officer If Owner Unknown: Whenever any
animals are delivered to the Animal Control Officer and the certificate of
appraisement is filed with him as herein provided and such certificate states
that the owner is unknown, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately examine
all brand books or brand sheets in his possession. If the owner be ascertained
thereby or if the owner be already known to the Animal Control Officer, he
shall, if the owner lives within ten (10) miles, immediately deliver a copy of
such certificate of appraisement to such owner, or leave the same at his
residence if he cannot be found. If the owner lives more than ten (10) miles
away, the Animal Control Officer may at his option deliver such copy personally
to the owner, or deposit the same in the nearest post office in a registered
letter addressed to such owner. He shall, however, serve a copy in one of the
ways provided herein; provided, that whenever personal service of a copy of any
paper is required by this Chapter, service by agent shall be deemed sufficient.
(1979 Code § 13-269)
      6.   Sale Of Delivered Animals: As soon as any such animals are delivered
to the Animal Control Officer, he shall immediately proceed to advertise the
same for sale as hereinafter provided, except when the owner is known and has
been notified, in which case he shall hold said animals forty eight (48) hours
before advertising the same. He shall advertise in a newspaper published in and
having general circulation in the County, by publishing a notice in at least
one issue of said paper, by posting notices in three (3) public places in the
City, one of which shall be at or near the post office, and he shall deliver a
copy of the same to the County Clerk or send the same by deputy or by
registered mail. The County Clerk should preserve such notice and post a copy
thereof. The notice herein provided for shall state the time when the damage
was done and the amount thereof, the name of the party damaged, a description
of the animals, including all visible marks and brands, and the day, hour, and
place at which such animals will be sold, which shall be not less than ten (10)
nor more than twenty (20) days from the time of posting such notice. The
notices shall be substantially in the following form: (1979 Code § 13-270; amd.
1998 Code)
   SALE OF ANIMALS FOR DAMAGE
State of Utah, County of                ,
In                   of                  ,
I have in possession the following described animals which, if not claimed and
taken away, will be sold at public auction to the highest cash bidder at the
City pound in the                       of                     , on the
                    day of                , 19    , at the hour of
                   .
   (Description of Animals)
The above described animals are held by me to secure the payment of
$                           damages done by those animals on the premises of
                          on the                  day of                 ,
19    .
                                             
               Animal Control Officer of the City
               of Ferron
   (1979 Code § 13-270)
      7.   Owner Claim; Disputed Appraisal: The owner of any trespassing
animals taken up under the provisions of this Section may, at any time before
the sale thereof, claim and take such animals away upon paying the amount of
damages set forth in the certificate of appraisement and the accrued costs, and
if such animals are included in a lot or group of animals belonging to other
parties against which the damages and costs are assessed as a whole, he shall
pay his proportion of the total amount of damages and costs assessed against
such animals, according to the number of animals he owns when compared with the
number of the entire lot or group. If he deems the appraisal too high, he may
choose another appraiser having the qualifications herein provided who, with
the first appraiser, shall make a new appraisal, and if they cannot agree, they
shall choose a third appraiser, and the three (3) shall proceed to make another
appraisal, and the decision of the majority shall be final. (1979 Code § 13-
271)
      8.   Sale To Highest Bidder; Bill Of Sale: If such animals are not
claimed and taken away by the owner, the Animal Control Officer shall, at the
time and place set forth in the notice of sale, proceed to sell such animals,
one at a time, to the highest cash bidder. If the owner of any lot of animals
to be sold is known, the Animal Control Officer shall sell only enough of said
animals to pay the damages and costs, the remainder may be turned over to the
owner at any time thereafter; but if the owner be unknown, the Animal Control
Officer shall proceed to sell all of said animals so advertised for sale. He
shall execute and deliver a bill of sale therefor, and file a copy with the
County Clerk as hereinbefore provided. (1979 Code § 13-272)
      9.   Redemption Within Ninety Days: The owner of any trespassing animals
sold under the provisions of this Section may, at any time within ninety (90)
days of the date of such sale, redeem such animals from the purchaser or
assignee having the same in his possession, upon paying to such purchaser or
assignee the sum for which such animals were originally sold, together with an
additional ten percent (10%) and reasonable compensation for the care and
keeping of the same. If such purchaser or assignee refuses to give up such
animals on the owner proving his title to the same and on his tendering the
amount due as herein provided, such owner may maintain an action at law to
recover the same; provided, that the purchaser or any assignee who has disposed
of such animals shall not be liable to such owner in any amount. If redemption
of such animals is not made within ninety (90) days after the date of such
sale, such sale shall be absolute and shall vest the title to such animals in
the purchaser or assignee. Any person selling or disposing of any such animal
within ninety (90) days of its sale under the provisions of this Section shall
notify the purchaser of the same of the date of the original sale and the
amount paid for such animal at that time, and if he fails to do so, he shall be
liable for any loss that may accrue to such purchaser by reason of such animal
being redeemed for an amount less than he paid therefor. (1979 Code § 13-273)
      10.   Owner Entitled To Residue Of Proceeds: If any estrays or
trespassing animals sold under the provisions of this Section shall, within a
period of six (6) months following the date of sale, be claimed and proved to
be the property of any person, it shall be the duty of the City Treasurer at
the expiration of such time to pay the money received for such animals to the
owner thereof, less the amount of damages and the expense of taking, keeping,
and selling the same. In the event such animals are not claimed as aforesaid,
such money shall become the property of the City; provided, that in case there
is a contest between two (2) or more persons claiming to be the owners of any
such animals, the City Treasurer shall pay the residue to the party who shall
establish by action his right to the same. (1979 Code § 13-274)
      11.   Records Maintained By Animal Control Officer: The Animal Control
Officer shall keep an accurate record of all trespassing animals received by
him, which record shall contain all the items required by this Chapter together
with the names of the injured party and the owner of the animals, the amount of
the damages claimed, and all other matters necessary to maintain a complete
account of the transaction. Such record shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable hours without charge. (1979 Code § 13-275; amd. 1998 Code)
   H.   Retaking Animal Unlawfully: It shall be unlawful for anyone to take any
animal out of the possession of anyone lawfully holding the same under the
provisions of this Section, either by stealth, force, fraud, or to intercept or
hinder any person lawfully taking up or attempting to take up such animals.
(1979 Code § 13-276)
5-1-14:  FEEDING WILD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or bait wild animals within the
city limits unless authorized as part of the city’s urban deer control plan.
(Ord. 2019-1, 6-13-2019)
5-1-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CRIMINAL CODE; OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Utah Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-2-2: Discharging Firearms
5-2-1: UTAH CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah Criminal Code (title 76), as amended, are hereby adopted
by the City. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of
this Chapter 2, and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to
penalty provisions under this Chapter if proceeded hereunder. (1998 Code)
5-2-2: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to discharge any kind of firearm from an
automobile or other vehicle or to discharge a firearm from upon or across any
highway. It shall also be unlawful for any person to discharge any rifle, gun
or pistol within the limits of the City, except in self-defense or in the case
of any peace officer or animal control officer in the discharge of his duties.
(Ord. 3-9-93-2, 3-9-1993; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEWS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Prohibited Hours; Exceptions
5-3-2: Camping On Public Grounds, Streets, Parks And Playgrounds
5-3-3: Minors
5-3-4: Penalty
5-3-1: PROHIBITED HOURS; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to be on, upon, near or about any
public park, recreational area or playground belonging to or under the control
of the city after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., except for such special
occasions as may be allowed by the city council, and after proper presentation
therefor. (Res. 1999-3, 2-23-1999; amd. Ord. 2020-4, 10-14-2020)
5-3-2: CAMPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS, STREETS, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, cook, make a fire or
pitch a tent, fly, lean to, tarpaulin, or any other type of camping equipment
on any "public grounds" as defined in subsection B of this section, upon any
portion of a street or in any park or playground unless expressly allowed as
provided in subsection C of this section.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the term "public grounds" means any real
property owned in whole or in part by the United States of America and its
agencies, or the State of Utah or any of its political subdivisions, including
Ferron City.
   C.   Notwithstanding the above, camping on public grounds shall be allowed
in designated areas. Currently, the use of recreational vehicles in designated
areas of the fairground is allowed subject to a fee. (Res. 1999-3, 2-23-1999;
amd. Ord. 2020-4, 10-14-2020)
5-3-3: MINORS:
   A.   Established; Exceptions: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years
shall be or remain upon any of the streets, alleys or public places or vacant
lots at night, (Friday-Saturday), between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.; on week nights (Sunday-Thursday) between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. unless
such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of such minor person, or unless the employment or lawful business of
such minor makes it necessary to be upon the street, alley or public places
between such specified hours, in which event such minor person shall obtain a
permit from the City office to be upon the streets, alleys or public places
during such hours. On any night when special events are taking place, the hours
of curfew shall be twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
in order to provide adequate time to attend such functions provided for minor
persons. When a permit is required from the City office under this Section,
such permit shall be kept upon the person, and it shall be unlawful to be upon
the street, alleys or public places during such curfew hours without such
permit.
   B.   Responsibility of Parents and Guardians: No person, guardian or other
person having legal charge of custody of any person under eighteen (18) years
of age shall knowingly allow or permit any such person or child, ward or other
person under such age while in such legal custody, to go or be in or upon any
of the streets, alleys or public places when such going or being in or upon
such streets, alleys or public places would be a violation of such minor person
of any provision of Section 5-3-4A of this Chapter. (Res. 1999-3, 2-23-1999;
amd. Ord. 2020-4, 10-14-2020)
5-3-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor. (Res. 1999-3, 2-
23-1999; amd. Ord. 2020-4, 10-14-2020)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition
5-4-2: Sale, Discharge And Possession Of Certain Fireworks Restricted
5-4-3: Enforcement
5-4-4: Punishment
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
All terms relating to fireworks used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as they are defined in Utah Code Annotated 53-7-202 of the Utah fire
prevention act. (Ord. 2012-2, 6-28-2012)
5-4-2: SALE, DISCHARGE AND POSSESSION OF CERTAIN FIREWORKS RESTRICTED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for retail sale, or to
discharge, or to have in their possession any fireworks in this municipality,
other than class C common Utah state approved explosives used in accordance
with, and only on the dates allowed, by Utah Code Annotated sections 53-7-220
through 225; the rules adopted pursuant thereto; and this chapter, except as
otherwise permitted by state law.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks within twenty
feet (20') of any residence, dwelling, or structure. (Ord. 2012-2, 6-28-2012)
5-4-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Every officer charged with enforcement of state and municipal laws
including the fire marshal is hereby charged with the responsibility to enforce
this chapter.
   B.   Fireworks possessed, sold or offered for sale in violation of this
chapter may be seized and destroyed and the license of the person selling or
offering fireworks for sale may be revoked. (Ord. 2012-2, 6-28-2012)
5-4-4: PUNISHMENT:
Violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor punishable by both
fine and imprisonment as set forth in Utah law. (Ord. 2012-2, 6-28-2012)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Uniform Traffic Code Adopted
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-3: Traffic Control
6-1-4: Parking Regulations
6-1-5: Violations
6-1-1: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
The Utah Traffic Code, Rules of the Road, 1988 edition, as compiled, prepared
and published as a code in book form by the Utah Department of Public Safety
and the Utah League of Cities and Towns, three (3) copies of which have been
filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Recorder,
hereby is approved and adopted as the Traffic Code for the City, except as such
code may be altered or modified by the ordinances of the City. (1979 Code § 11-
321; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in the Traffic Code to:
LOCAL AUTHORITIES: Shall mean the City Council.
MAGISTRATE: Shall mean the Justice of the Peace.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Shall mean to include but is not limited to: recreation
vehicles, boats, campers, ATVs, camp trailers, semi-trailers, utility trailers,
flatbed trailers, farm equipment, or anything similar in nature to the items
listed herein.
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF UTAH: Shall mean the Emery
County Sheriff or his agent.
THE STATE ROAD COMMISSION OR STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION: Shall mean the
City and its officers, departments, agencies and agents. (Ord. 2018-2, 6-14-
2018)
6-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Prima Facie Speed; Designated Streets:
      1.   Streets With Signs: When appropriate street signs giving notice of
the maximum permitted speed thereon are erected, the prima facie speed limits
designated upon said signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions
of streets so posted. (1979 Code § 11-323)
      2.   Streets Not Posted: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in
any other ordinance of the City, the prima facie speed limits on the streets of
the City shall be thirty five (35) miles per hour. (1979 Code § 11-323; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Through Streets Designated; Stop And Yield Intersections: When
appropriate traffic-control or regulatory signs are posted at entrances to
intersections identifying them as stop or yield entrances, such streets are
hereby declared to be stop entrances and yield entrances as designated by said
signs. (1979 Code § 11-325)
   C.   Designations Posted: The City Council shall designate the places at
which appropriate traffic-control devices or regulatory signs shall be placed
relating to maximum speed limits, angle parking, through streets, stop and
yield intersections and other regulations governing traffic. (1979 Code § 11-
326)
   D.   Angle Parking: When appropriate traffic-control or regulatory signs are
posted permitting angle parking, angle parking shall be permitted on the
streets or parts of streets so posted at the angle designated by the sign.
(1979 Code § 11-324)
   E.   Penalty: Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
Notwithstanding other language or provisions in the Utah Traffic Code, Rules of
the Road, 1988 edition, hereby adopted, any violator of this section, upon
conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code § 11-327; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Signs; Erection: The City Council may authorize or direct any person
employed by the City to erect or install any sign or traffic-control device
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1979 Code § 11-342)
   B.   Properly Posted Areas: It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, to park or leave standing at any time a motor vehicle, as
defined in the Utah Traffic Code, Rules of the Road, 1988 edition, as adopted
by the City, in any place when properly posted, except when necessary to avoid
interference with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device. (1979 Code § 11-343; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Blocking Streets Or Highways: In addition to the parking provisions
contained in the Utah Traffic Code, as adopted by the City, it shall be a Class
B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to: (1979 Code § 11-341; amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a
manner as to obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
thereon.
      2.   Wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway
in such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any
police officer.
      3.   Wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to
obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property
abutting upon the street or highway or any property having access to such
street or highway. (1979 Code § 11-341)
   D.   Unlawful Parking:
      1.   Parking At Curb: No motor vehicle shall be parked with the left side
of the vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It shall be
unlawful to stand or park any motor vehicle in a street other than parallel
with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches (12") of the regularly-established curb line, except on those streets
which have been marked for angle parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the
angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
      2.   Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle from
which merchandise is peddled on any business street.
      3.   Loading Zone: When so posted, it shall be unlawful for the driver of
a passenger vehicle to stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer
than is permitted by the posted sign for the loading or unloading of
passengers, or for the driver to stand or park any freight-carrying motor
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and
deliver materials in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as such.
      4.   Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, except
physicians on emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles, when properly
posted, to park any motor vehicle on any street in violation of the posted
restrictions.
      5.   Alleys: No person shall park a motor vehicle within an alley in such
manner or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
      6.   Cab Stands; Bus Stands: No motor vehicle other than a licensed
taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand
and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a
bus loading zone. (1979 Code § 11-344)
      7.   Time Limit; Impoundment: It shall be an infraction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to park or leave standing on any public
road, street, alley or City property any motor vehicle for forty eight (48) or
more consecutive hours, and any vehicle so parked or left standing may be
impounded or removed by the Emery County Sheriff. For purposes of impoundment
and removal, the Emery County Sheriff may impound and remove any motor vehicle
which reasonably appears to have remained unmoved for forty eight (48)
consecutive hours. The cost of impoundment and removal shall be charged to the
owner or any person who claims the impounded motor vehicle. (1979 Code § 11-
344; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-5: VIOLATIONS:
Fines and violations for 6-1-4 and all other parking related violations shall
be adopted here by reference and can be found in the city fee schedule. (Res.
2018-9, 1-10-2019)
CHAPTER 2
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definition
6-2-2: Rules And Regulations
6-2-3: Penalty
6-2-1: DEFINITION:
ALL-TERRAIN TYPE I VEHICLE (ATV): Any motor vehicle fifty inches (50") or less
in width, having an unladed dry weight of seven hundred (700) pounds or less,
traveling on three (3) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator, and designed for or capable of travel over
unimproved terrain. (Ord. 2003-05, 7-10-2003)
6-2-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
An ATV is allowed to be driven on designated streets within city limits under
the following conditions or restrictions:
   A.   Streets so designated are identified on the map (exhibit A) attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
   B.   In addition to the above identified streets, ATVs may be operated on
the streets of Ferron City that constitute the most direct route to and from
any residence within the city to any of the aforementioned designated routes
indicated on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein. No cruising
on ATV routes within the city limits will be allowed. "Cruising" is defined as
more than four (4) trips in a twenty four (24) hour period.
   C.   ATVs shall be used and operated only on or over such public lands,
trails, streets, roads or highways within Ferron City that are designated by
this chapter as open to such vehicle use, and all such designated accessways
shall be posted by signs to evidence their use as ATV routes. Further, to the
full extent possible, ATVs shall be operated on the outer portion of the travel
lane to facilitate easy passing by other motorized vehicles.
   D.   ATVs shall be operated at all times in accordance with all applicable
state, county and city traffic laws and regulations as indicated in section 41-
22-10.6 of the Utah state vehicle code. If equipped with headlights, shall be
operated with the headlights functioning and turned on. Further, all ATVs must
be equipped with a noise control device and spark arrester when operated on
Ferron City streets. State, county and city noise regulations shall be
enforced.
   E.   The ATV is legally licensed and registered.
   F.   The driver of an ATV who is sixteen (16) or older must hold a legal
driver's license.
   G.   Any operator who is under sixteen (16) years of age must be under the
direct visual supervision of an adult who is at least eighteen (18) years of
age while using a route designated under this chapter. Per Utah state vehicle
code 41-22-10.5(2), those operators between eight (8) and sixteen (16) must be
state certified to operate an ATV and have said certification with them at time
of operation.
   H.   Any ATV being operated by an individual or having a rider eight (8)
through eighteen (18) shall wear an approved helmet.
   I.   No person under the age of eight (8) years old shall operate any ATV on
Ferron City streets.
   J.   The ATV is in a safe running condition.
   K.   The ATV is being operated in a safe condition.
   L.   The ATV driver when driving on streets within city limits must be going
to or from a local city business, or to gain access or returning from an ATV
route or to perform work with husbandry or irrigation.
   M.   No ATV shall be operated on city streets past official sundown or
before official sunrise and must have working head and tail lights.
   N.   ATVs used as implements of husbandry and identified as such are exempt
from this chapter as indicated by title 41 of the state highway code 41-22-10.5
(5), "does not apply to off highway implements of husbandry used in accordance
with section 41-22-5.5". (Ord. 2003-05, 7-10-2003)
6-2-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and be
subject to penalty as provided by Utah state law for infractions.
   B.   The Emery County sheriff's department or other legal policing authority
is given all rights to write citations to those individuals breaking laws or
safety guidelines as outlined in this chapter.
   C.   The first violation shall be subject to a written violation and a fine
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
   D.   The second violation in a six (6) month period shall be a written
violation and subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine.
   E.   Any further violation will result in a written violation and a fine of
two hundred dollars ($200.00). All fines are payable to Emery County. (Ord.
2003-05, 7-10-2003)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Purpose
7-1-2: Delinquency; Notice Of Sale
7-1-3: Fees, Costs And Interest
7-1-4: Minimum Sale Price
7-1-5: Sale
7-1-6: Tax Sale Record
7-1-7: Certificate Of Sale
7-1-8: Sale To City
7-1-9: General Taxes On Delinquent Property
7-1-10: Redemption
7-1-11: Tax Deed
7-1-12: Sale After Deed
7-1-13: Special Improvement Guaranty Fund
7-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to supplement and provide details necessary
to implement the powers and procedures whereby the City may levy, assess and
collect special taxes for special improvements under the provisions of the Utah
Municipal Improvement District Act, Utah Code Annotated section 17A-3-301 et
seq. (1979 Code § 6-211; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-2: DELINQUENCY; NOTICE OF SALE:
After the date of delinquency, as fixed in the levy and notice of tax adopted
by the City Council in connection with the creation of a special improvement
district and the levy of taxes necessary to pay for the project, the City
Treasurer shall proceed to make up a list of all property upon which the
special tax remains due and unpaid and cause the same to be published at least
once in some newspaper having general circulation in the City at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of sale. The delinquency list shall contain a
description of the property delinquent according to lots, blocks or parcels,
together with the owner's name or names, if known, and if not known, in lieu
thereof, the words "unknown owner" with the amount of taxes due on each
separate parcel exclusive of costs, and shall be accompanied by a notice of
sale substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE OF SALE FOR SPECIAL TAXES
Notice is hereby given that special taxes for (here insert briefly the purpose
of the tax) are due and unpaid in amounts and upon the lands set forth and
described in the delinquent list hereto attached. Unless the taxes, including
interest, together with the cost of publication, are paid on or before the
           day of                (here fix a date at least 12 days from the
date of first publication), the real property upon which such taxes are a lien
will, on that day, be sold for the taxes, interest, costs of advertising, and
expenses of sale, at the front door of the                                (here
insert name of building and address) beginning at the hour of 12:00 o'clock
noon, and continuing until all of the property shall have been sold.
(1979 Code § 6-212)
7-1-3: FEES, COSTS AND INTEREST:
   A.   Costs Of Advertising: The City Treasurer shall tax against each parcel
of land advertised as delinquent the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
the cost of advertising the delinquency and shall, after the first publication,
in all instances of payment, collect such amount in addition to the tax. (1979
Code § 6-213)
   B.   Expense Of Sale: In case of a sale of any land for special taxes, the
City Treasurer shall add to the amount of tax and costs of advertising, the
further sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) as the expense of sale and shall,
in all instances of sale or redemption, collect such sum. (1979 Code § 6-214;
amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Certificates Issued: The City Treasurer shall collect a fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each certificate issued, which fee shall be paid into
the Treasury. (1979 Code § 6-217; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Interest: Interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per year shall
be charged on the special tax due from the date of delinquency until date of
sale and interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per year shall be charged
on the full amount for which the property was sold from the date of sale. (1979
Code § 6-218; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-4: MINIMUM SALE PRICE:
In no case shall lands advertised for sale for delinquent special taxes be sold
for less than the amount of such special taxes, interest, the cost of
advertising and expense of sale. (1979 Code § 6-215)
7-1-5: SALE:
   A.   Conducted; Offer: On the day fixed for the sale, the City Treasurer, in
person or by deputy, shall appear at the hour and place named in the notice of
sale and at public auction, and there offer to the highest responsible bidder
sufficient of the delinquent real estate for a sum sufficient to pay the taxes,
interest and costs. The offer of sale shall be substantially in the following
language:
There is delinquent upon                   (here describe the piece of property
as in the notice) special taxes amounting to                      dollars with
interest, costs, and expenses of                           dollars. What is the
smallest portion of this property which you will take and pay the taxes,
interest, costs and expenses?
   B.   Continued: If the sale is not concluded by four o'clock (4:00) P.M. of
the day advertised, it may be, by the City Treasurer, continued until twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon of the next-succeeding business day and thereafter in the
same manner proceeded with and continued until completed. (1979 Code § 6-216)
7-1-6: TAX SALE RECORD:
   A.   Contents Required: The City Treasurer shall make a record of all sales
of real property in a book to be kept by him for that purpose. The record shall
be kept substantially in the same order as that for which the property was
advertised for sale, but shall list, as applicable, in separate columns, a
description of the property, the amount of the tax, interest, costs, expenses,
how much of what part of each tract was sold, by whom purchased, the date of
sale and the date of redemption.
   B.   Filing: At the end of each calendar year, the book shall be endorsed
"Ferron Treasurer, Special Tax Sale Record for the Year 19____", and it shall
then be filed in his office. Whenever thereafter any portion of property so
sold shall be redeemed, the fact of redemption shall be entered by the City
Treasurer opposite the description of the property in the tax sale record. At
the expiration of three (3) years from the date of filing in his office, the
City Treasurer shall file each yearly tax sale record in the office of the City
Recorder. (1979 Code § 6-219)
7-1-7: CERTIFICATE OF SALE:
When real estate is sold for special taxes, the City Treasurer shall make out,
sign, acknowledge, and deliver a certificate of sale which shall recite the
facts of sale as in the tax sale record and what payment has been made
therefor, and which certificate shall be substantially in the following form:
   (name of municipality)
   TREASURER'S OFFICE
   CERTIFICATE OF SALE FOR SPECIAL TAX
THIS CERTIFIES, That on the           day of              , 19    , in
pursuance of law and ordinance, I,                      , as treasurer and
collector of special taxes for            , Utah, sold to
                           , subject to redemption, as provided by law, the
following property in (name of municipality) for delinquent special taxes
assessed against the property in the name of (delinquent taxpayer) to-wit:
   DESCRIPTION
                   , Ext. No.               , Page                   
Frontage abutting the improvement to the full depth back therefrom (or other
depth)
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
   Feet               of Lot                Book                Plat
                  
   TAX AND COSTS
Amount of tax   $                            
Interest to date of sale   $                            
Advertising   $                            
Expense of sale   $                            
Certificate of sale   $                            
Total tax and costs at date of sale   $                            
_________________________
treasurer and collector
of special taxes
DATED, (name of municipality) ,
                                                    (acknowledgment in
statutory form)
(1979 Code § 6-220)
7-1-8: SALE TO CITY:
   A.   Conditions: Where no bid at least equal to the amount of the tax,
interest, cost of advertising and expenses of sale on each separate parcel is
received as each separate parcel is offered for sale, the City shall be deemed
to have bid for such property, and the property shall be sold by the City
Treasurer to the City for the amount of the tax, interest, cost of advertising
and expense of sale. The sale shall have the same effect as if made to an
individual. The City Recorder shall draw a check or warrant on the Special
Improvement Guaranty Fund for which the special tax was levied in the amount
necessary. (1979 Code § 6-222)
   B.   Certificate: When property is sold to the City for special taxes, the
City Treasurer shall make out, sign, acknowledge and deliver the certificate of
sale described in Section
7-1-7 of this Chapter to the City Recorder, whose duty it shall be to see that
such certificate is properly recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and
it shall thereafter be kept as a part of the records of the City Recorder's
office. (1979 Code § 6-221)
7-1-9: GENERAL TAXES ON DELINQUENT PROPERTY:
   A.   Request For Appropriation: Between November 15 and December 15 in each
year, the City Recorder shall ascertain, by examination of the County records,
which, if any, of the property sold to the City is delinquent and about to be
sold for general taxes, and report the property and the amount of taxes in each
instance to the City Council, with the request that the amount thereof be
appropriated to the County.
   B.   Warrant: It shall be the duty of the City Council to appropriate the
amount recommended by the City Recorder. The City Treasurer shall thereon draw
a warrant in favor of the County for the total sum of such delinquent taxes,
and the City Recorder shall deliver the warrant to the County Treasurer, taking
duplicate receipts therefor for each separate piece or parcel of property upon
which the general taxes are thus paid. The City Recorder shall thereon deliver
one of each such receipts to the City Treasurer and file and attach the other
to the corresponding certificate of sale in his office.
   C.   Records: On receiving such receipt, the City Treasurer shall make entry
on his tax sale record, opposite the corresponding property, of the date and
amount of taxes paid. Such taxes shall thereafter draw interest at the rate of
twelve percent (12%) per annum, and shall be included in the amount required to
be paid for redemption of such property. (1979 Code § 6-223; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-10: REDEMPTION:
   A.   Conditions: Real estate sold for special taxes may be redeemed by any
person interested therein, at any time within three (3) years after the date of
the sale thereof, by such person paying to the City Treasurer, for the use of
the purchaser or his legal representative, the amount paid by such purchaser
and all costs and expenses, including the cost of the certificate of sale,
together with the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the redemption
certificate, and all special taxes that have been accrued thereon and which
have been paid by the purchaser after his purchase to the time of redemption,
together with interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month on the whole
from the date of payment to the date of redemption; provided, that:
      1.   In all cases where property has been sold to the City, and general
taxes thereon have been thereafter paid by the City, it shall be necessary for
a redemptioner to pay the amount of such general taxes, so paid as aforesaid,
with interest thereon from the date of payment to the date of redemption, at
the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum; and
      2.   When two (2) or more parties are interested in a piece of property
which has been sold for taxes, either party may redeem the property in which he
is interested, upon payment of that proportion of the taxes, interest and costs
which his property bears to the whole property sold, together with the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a redemption certificate. (1979 Code § 6-224;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Installment Redemption:
      1.   Any property sold to the City, on which tax sale certificates have
been issued but for which no tax deed has issued to the City, may be redeemed
by any person having an interest in such property on the payment in
installments of the unpaid principal, interest and all costs and charges;
provided, that the installments shall be paid within such time and in such
amounts as will discharge the indebtedness within the period in which the right
to redeem from such tax sale shall expire.
      2.   Credit shall be given for each installment as paid, and the interest
shall be reduced proportionately. (1979 Code § 6-225)
      3.   Interest shall be paid at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum
on the unpaid balance due under this subsection.
      4.   There is hereby imposed the sum of two dollars ($2.00) per
installment payment to cover the additional bookkeeping expenses incurred by
any person taking advantage of this subsection, and such charge shall not be
credited against the delinquent assessment. (1979 Code § 6-225; amd. 1998 Code)
      5.   Every person who takes advantage of this subsection shall enter into
an agreement with the City, which shall be substantially in the following form:
   AGREEMENT OF INSTALLMENT REDEMPTION
The undersigned hereby:
1. Acknowledges that he is delinquent in the payment of the special improvement
taxes levied against the property described below in the amount of
$               , which amount is the total of the unpaid tax, principal and
interest, costs of advertising and expense of sale.
2. Agrees and promises to pay the above-stated amount in           equal
installments of $               , which payment will be made on or before the
         day of each month from the period beginning                    ,
19       , to and including                  , 19       .
3. Acknowledges having received and read a copy of subsection 7-1-10B of this
Chapter, and understands the same.
4. Agrees that should he fail to make payment of the installments when due, the
right of the City to receive a tax deed for the property below described shall
not be impaired thereby and the undersigned shall not be entitled to receive
any refund of any amount paid hereunder.
The property covered by the provisions of this agreement is described as
follows:
                                                                                
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
      DATED this             day of                     , 19      .
                                   
Mayor
   ATTEST:
                                     
City Recorder
   (1979 Code § 6-225)
   C.   Certificate: The City Treasurer shall, when any property is fully
redeemed, make the proper entry in the tax sale record file in his office, and
issue a certificate of redemption, which certificate shall be by him
acknowledged, and which entry or certificate shall be prima facie evidence of
such redemption. (1979 Code § 6-226)
   D.   Notice: In all cases where property sold to the City is fully redeemed,
the City Treasurer shall issue a formal notice of such redemption in writing
and file the same with the City Recorder, whose duty it shall be to attach such
notice to the corresponding certificate of sale on file in his office, and
endorse on the filing face of such certificate in red ink the word "REDEEMED"
and the date of redemption. (1979 Code § 6-227)
7-1-11: TAX DEED:
   A.   Issued: If any property sold as aforesaid is not fully redeemed within
the time and in the manner in this Chapter provided, on the deposit of the tax
sale record for the year in which the property was sold by the City Treasurer
with the City Recorder, the City Recorder shall, on presentation of the City
Treasurer's certificate of sale, make and acknowledge a deed conveying the
property therein described to the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, as the case
may be. If any person shall be entitled to receive deeds for more than one
parcel of property, he may have the whole included in one deed, but each parcel
shall be separately described. In January of each year, or as soon thereafter
as the business of the office will permit, the City Recorder shall make and
acknowledge a deed, conveying to the City all property purchased in the name of
the City at special tax sale not theretofore redeemed, as in this Chapter
provided, shall see that such deeds are properly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, and shall keep such deeds on file in his office for the
benefit of the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund.
   B.   Contents: Deeds issued by the City Recorder in pursuance of the
provisions of this Chapter shall recite in substance the amount of tax for
which the property was sold, the particular purpose of the tax levied, the year
in which the levy was made, the day and year of sale, the amount for which the
real estate was sold, a description of the property sold, in accordance with
the certificate of sale, the name of the purchaser or the purchaser's assignee,
and shall be executed by the City Recorder on behalf of the City, and by him
acknowledged so as to be entitled to record. (1979 Code § 6-228)
   C.   Records Maintained: The City Recorder shall keep on file in his office
a record of all tax deeds issued by him, which shall be a photocopy of the
deeds so issued by him, and which shall be indexed in the name of the party
whose property was sold for taxes, and also in the name of the individual to
whom the tax deed was issued. (1979 Code § 6-229)
   D.   Fee: The City Recorder shall collect fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each
deed issued, for the first description of property contained in such deed, and
for each additional description of property in such deed, and shall pay such
fees monthly into the Treasury. However, in cases where the City is the tax
sale purchaser, no fee shall be collected. (1979 Code § 6-230; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-12: SALE AFTER DEED:
Whenever property sold for special taxes and purchased by the City shall not
have been redeemed within the time specified, but shall have been conveyed to
the City by recorder's deed, and which shall not have been sold by the City,
such property may thereafter be purchased by the prior owner, his heirs,
personal representative or assigns, or any other person, upon petition therefor
addressed to the City Council and upon such terms as the City Council may
determine. The proceeds of such purchase shall be paid into the Special
Improvement Guaranty Fund; provided however, that nothing contained in this
Section shall prevent the City from selling any property conveyed to it by
recorder's deed to any person at any time after such conveyance is made. (1979
Code § 6-231)
7-1-13: SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the
Special Improvement Guaranty Fund, which Fund shall be used for the purpose of
guaranteeing to the extent of the Fund the payment of special improvement bonds
or special improvement warrants and interest thereon theretofore or thereafter
issued against the local improvement districts for the payment of local
improvements therein and for the purchase of property sold to the City at tax
sales or under foreclosure for delinquent special improvement taxes. (1979 Code
§ 6-301)
   B.   Maintenance Of Fund: The City Council shall create and maintain the
Special Improvement Guaranty Fund by appropriations from the General Fund, by
the levy of a tax not to exceed one mill in any one year, by the issuance of
general obligation bonds, or by appropriation from such other sources as may be
determined by the City Council to provide the money necessary for that purpose.
The Fund shall be held by the City Treasurer and shall be kept by him separate
and apart from all other funds held by him. Payments out of the Fund shall be
made only by checks drawn by the City Recorder. (1979 Code § 6-302)
   C.   Interest And Penalties: All excess charges and penalties collected by
the City Treasurer for the benefit or credit of any special improvement fund
and remaining on hand after all the bonds or warrants, together with interest
thereon, drawn against the special improvement fund shall have been fully paid
and cancelled, shall be transferred by the City Recorder to the Special
Improvement Guaranty Fund. (1979 Code § 6-303)
   D.   Payment Of Bonds Or Warrants: When any bond, warrant, or coupon drawn
against any special improvement fund is presented to the City Treasurer for
payment and there is not a sufficient amount in the special improvement fund
against which it is drawn, payment therefor shall be made by warrant drawn by
the City Recorder against the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund (unless
otherwise requested by the holder). (1979 Code § 6-304)
   E.   Replenishment Of Fund: Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of
cash in the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund at any time to make any and all
purchases of property bid on by the City at sales of property for delinquent
special improvement taxes, the City Council shall replenish the Special
Improvement Guaranty Fund by transfer or appropriation from the General Fund or
other available sources as may be determined by the City Council. (1979 Code §
6-305)
   F.   City Recorder To Issue Warrants: Warrants drawing interest at rate not
to exceed eight percent (8%) per annum may be issued by the City Recorder
against the Fund to meet any financial liabilities accruing against it. At the
time of making its annual tax levy, the City Council shall provide for the levy
of a sum sufficient with the other resources of the Fund to pay warrants so
issued and outstanding, the tax for this purpose not to exceed one mill in any
one year. (1979 Code § 6-306)
   G.   Subrogation Of City: Whenever the City shall have paid under its
guaranty any sum on account of principal or interest on the bonds or warrants
of any district, it shall be subrogated to the rights of the holders of such
bonds or warrants or interest coupons so paid, and such bonds or warrants or
coupons, and the proceeds thereof, shall become a part of the Guaranty Fund.
(1979 Code § 6-307)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Administration And Enforcement
7-2-2: Removal Of Snow
7-2-3: Obstructions In Streets
7-2-4: Doors Obstructing
7-2-5: Discharge Of Water
7-2-6: Sidewalk Regulations
7-2-7: Animals On Streets
7-2-8: Street Encroachment Permit
7-2-1: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
In conjunction with the Castle Valley Special Service District, the City shall:
   A.   Charge And Control: Have charge of the construction, maintenance and
repair of streets, sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains,
waterways and other public ways. It shall have control of all waters flowing on
the streets, sidewalks and public ways, whether originating from storm, flood,
drainage or irrigation waters.
   B.   Complaints: Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of
defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks and other public ways
and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall
record the action taken on each complaint.
   C.   Enforcement: Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other
ordinances relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains,
ditches, waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways.
   D.   Repair Defects: Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to
the City's attention and take reasonable precautions to protect the public from
injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1979 Code § 11-312; amd.
1998 Code)
7-2-2: REMOVAL OF SNOW:
   A.   Failure To Remove Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, lessor or agent of any property, abutting on a paved sidewalk, to
fail to remove or have removed from such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow or
sleet thereon within a reasonable time after such snow, hail or sleet has
fallen. In the case of a storm between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., such sidewalks shall be cleaned before nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the same day.
   B.   Depositing In Gutter Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person
removing snow from the sidewalk, to deposit snow, dirt, leaves or any other
material in the gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of water therein.
(1979 Code § 11-361)
7-2-3: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to place or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking area,
gutter or on the half of the street next to such premises:
   A.   Refuse: Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse
matter, ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
(1979 Code § 11-362)
   B.   Building Materials: Any lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building material,
dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall obstruct such
public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part thereof, or the
passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as expressly
authorized by ordinance, without the permission of the City Council first had
and obtained. (1979 Code § 11-362; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Permanent Or Temporary Structures: Any permanent or temporary
structure, mechanism, device, motor vehicle of any kind or character, except
trees planted pursuant to the provisions of applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2018-
2, 6-14-2018)
7-2-4: DOORS OBSTRUCTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the control or management
of any alley, road or passageway to construct or hang gates or doors to such
alley, road or passageway so that the gates or doors thereto, when open, shall
project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the sidewalk beyond the
property line. (1979 Code § 11-364)
7-2-5: DISCHARGE OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of
any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the
control of such person, to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(1979 Code § 11-365)
7-2-6: SIDEWALK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving Or Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
park a self-propelled vehicle or lead, drive or ride any animal upon any
sidewalk, except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1979 Code § 11-
366)
   B.   Businesses To Keep Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned. (1979 Code § 11-367; amd.
1998 Code)
   C.   Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or merchandise shall be
placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any parking area,
street or sidewalk beyond two feet (2') from the front line of the lot, without
first obtaining the written approval of the city council. Such approval shall
be granted only when such sale or show shall be a promotional activity not
exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when participated in by a majority of
firms seeking approval in their business areas. The city council's written
approval shall specifically provide that no goods, wares or merchandise shall
be placed in such a manner as to leave less than a six foot (6') passageway for
pedestrians. (1979 Code § 11-368)
   D.   Playing: Every person who obstructs the sidewalk or street by playing
any game or engaging in any activity which obstructs the free travel thereon is
guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1979 Code § 11-370; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Congregating: It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to congregate about or upon any sidewalks,
stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling house,
theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing to obstruct or
interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying such
building or premises. (1979 Code § 11-371; amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-7: ANIMALS ON STREETS:
   A.   Permission Required: No person shall drive livestock through the city
upon streets not recognized as historical livestock trails except upon
permission and according to the direction of Ferron City. The following streets
are recognized as historical livestock trails (HLT):
HLT 1: State Street beginning at 300 North and extending north to the city
boundary line.
HLT 2: State Street beginning at 300 North and extending east to the city
boundary line.
HLT 3: 300 North beginning at 200 East and extending north to the city boundary
line.
HLT 4: State Street beginning at 100 South and extending south to the city
boundary line.
HLT 5: State Street beginning at 100 South and extending east to the city
boundary line.
HLT 6: State Street beginning at 100 South and extending west to the city
boundary line.
HLT 7: State Street beginning at 500 South and extending east to the city
boundary line.
HLT 8: State Street beginning at 500 South and extending west to the city
boundary line.
HLT 9: State Street beginning at 900 South and extending west to the city
boundary line.
HLT 10: 100 South beginning at 400 West and extending south to the city
boundary line.
HLT 11: 800 West extending both north and south to the city boundary line.
A map of the historical livestock trails is filed with ordinance 2005-4. (Ord.
2005-4, 11-10-2005)
7-2-8: STREET ENCROACHMENT PERMIT:
Upon meeting the requirements of this section, an applicant may encroach upon
streets within Ferron City for the purpose of transporting materials and
equipment.
   A.   Permit Requirements: Applicant will comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Comply with all the laws, ordinances and regulations of all
governmental agencies, including, but not limited to, Ferron City, as well as
instructions of the Ferron City council or their representative.
      2.   Applicant agrees to follow the routing as requested in the
application.
      3.   Transporting of material will be during daylight hours only.
      4.   If spillage from trucks occurs, the material will be removed from
the street immediately.
      5.   Repair any damages made by their equipment to the existing city
streets used for transporting of materials.
      6.   Dust control will be provided during hauling operations.
      7.   Proper signing will be provided on all streets and intersections
while transporting material is in progress.
      8.   Traffic control (signing) will be provided as required.
      9.   Inspections of streets will be made periodically and any necessary
repairs will be made immediately by the applicant at their expense. Inspections
will be made with a representative from the following: the applicant, Ferron
City, Castle Valley special service district, and city engineer. The inspection
fee shall be paid for by the applicant.
      10.   The applicant is responsible for all liability for injury to, or
death of any person, or damage to property which may occur through any act or
omission of the applicant. In the event any claim, suit or action is brought
against the city, its officers, employees or agents thereof, by reason of, or
in connection with any such act or omission, applicant shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees or agents from such claim,
suit or action. Applicant will be required to show evidence that a policy of
liability insurance is in force for property damage and personal injury in an
amount not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).
      11.   The applicant shall be required to post a bond or acceptable
guarantee for damage to the city streets caused by commercial haulage. The
amount of this bond shall be three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
This bond shall be conditional upon the complete restoration and repair of the
site of the encroachment. Bonds given pursuant to this section shall remain in
force for one year after the completion of the project.
      12.   Acceptance of the permit constitutes an agreement by the applicant
to observe and comply with all of the conditions on the face of the permit and
attachments thereto. (Ord. 2004-1, 3-25-2004)
CHAPTER 3
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permit Required; Inspection
7-3-2: Conform To Established Specifications
7-3-3: Changing Existing Construction
7-3-4: Building Materials In Street; Permit
7-3-5: Mixing Concrete On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks; Permit
7-3-6: Overflowing Of Water
7-3-7: Irrigation Ditches
7-3-8: Removal Of Earth
7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION:
   A.   Required: No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or
employee, shall construct any permanent sidewalk for public use without first
obtaining from the building inspector a permit to do so. The permit shall
specify that the sidewalk be constructed of cement, the character and quality
of the cement, the consistent parts of the mixture, and the thickness of the
sidewalk. (1979 Code § 11-352; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
   B.   Unlawful Violation Of Specifications: It shall be unlawful to construct
a sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by a proper city official.
(1979 Code § 11-352)
   C.   Inspection: All sidewalks shall be inspected by the building inspector
or his duly authorized representative. (1979 Code § 11-352; amd. 1998 Code;
Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
7-3-2: CONFORM TO ESTABLISHED SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor
or employee to construct a street or sidewalk which does not conform to
specifications established by the city engineer or other authorized
representative of the city unless special permission to deviate from such
specification is first obtained from the city council. (1979 Code § 11-351)
7-3-3: CHANGING EXISTING CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk
or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first
making written application and obtaining from the building inspector a permit
to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the
part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance with
specifications furnished by the city. (1979 Code § 11-353; amd. 1998 Code; Ord.
2010-1, 1-28-2010)
7-3-4: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving from the city council a
permit for the occupation or use of such portions of streets for such periods
of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be required by the
city council. Any such permit may be revoked by the city council at any time
when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which
it is granted, or when, in the opinion of the city council, the public interest
requires such revocation. (1979 Code § 11-354)
7-3-5: MIXING CONCRETE ON PAVED STREETS OR SIDEWALKS; PERMIT:
Unless a permit from the zoning administrator has been obtained, it shall be
unlawful to: (1979 Code § 11-355; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
   A.   Place, Pile Or Permit: Place or pile or permit to be placed or piled,
any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance
or mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk.
   B.   Make, Mix Or Permit: Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any
mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of
any paved street or sidewalk. (1979 Code § 11-355)
7-3-6: OVERFLOWING OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch,
canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the
city. (1979 Code § 11-356)
7-3-7: IRRIGATION DITCHES:
All owners or occupants of lots in the city who require water from a ditch for
irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the zoning administrator. (1979 Code §
11-357; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
7-3-8: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street or other
public place without a permit from the zoning administrator. (1979 Code § 11-
358; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
CHAPTER 4
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Administrative Authority
7-4-2: Definitions
7-4-3: Permit Required; Basis For Issuance
7-4-4: Application For Permit; Requirements
7-4-5: Fees For Permit
7-4-6: Insurance Requirements
7-4-7: Bond Required
7-4-8: Duration Of Permit; Extensions
7-4-9: Compliance Required
7-4-10: Relocation Of Structures In Public Ways
7-4-11: Impact On Existing Improvements
7-4-12: Restoration Of Public Property
7-4-13: Transferability; Assignability
7-4-14: Other Highway Permits
7-4-15: Work Without Permit
7-4-16: Revocation Or Suspension; Stop Order; Default
7-4-17: Failure To Conform To Design Standards
7-4-18: Emergency Work
7-4-19: Nonliability Of City
7-4-20: Appeals
7-4-21: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
7-4-22: Conflicting Provisions
7-4-23: Penalty
7-4-1: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
In approving or disapproving work within any public way, or permits therefor,
in the inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or specifications;
and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him/her by this
Chapter, the City Engineer shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect
the public way and the use thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the
actions or inaction of permittees and applicants or other persons which have no
relationship to the use, preservation or protection of the public way. (Ord. 2-
24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUSINESS: Any place in the City in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
CITY: Ferron City, a Municipal corporation of the State of Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer or his/her authorized representative.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes
interruption of utility or public services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS AND/OR DESIGN STANDARDS:
The latest version of the engineering regulations, specifications, design
standards or criteria published or adopted by the City Engineer.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet City Engineer
specifications, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard condition
within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement of
surfaces, deterioration of materials or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the engineering regulations.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the right of way.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
PERMITTEE: Any person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this Chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
provider, corporation, company, organization or entity of any kind.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee or
public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
State Public Service Commission or any mutual corporation providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone or other utility products or services for use by
the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys and public drainage ways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the City.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying
system used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights
of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway or ditch installed in a right
of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term
does not include private drain lines.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider located in the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and
includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation
of the permit. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE:
Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a public way within the
City, shall make application for a permit. The decision by the City to issue a
permit shall include, among other factors determined by the City, the
following:
   A.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or
structures proposed to be installed in the public way;
   B.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in addition
to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other users of
the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and water;
   C.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements or landscaping previously existing in the public way;
   D.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the public way. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-
1998)
7-4-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required; Filing: Application for a permit shall be filed with the City
Engineer on a form or forms to be furnished by the City. Property owners and/or
tenants for whom work is being done shall be responsible for obtaining the
permits, provided however, contractors may obtain the permit in the
contractor's name.
   B.   Eligible Persons: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work within the public ways of the City, save and except the
following:
      1.   Contractors licensed by the State as general contractors;
      2.   Providers;
      3.   Property owners installing, replacing or maintaining less than five
hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb
and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the City Engineer,
upon a portion of the public way adjacent to their residence; or
      4.   Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public
way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings and painting or cleaning of
buildings or sign boards or other structures.
   C.   Denial Based On Past Performances: The City Engineer may deny the
issuance of permits to contractors, utility companies or other permit
applicants who have shown by past performance that, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, they will not consistently conform to the engineering regulations,
specifications, design standards or the requirements of this Chapter.
   D.   Engineering Plans; When Required: When necessary, in the judgment of
the City Engineer, to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to
existing or proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether
the work proposed complies with the engineering regulations, construction
specifications and design standards, the City Engineer may require the filing
of engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in
sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance,
or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and
sketches are filed and approved.
   E.   Approval Required Prior To Commencement Of Work: It shall be unlawful
for any person to commence work upon any public way until the City Engineer has
approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work,
except as specifically approved to the contrary in this Chapter.
   F.   Exceptions:
      1.   Government Employees: It shall be lawful for a City, County, State,
Federal or other government employee to perform routine maintenance work, not
involving excavations, without first having obtained a permit therefor.
      2.   Hand Digging Excavations: A permit is not required from the City
Engineer for hand digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler
systems and landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public way. However,
conformance to all City specifications is required. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-5: FEES FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Authorized: The City shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon
issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under
the permit as outlined in the consolidated fee schedule. Such costs could
include costs for reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of
the project, deterioration of the public way or diminution of the useful life
of the public way, and other costs to the City associated with the work to be
done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory
manner.
   B.   Waiver; Determination: The City Engineer may waive permit fees or
penalties, or portion thereof, provided for in this Chapter, when he/she
determines that such permit fee or penalty:
      1.   Low Income Housing: Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of
housing for persons whose income is below the median income level for the City;
or
      2.   Encroachment Involving Beautification Project: Pertains to an
encroachment on the public way involving a beautification project which
furthers specific goals and objectives set forth in the City's Strategic Plan,
Master Plans or other official documents, including decorative street lighting,
building facade lighting, flower and planter boxes and landscaping.
   C.   Required Reviews And Inspections: Additional charges to cover the
reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review, inspection and
work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the
City to each permittee, in addition to the permit fee. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-
1998)
7-4-6: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Evidence Provided; Limits, Provisions: Before a permit is issued, the
applicant shall furnish to the City evidence that such applicant has a
comprehensive general liability and property damage policy that includes
contractual liability coverage endorsed with the following limits and
provisions, or with such alternative limits and provisions as may be approved
by the City:
      1.   A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage and
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The general
aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general aggregate
limit shall be two (2) times the required occurrence limit. The coverage shall
be in the nature of broad form commercial general liability coverage. The City
Attorney may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits, depending on the
potential liability of any project.
      2.   All policies shall include the City, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers and assigns as insured. Any reference to the
"City" shall include the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns.
      3.   The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance
or self-insurance maintained by the City, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance
and shall not contribute to or with it.
      4.   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall
not effect coverage provided to the City, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers and assigns.
      5.   Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
      6.   Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against
the City, it being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so
affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all
losses covered by the described insurance.
      7.   The insurance companies issuing the policy shall have no recourse
against the City for payment of any premiums due or for any assessments under
any form of any policy.
      8.   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage
shall not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or in limits,
except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, sent to the City.
      9.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend
the City and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property occurring by
reason of permit work done by the permittee, his/her subcontractor or agent,
whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right of way
has been opened to public travel.
      10.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the City and its officers and employees against any claim or loss,
damage or expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work
pursuant to the permit, including, but not limited to, falling objects or
failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time
work begins until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public
use.
   B.   Rating Of Insurer: Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM
Best rating of no less than an "A" carrier, with a rating of "7" or higher.
   C.   Certificates, Endorsements: The permittee shall furnish the City with
certificates of insurance and original endorsements affecting coverage required
by the permit. The certificates and endorsements of each insurance policy are
to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its
behalf. The City expressly reserves the right to require complete, certified
copies of all required insurance policies at any time. Consequently, the
permittee shall be prepared to provide such copies prior to the issuance of the
permit.
   D.   Unsatisfactory Policy: If any of the required policies are, or at any
time become, unsatisfactory to the City as to form or substance, or if a
company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to
the City, the permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to
the City for approval and thereafter submit verification of coverage as
required by the City. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such
insurance as provided herein, the City may declare the permit to be in default
and pursue any and all remedies the City may have at law or in equity,
including those actions outlined in this Chapter.
   E.   Subcontractors: The permittee shall include all subcontractors as
insured under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and
endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be
subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
   F.   Deductibles, Self-Insured Retentions: Any deductibles or self-insured
retentions shall be declared to and approved by the City. At the option of the
City, either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-
insured retentions as respects the City, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers or assigns, or the permittee shall procure a bond, in a form
acceptable to the City, guaranteeing payment of losses and related
investigations, claim administration and defense expenses.
   G.   Property Owner Performing Work: A property owner performing work
adjacent to his/her residence may submit proof of a homeowner's insurance
policy in lieu of the insurance requirements of this Section.
   H.   Relief Of Obligation; Circumstances: A provider may be relieved of the
obligation of submitting certificates of insurance under the following
circumstances:
      1.   If such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
         a.   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this Chapter or has
complied with State requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may
submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit; and
         b.   Said coverage provides to the City the same scope of coverage
that would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this
Chapter; or
      2.   The work to be performed under the permit issued to the applicant is
to be performed by the City, in which case insurance or other risk transfer
issues shall be negotiated between the City and the applicant by separate
agreement. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-7: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Acceptable Security: Except as noted in this Chapter, each applicant,
before being issued a permit, shall provide the City with an acceptable
security (this may include a corporate surety bond, cash bond or letter of
credit, as determined by the City) in the amount to be determined to guarantee
faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to
this Chapter. The amount of the security required may be increased or decreased
at the discretion of the City Engineer whenever it appears that the amount and
cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary
from the amount of security otherwise required under this Chapter. The form of
the security and the entity issuing the security shall be subject to the
approval of the City Attorney.
   B.   Public Utilities Franchised By City: Public utilities franchised by the
City shall not be required to file any security if such requirement is
expressly waived in the franchise documents.
   C.   Conditions Of Security: The security required by this Section shall be
conditioned as follows:
      1.   Compliance With Specifications And Regulations: The permittee shall
fully comply with the requirements of the City ordinances and regulations,
specifications and standards promulgated by the City relative to work in the
public way, and respond to the City in damages for failure to conform
therewith;
      2.   Diligent Completion: After work is commenced, the permittee shall
proceed with diligence and expedition and shall promptly complete such work and
restore the public way to construction specifications so as not to obstruct the
public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
      3.   Guarantee Of Materials, Workmanship: The permittee shall guarantee
the materials and workmanship for a period of two (2) years from completion of
such work, with reasonable wear and tear excepted; and
      4.   Street Facilities: Unless authorized by the City Engineer on the
permit, all paving, resurfacing or replacement of street facilities on major or
collector streets shall be done in conformance with the regulations contained
herein within three (3) calendar days, and within seven (7) calendar days from
the time the excavation commences on all other streets, except as provided for
during excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not allow
paving according to engineering regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must
be provided. In all excavations, restoration of pavement surfaces shall be made
immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete is cured. If work is
expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall submit a detailed
construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and methods
to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction as soon as
reasonably possible. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-8: DURATION OF PERMIT; EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Completion Date; Determination: Each permit application shall state the
starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed within
five (5) days from the starting date or as determined by the City Engineer.
Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonably related to the work
to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include, in addition to
other factors related to the work to be performed, the following:
      1.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
      2.   Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on the public way affected by the work;
      3.   Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted by
the work;
      4.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed, as
well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the
public way by the public;
      5.   Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the
City.
   B.   Notification To City Upon Commencement: The City Engineer shall be
notified by the permittee of commencement of the work within twenty four (24)
hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time period
specified in the permit.
   C.   Application For Extension: If the work is not completed during such
period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the
City Engineer for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by
the City Engineer for good cause shown.
   D.   Length Of Extension: The length of the extension requested by the
permittee shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. No extension
shall be made that allows work to be completed in the winter period without
payment of winter fees. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-9: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Regulations, Specifications: The work performed in the public way shall
conform to the requirements of the engineering regulations, design standards,
construction specifications and traffic-control regulations of the City, copies
of which shall be available from the City Engineer, kept on file in the office
of the City Recorder and be open to public inspection during office hours.
   B.   Unattended Site; Permittee Identification: Where a job site is left
unattended before completion of the work, signage with minimum two inch (2")
high letters shall be attached to a barricade or otherwise posted at the site,
indicating the permittee's name or company name, telephone number and after
hours telephone number.
   C.   Traffic Control; Barricades: All excavations shall be conducted in a
manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or interruption of street
or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on
the public way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades
and/or other structures will be available and used where necessary to prevent
accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all
of the permittee's equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has
been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place, except where
backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the City; in which case the
barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain
in place until the backfill work is actually commenced by the City. From sunset
to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate
signal lights, torches, etc. The Police Department and Fire Department shall be
notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation
requiring street closure or traffic detour. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-10: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Authority; Costs: The City Engineer may direct any person owning or
maintaining facilities or structures in the public way to alter, modify or
relocate such facilities or structures as the City Engineer may require as set
forth herein. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults,
trash receptacles and overhead and underground gas, electric, telephone,
telecommunication and communication facilities shall specifically be subject to
such directives. The person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
shall, at their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by the
City, promptly protect or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or
structures, or part thereof, as directed by the City. In the event that such
person refuses or neglects to conform to the directive of the City, the City
shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of
the facilities or structures without liability to such person. Such person
shall pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in connection with such
work performed by the City, including also design, engineering, construction,
materials, insurance, court costs and attorney fees.
   B.   Considerations For Issuing Directive: Any directive by the City
Engineer shall be based upon the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or determined by the City Engineer to be
structurally unsound or defective;
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under
State statute;
      3.   The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has
expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
      5.   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
   C.   Police Power: Any directive of the City Engineer under this Section
shall be under and consistent with the City's police power. Unless an emergency
condition exists, the City Engineer shall make a good faith effort to consult
with the person regarding any condition that may result in a removal or
relocation of facilities in the public way to consider possible avoidance or
minimization of removal or relocation requirements and provide the directive as
far enough in advance of the required removal or relocation to allow the person
a reasonable opportunity to plan and minimize cost associated with the required
removal or relocation.
   D.   Private Easements; Exception: This obligation does not apply to
facilities or structures originally located on private property pursuant to a
private easement, which property was later incorporated into the public way, if
that prior private easement grants a superior vested right. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-
24-1998)
   E.   Failure To Comply: Any person owning or maintaining facilities or
structures in the public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such
facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the City Engineer shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall
be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
involved. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Emergency; Authority Of City: The City may, at any time, in case of
fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or
under the public way, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a
person. The City shall notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable, but
in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business
day following any action taken under this subsection. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-11: IMPACT ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp Blocked; Temporary Improvement: If any sidewalk
or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp
shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for
travel and convenient for users, and consistent with City standards for such.
   B.   Paved Areas; Temporary Surface: Where excavations are made in paved
areas, the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such
time as the permanent repairs are completed.
   C.   Disturbance Of Property:
      1.   At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or
personal property of a private property owner or the City, such permittee shall
ensure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of
the work.
      2.   The costs associated with the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be done by the permittee. Further, a
permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the City for any actual damage
caused by the permittee, its subcontractor or its independent contractor, in
connection with the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this
subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private property
owner when that subscriber or private property owner requests that the
permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the service
provided by the permittee to the property owner and when the permittee
exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber
or private property owner provided false information to the permittee on which
the permittee relied to its detriment.
   D.   Acts Specifically Included: Examples of types of acts specifically
included in this Section are the following:
      1.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways or fence
to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable or
other appurtenances of the permittee;
      2.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering or the like on the part of the
permittee;
      3.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a private property owner, such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning, heating unit or the like, in order to perform some sort of
construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
      4.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances
due to the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if
applicable).
   E.   Drainage Channels Free From Debris: Existing drainage channels, such as
gutters or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural
flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise
interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be
submitted for approval by the City Engineer prior to the blockage of the
channel.
   F.   Subcontractor, Independent Contractor: The requirements imposed upon
the permittee extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the
permittee might employ to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
   G.   Exception: The requirements of this Section shall not apply to the
removal by a permittee of a permanent structure placed by a property owner in a
public way, unless such property owner has received prior written permission
from the City granting the property owner the right to install a permanent
structure on a public way, and such written permission has been recorded in the
office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-12: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Required: The permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the surface
of any public way to its original condition and replace any removed or damaged
pavement with the same type and depth of pavement as that which is adjoining,
including the gravel base material. All restoration shall conform to the
engineering regulations, design standards and specifications promulgated by the
City and shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth in the permit,
unless additional time is granted in writing by the Department.
   B.   By City; Fee Charged To Permittee: At its option, the permittee doing
the actual excavation work may request that the City restore the surface to its
original condition. The fee for such resurfacing shall be determined by the
City Engineer in accordance with its reasonable costs for such work and shall
be charged to the person making the excavation. Payment for said work shall be
received by the City prior to the release of the bond. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-
1998)
7-4-13: TRANSFERABILITY; ASSIGNABILITY:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided however, that the holder of the permit
shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the
permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this Chapter
and under said permit. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-14: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
   A.   City Permit Not Required: Holders of permits for work on highways owned
or under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but located within the
City limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from the City under the
provisions of this Chapter, unless the work extends beyond the back side of the
curb, or beyond any other designated jurisdictional boundary. Any City permit
shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a County road or a State
highway within the City without an applicable County or State permit.
   B.   Regulation Of Work By City; Authority: The City Engineer, in his or her
discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate work under permits
issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work,
and measures required to be taken by the permittee of said governmental entity
for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
   C.   Liability: Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Chapter shall
be construed to impose any duty, implied or expressed, on the City or its
employees, officers, agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic
and safety of persons or property arising out of the issuance of any permit
issued by government entities other than the City, or arising out of any work
performed on any public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the City. (Ord.
2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-15: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT:
   A.   Stop Order: A stop order may be issued by the City Engineer directed to
any person doing or causing any work to be done in the public way without a
permit. The abutting property owner shall be responsible for causing work to be
done.
   B.   Fee: Any person found to be doing work in the public way without having
obtained a permit, as provided in this Chapter, shall be required to pay a
permit fee equal to two (2) times the normal permit fee. For replacement work,
where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for new construction
shall apply. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-16: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; STOP ORDER; DEFAULT:
   A.   Authority; Notice: Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop
order issued by the City Engineer, after notice to the permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the security or of any
provisions of this Chapter;
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the City or law
relating to the work; or
      3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   B.   Immediate Effect: A suspension or revocation by the City Engineer and a
stop order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the City
Engineer and notice to the person performing the work in the public way. Notice
to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the City Engineer
has posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written notice has
been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by the
permittee on the permit.
   C.   Default: Whenever the City Engineer finds that a default has occurred
in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice
thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond, if there
is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the City Engineer to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
   D.   Failure To Commence Work: In the event that the surety (or principal),
within a reasonable time following the giving of such notice (taking into
consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the
requirements of public safety and for the protection of persons and property),
fails either to commence and cause the required work to be performed with due
diligence, or to indemnify the City for the cost of doing the work, as set
forth in the notice, the City may perform the work, at the discretion of the
City Engineer, with City forces or contract forces, or both, and suit may be
commenced by the City Attorney against the contractor and bonding company and
such other persons as may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the
City, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the event that cash has
been deposited, the cost of performing the work may be charged against the
amount deposited, and suit brought for the balance due, if any. (Ord. 2-24-98,
2-24-1998)
7-4-17: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS:
For failure to conform to the design standards and regulation, the City
Engineer may:
   A.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
   B.   Issue a stop order;
   C.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
   D.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
   E.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-18: EMERGENCY WORK:
   A.   Authorized Without Permit: Any person maintaining pipes, lines or
facilities in the public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately; provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been
obtained beforehand.
   B.   Notification To City; Protection Of Public: In the event that emergency
work is commenced on or within any public way of the City during regular
business hours, the City Engineer shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour
from the time the work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such
work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the
public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is
accomplished according to City engineering regulations, the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and other applicable laws, regulations or generally
recognized practices in the industry.
   C.   Application For Permit; Time Limit: Any person commencing emergency
work in the public way during other than business hours without a permit shall
immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during the first hour
of the first regular business day on which City offices are open for business
after such work is commenced. A permit for such emergency work may be issued
which shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the
discretion of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-19: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
   A.   Agreement To Hold City Harmless: The permittee agrees to save the City,
its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and
liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work
performed under the permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under
this Chapter shall constitute such an agreement by the permittee to this
Section.
   B.   Liability: This Chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the
City, its officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work
within the public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter; nor
shall the City, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or
assigns thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility
by reason of inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the
approval of any work. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-20: APPEALS:
   A.   Application Disapproval Or Denial: The disapproval or denial of an
application by the City Engineer may be appealed by the applicant to the City
Council by the filing of a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the
action of the City Engineer. The City Council shall hear such appeal, if
written request therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render
their decision within two (2) weeks following notice of such appeal.
   B.   Suspension, Revocation Or Stop Order: Any suspension, revocation or
stop order by the City Engineer may be appealed by the permittee to the City
Council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action
of the City Engineer. The City Council shall hear such appeal, if written
request therefor be timely filed, as soon as practicable, and render their
decision within a reasonable time following filing of notice of appeal. (Ord.
2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-21: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-22: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998)
7-4-23: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, a violation of any provision of
this Chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate offense.
No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with
the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2-24-98, 2-24-1998; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
7-5-1: City Cemetery
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Applicability
7-5-4: Administration And Enforcement
7-5-5: Burials
7-5-6: Fees And Charges
7-5-7: Lot Sales
7-5-8: Perpetual Care Lots
7-5-9: Nonperpetual Care Lots
7-5-10: Indigents
7-5-11: Rules And Regulations
7-5-12: Care And Maintenance; Right To Enter
7-5-13: Unlawful Acts
7-5-1: CITY CEMETERY:
The burial ground of the City shall be known and designated by the name of
Ferron City Cemetery. (1979 Code § 8-202)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context otherwise clearly requires:
LOT: The partial lots or single graves in the City cemetery.
LOT OWNER OR PURCHASER AND GRAVE OWNER OR PURCHASER: The owner or purchaser of
burial privileges or the collateral right of use of any burial lot evidenced by
a deed or burial right for a described lot or by proved and recognized descent
or devise from the original owner. (1979 Code § 8-202)
7-5-3: APPLICABILITY:
All cemeteries owned and/or maintained by the City or which may hereafter be
acquired by the City wherever situated are hereby declared subject to the
provisions of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 8-203)
7-5-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The City Council, or such official designated by the City Council, shall have
the general supervision and administration of the City cemetery, including, but
not limited to:
   A.   Recommend Rules And Regulations: Recommending such additional rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the operation, maintenance, use and
protection of the cemetery.
   B.   Subdividing: Subdividing the cemetery into lots and grave sites.
   C.   Record Maintenance: Maintaining a record of the location of the graves
and preventing any lot from being used beyond its capacity.
   D.   Enclosure: Keeping in proper repair the enclosure around the cemetery
and preventing its being entered by animals and, so far as practical,
preventing the destruction or defacing of any tablet or marker placed or
erected therein.
   E.   Plat Of Cemetery: Keeping a duplicate plat of the cemetery and, at the
request of any person wishing to purchase any of the lots or parts of lots,
pointing out any of the lots or parts of lots for sale; and upon disposal of
any lots or part thereof, notifying the City Treasurer of such fact. The City
Treasurer shall, after payment of the lot price has been received in the
Treasury, issue a certificate of burial rights which shall describe the lot or
grave to which the right to burial is granted. The certificate shall be signed
by the Mayor and the City Recorder.
   F.   Opening Graves: Opening any graves in the cemetery upon application
being made by the City Treasurer or by any person having the right to make such
application and being responsible for closing all graves.
   G.   Floral Pieces; Displays: Removing floral pieces or displays left on any
grave as deemed necessary to the appearance of the cemetery, but such floral
pieces or displays shall not be removed sooner than ten (10) days after
original placement, except in emergency.
   H.   Street Maintenance: Keeping the streets, alleys, walks and avenues in
the cemetery in good order and unobstructed.
   I.   Markers: Erecting a suitable marker firmly set upon the northwest
corner of each lot with the number of the lot inscribed thereon and which
location shall be shown on the cemetery records. (1979 Code § 8-212; amd. 1998
Code)
7-5-5: BURIALS:
   A.   Permits Required:
      1.   Before any deceased person is buried in the city cemetery, a permit
properly issued by the registrar of the registration district in which the
death occurred or, in the absence of such registrar, a permit duly issued by
the state division of health or other authorized person shall be required by
the city. After burial, the city shall endorse upon the permit a description of
the location where the deceased is buried and shall enter all of the
information contained in the permit in the cemetery records.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased
person in the city cemetery without first obtaining a certificate of burial
right for the lot used or producing satisfactory evidence of a right to burial
based on a properly acquired certificate of burial right.
      3.   Only under the direct supervision of the city maintenance worker,
shall individuals or family members be allowed to conduct the burial of urns.
      4.   Permission to open a gravesite for burial may be given by the owner
of the lot, or a family representative designated by the lot owner.
   B.   Registration: Before any deceased person may be buried in the city
cemetery, the relatives or person having charge of the deceased shall provide
the city treasurer with a written statement which shall be filed by the city
treasurer, which statement shall contain, if known, information about the
deceased regarding his or her name, when and where born, the date and cause of
death, date of burial, name of cemetery and the description of the location of
the grave.
   C.   Vaults: It shall be unlawful for any person to be buried in the
cemetery unless the casket shall be placed in a vault made of concrete. All
urns shall be placed in a vault approved by the city. There shall be no more
than two (2) urns buried per lot or gravesite. There shall be only one grave
marker per plot or gravesite, regardless if there is one or two (2) urns buried
therein.
      1.   All caskets shall be placed in a vault made of concrete;
      2.   Ferron City will not be liable for any damages resulting from the
use of a Fire Proof Safe or a vault made of Polypropylene;
      3.   The following types of vaults are to be used for burial of an urn:
         a.   Concrete;
         b.   Fire Proof Safe; or
         c.   Polypropylene.
   D.   Grave Specifications: Specifications for graves are five feet by ten
feet (5' x 10') plots with eighteen inches (18") left between graves and a two
foot (2') area left between graves head to foot.
      1.   Piggybacking: There shall be no more than one body buried per plot
or single gravesite. The practice commonly known as "piggybacking", wherein one
body is buried directly above another, shall not be allowed. It shall be
unlawful to "piggyback" or bury an urn on top of another grave or to the foot
of an existing grave.
   E.   Headstones Or Markers: The base or footer of a single headstone or
marker shall be smaller than four feet (4') in width to avoid interference with
adjoining plots.
      1.   No marker, monument, item or structure of any kind may be placed in
the cemetery that is not dedicated to the memory of an actual, named deceased
human being.
      2.   If any marker, monument, effigy, or other item or structure of any
kind or any inscription thereon is placed on any lot, is deemed by the city to
be of an offensive nature, unsightly or improper, the city reserves the right
to remove, at the expense of the grave space owner, or request the grave space
owner to remove, correct or repair the problem within the time designated by
the city.
   F.   Unlawful Acts:
      1.   It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code, for any person to:
         a.   Disinter any body buried in any cemetery, except under the
direction of the city who shall, before disinterment, require written
permission from both the southeastern district health officer and the owner of
the lot or his or her heirs, which written authorization shall be filed and
preserved in a record kept for such purposes.
         b.   Disinter or remove the body of a person who has died from a
contagious disease within two (2) years after the date of burial, unless the
body was buried in a hermetically sealed casket or vault and is found to be so
encased at the time of disinterment.
      2.   It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this code, to inter anything other than the remains of human bodies
in cemeteries.
      3.   It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this code, to bury the body of any person within the city, except in
the city cemetery or a private cemetery, unless by special permission of the
city council under such rules and regulations that it may prescribe. (1979 Code
§§ 8-221 through 8-224; amd. Ord. 5-9-95, 5-9-1995; 1998 Code; Res. 2002-1, 2-
6-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Res. 2007-2, 5-10-2007; Res. 2016-8, 11-10-2016)
7-5-6: FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Established; Authority: The city council shall, from time to time by
resolution, fix the size of lots, the price at which burial rights shall be
sold and the fees which shall be charged for the various cemetery services to
be provided. (1979 Code § 8-243)
   B.   Residence: Resident/nonresident status refers to the person being
buried, regardless of who the lot owner may be.
The person shall be determined a resident if they have ever lived in Ferron,
Clawson or Molen at the time of their death. A person shall be determined a
nonresident if they have never lived in Ferron, Clawson or Molen at the time of
their death. (Ord. 2016-1, 2-11-2016)
   C.   Collection: The city treasurer, and such other persons as the city
council may designate, are hereby authorized and required to collect in
advance, prices and fees for the opening and closing of graves or other
services which shall include, but not be limited to, properly disinterring
bodies and properly restoring the earth and grounds, recording each burial,
disinterment or removal and raised monument privileges. (1979 Code § 8-241;
amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Opening Graves:
      1.   Prepayment of grave preparation fees may be accepted with the
condition that any increase made in the fees will be assessed at the time of
grave opening. No grave shall be opened in the cemetery until payment for that
service has been paid or payment arrangements have been made with the city
treasurer. (Res. 2002-1, 2-6-2002, eff. 3-1-2002)
      2.   The presentation of a receipt from the city treasurer or person
designated by the city council when presented to the maintenance department,
shall be authority to open a grave for the burial of a deceased person.
However, upon a contract being entered into between any mortician and the city
wherein the mortician agrees to be responsible and liable for fees for the
opening of a grave, and wherein that mortician will be personally liable for
such fees and for perpetual care payments, the city treasurer or authorized
person may give the maintenance department authority to open graves without the
presentation of a receipt from the city treasurer or authorized person. (1979
Code § 8-242; amd. 1998 Code)
7-5-7: LOT SALES:
   A.   Authority; Records: The city treasurer, or such other person as the
city council may designate, is hereby authorized to sell the use of lots in the
city cemetery for burial purposes only and to collect all sums arising from the
sale. The city treasurer shall keep a complete record of all sales, which
record shall describe the location of the lot purchased and the price paid
therefor. The city treasurer or designated person shall deliver to each
purchaser a certificate of burial rights for each lot purchased, which
certificate shall, among other things, describe the location of the lot, the
purchase price and the type of maintenance services which are to be provided,
e.g., perpetual care. (1979 Code § 8-251; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Purchase Price, Scope Of: A certificate and rights to burial shall be
exempt from execution, taxation or assessment for care and maintenance from and
after full payment of the purchase price. Payments made pursuant to this
section shall not be construed to be in payment for cemetery services other
than perpetual care.
   C.   Services Included: Perpetual care shall be deemed to include the
filling of the grave, the placing of topsoil upon the grave, seeding the grave
with grass and watering and cutting the grass. No other services are included.
(1979 Code § 8-251)
   D.   Improvements, Changes And Services: No other improvements, changes or
service, except perpetual care, shall be made on any lot without the
certificate holder or his heirs first submitting to and receiving from the city
written approval for such improvements, changes or services, which
improvements, changes or services shall be subject to the rules and regulations
promulgated by the city council. (1979 Code § 8-251; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Resale Restrictions:
      1.   From and after September 1, 1979, the lots sold by the city shall
not be further sold, transferred, conveyed or assigned to any person except the
city. The city hereby agrees to buy back any city cemetery grave lot which it
may hereafter sell. The repurchase of such lots shall be for the original price
paid by the purchaser or the current selling price of the lot, whichever is
less.
      2.   Whenever a certificate to burial rights or lots reverts to the city,
as provided for in this subsection, or becomes vested in the city for any
reason, before new certificates are issued, the original certificate shall be
canceled or an assignment given and the record shall be so changed.
      3.   The certificates shall be issued and signed by the mayor and shall
be attested by the city recorder. All lots or parts of lots, as provided in
this subsection, together with all improvements, shall be exempt from execution
and from taxation and assessment for care and maintenance charges from and
after said payment. (1979 Code § 8-252)
7-5-8: PERPETUAL CARE LOTS:
   A.   Scope Of Care: The essential perpetual care that the City agrees to
give shall consist of care of the cemetery generally, and shall include, but is
not limited to, mowing of all lots and graves at reasonable intervals,
resodding, seeding and filling in sunken graves, sodding the surface of the
graves to lot level, removing dead flowers and trimming trees and shrubbery
when necessary, raking and cleaning the lots and straightening of tilting
stones or markers, but shall not include repairing or replacing markers or
memorial structures of any nature, except when the need for repair or
replacement is directly caused by the City. (1979 Code § 8-262)
   B.   Contracting For Care:
      1.   No grave shall be hereafter opened in the cemetery of this City
until perpetual care upon the lot where the grave is to be opened shall have
been contracted for with the City, or perpetual care thereon paid. Should it be
the desire of any person to have a grave opened and the body interred therein
and perpetual care shall not have been previously contracted for or paid in
full for the lot therein, the person may either pay the full purchase price for
perpetual care or enter into a contract wherein payment shall be agreed.
      2.   The agreement shall provide for a down payment in the amount of
twenty percent (20%) of the total purchase price of the cost of the lot, and
shall further provide for the payment of monthly installments over a period not
to exceed twenty (20) months. The monthly installments shall be in the amounts
equal to the balance of the contract divided by the number of months which the
contract is to run, plus two (2) months extra payment to pay for the privilege
of making the payments in installments or six percent (6%) of the balance,
whichever is less.
      3.   The installment contract for perpetual care of, or purchase of a lot
with perpetual care, shall provide for collection by the City in event of a
default and such collection shall be by civil action, and the defendant therein
shall pay cost of collection, together with a reasonable attorney fees to the
City, and shall also pay interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum
upon the past due installments. All installments shall immediately become due
upon the default of any of the installments; provided however, that when
perpetual care for any lot in the City cemetery or portion thereof, has not
been paid for a period of ten (10) years, then, and in such an event, the
unused portion of the lot shall thereafter escheat to the City, and the title
thereof shall revert to the City, which shall thereafter have the right, option
and privilege to sell and dispose of unused cemetery property, as is in this
Chapter provided, upon condition that the City shall thereafter maintain
perpetually without cost of fee the portion of the lot occupied by a grave or
graves prior to the date when the remaining property escheated to the City.
(1979 Code § 8-261)
      4.   The City shall have the power to fix, by resolution, a fee from any
person now owning a cemetery lot or portion thereof for the annual maintenance
and care thereof. Until such time as the fee shall be fixed by resolution, said
person shall pay a fee equal to fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot and twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per one-half (1/2) lot per year for such care and maintenance.
The fee shall continue to be paid until such time as a further or additional
interment shall be made on the lot, at which time the provisions of this
subsection relating to perpetual care and maintenance and to payment of fees
and costs pertaining thereto shall take effect and apply. (1979 Code § 8-261;
amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Fund Created; Use:
      1.   There hereby is established a Perpetual Care Fund according to the
laws of the State and this Chapter. All funds received from the sale of
perpetual care services shall be placed in a special Perpetual Care Fund,
invested in compliance with the laws of the State and used for the purposes
herein provided.
      2.   The income from the Perpetual Care Fund shall be used to pay the
upkeep and development of the cemetery. The City may borrow from the Fund from
time to time, but any funds borrowed shall be repaid to the Fund with interest
thereon at the prevailing rate paid by the City to borrow funds from commercial
lenders.
      3.   If the City borrows from the Fund, it shall pay into a fund for the
operation of the cemeteries the interest accrued upon money annually. Should it
be found that the interest returned upon the perpetual care funds shall be more
than is required to pay for the operation and upkeep of the City cemetery, then
the surplus shall be added to the principal amount of the Perpetual Care Fund
herein created, and shall be so handled until changed by resolution to provide
for the use of such accumulated interest. (1979 Code § 8-271)
   D.   Duties Of Officials:
      1.   Treasurer: It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to keep an
accurate record of the perpetual care trust fund account, including
investments, to see that the principal portion thereof is properly invested in
accordance with resolutions of the City Council and the laws of the State, and
to advise the Mayor when funds are available for investment in the amount of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. The Mayor shall advise the City
Council of the availability of such funds. (1979 Code § 8-272)
      2.   City Council: It shall be the duty of the City Council, when funds
are available for investment, to direct by resolution all purchases of
securities for the Perpetual Care Fund or to name a suitable trustee for such
investment. (1979 Code § 8-273)
   E.   Investment Income: All income from investments held in the Perpetual
Care Fund shall be quarterly credited to the Cemetery Maintenance Fund for use
in providing the perpetual care as required herein. (1979 Code § 8-274)
7-5-9: NONPERPETUAL CARE LOTS:
   A.   Maintenance Charges:
      1.   Every lot for which perpetual care has not been purchased and with
reference to which the owner has established a right to directly provide for
maintenance and care, notwithstanding the provisions of Section
7-5-12 of this Chapter, shall be maintained and cared for to the extent and in
accordance with the standards established by the City Council for care and
maintenance of all lots of the cemetery. (1979 Code § 8-281)
      2.   In the event that the owner fails to provide the requisite care and
maintenance for nonperpetual care lots, the Maintenance Department shall
furnish care and maintenance at rates established by the City Council. (1979
Code § 8-281; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   All such charges shall become a personal liability of the owner of
the lots and, in addition thereto, shall constitute a lien against the lots
upon the basis of which the City Council may cause the burial rights therein to
be forfeited and said rights to revert to the City. (1979 Code § 8-281)
   B.   Reversion Of Nonpaying Lots:
      1.   When any owner of any lot or portion of a lot in the cemetery shall
have failed to pay the cost of services rendered by the City or its employees
in watering, beautifying, maintaining or caring for any lots or portions
thereof in the City cemetery for which perpetual care has not been purchased in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, and such failure to pay has
continued for a period of six (6) months, the City may pursue collection of
such costs in a court of law. A court action may be pursued for the purpose of
seeking judgment against the owner and thereafter attaching any of the assets
of the owner, including an attachment of the lots or portions of lots upon
which the owner has failed to make payment for maintenance service.
      2.   As an additional remedy, or in lieu of seeking collection in a court
of law, the City may cancel the owner's certificate or deed representing rights
to burial on the unoccupied lots or portions of lots and causing ownership of
lots or portions thereof to revert back to the City by following the procedure
set forth in this Section. (1979 Code § 8-282)
   C.   Procedure For Reversion Back To City:
      1.   The City may terminate the owner's right to use of unoccupied lot or
lots in the City cemetery when there has been a six (6) month failure to pay
the costs of maintenance provided by the City in the following manner:
         a.   The City Council shall fix a time and place of hearing before the
City Council at which the owner shall be given the opportunity to present good
cause as to why his right to future use of the lot or lots involved shall not
be terminated and as to why the ownership of the lot or portions of lot shall
not revert back to the City for resale by it.
         b.   A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing to forfeit
the owner's interest in the lot or parts of the lot shall be given by personal
delivery of a written notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting of
the City Council or by mailing a copy of the notice to the last known address
of the owner or owners.
         c.   In the absence of an ability to make personal delivery of the
written notice to the owner or owners, a notice of the hearing to forfeit
rights to said lot or portions of lot shall be published at least once in a
newspaper having general circulation in the County. The publication shall be
made at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of the hearing.
         d.   If the owner is known to be deceased, then mailing of notice or
delivery of notice shall be made to the last known addresses of any known
heirs.
         e.   Copies of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place
in the offices of the City.
         f.   At the time and place set for the hearing before the City
Council, the City Council shall give the owner or owners an opportunity to be
heard, a right to present witnesses and to submit evidence showing cause why
the lot or portions of the lot shall not be forfeited to the City.
      2.   After due consideration of all the facts presented at such hearing,
the City Council may order, if it finds that there has been a failure to make
payment of such costs or if no satisfactory arrangement has been preferred for
making the immediate payment of such costs, that the lot or portions of lot
shall revert to the City for resale and that all of the rights and privileges
of the owner in the lot or lots are terminated.
      3.   Thereafter, the City may make sale of the lots in the same manner as
it makes sales of all other lots within the cemetery. (1979 Code § 8-283)
7-5-10: INDIGENTS:
   A.   The City Council may by resolution designate a portion of the City
cemetery to the burial of indigents. Whenever it is made to appear to the Mayor
by proof submitted to him by the City Treasurer that any person who has died
does not have an estate sufficient to pay the purchase price of a lot in the
cemetery, and that the nearest relative or representative of such deceased
person desires to have the body of such deceased interred in the cemetery, the
Mayor may grant burial space for such deceased person at the request made to
him by the City Treasurer.
   B.   The Mayor shall communicate his decision to both the City Treasurer and
the Maintenance Department. The Mayor shall give report of his decision,
whether affirmative or negative, to the City Council at its next regular
meeting. All strangers without funds or other persons who may die in the City
may be granted the privilege granted herein. (1979 Code § 8-291; amd. 1998
Code)
7-5-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Authority To Regulate; Procedure:
      1.   The City Council may promulgate by resolution such additional rules
and regulations concerning the care, use, operation and maintenance of the
cemetery as it shall deem necessary.
      2.   The Mayor may, from time to time as the City Council deems
necessary, direct and publish a booklet of rules and regulations for the
convenience of the purchasers of lots in the City cemetery. Such rules and
regulations shall constitute a part of the terms and conditions under which
owners and users may utilize the cemetery and shall form a supplement to this
Chapter after they have been adopted as official by resolution of the City
Council.
      3.   Any changes in the rules and regulations shall be adopted by the
City Council before such changes shall be official. (1979 Code § 8-237)
   B.   Lots Sold: Every lot or single grave sold is subject to rules and
regulations that have been or may be adopted. The rules and regulations shall
be subject to such changes as are found necessary for the protection of lot
owners, the remains of the dead and the preservation of the cemetery. (1979
Code § 8-227)
   C.   Traffic Control:
      1.   The provisions of the City traffic ordinances relative to the
operation of vehicles and conduct of pedestrians shall be in effect in the
cemetery, except as herein otherwise modified by this Chapter.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive within the City
cemetery at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour. (1979 Code § 8-230)
   D.   Children: Children under the age of sixteen (16) years shall not be
allowed in cemeteries unless accompanied by their parents or other adults,
except for the purposes of attending authorized funerals or, in the company of
adults, placing flowers on the grave of a deceased relative or friend, or
performing any other customary evidence of respect in accordance with their
religious principles. (1979 Code § 8-231)
   E.   Animals: No animal shall be allowed in any cemetery, except in the
confines of a vehicle and must be at all times retained within the confines of
said vehicle while the vehicle remains in the cemetery. (1979 Code § 8-232)
   F.   Decorum: Cemetery grounds are sacredly devoted to the interment and
repose of the dead. Strict observance of decorum due such a place shall be
required of all persons. (1979 Code § 8-233)
   G.   Errors In Opening Graves: Under no circumstances will the city assume
responsibilities for errors in opening graves when orders are given by
telephone. (1979 Code § 8-229)
   H.   Religious And Fraternal Organizations: The city may contract with
religious and fraternal organizations to designate a reasonable portion of the
cemetery in which burials may be restricted to members of such religious and
fraternal organizations and their families. (1979 Code § 8-226)
7-5-12: CARE AND MAINTENANCE; RIGHT TO ENTER:
The city reserves the right to enter upon any grave and to perform all work
necessary for the care and upkeep of all lots and graves in its cemeteries.
(1979 Code § 8-228)
7-5-13: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Injury To Property:
      1.   It is a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to tie or attempt to tie any horse, animal
or motor vehicle to any monument, gravestone, tablet, marker, tree, shrub,
fence or enclosure on the premises of the cemetery for the purpose of injuring,
defacing or attempting the removal of same.
      2.   It shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to injure, deface, break, destroy or remove
any headstone, tombstone, monument, tree, shrub or any other property in the
cemetery. (1979 Code § 8-234; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Landscaping By Private Persons: It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect or maintain any fence, corner post, coping or boundary of any kind, to
place benches, to plant any shrubs or trees upon any lot or lots, street, alley
or walkway in the cemetery or to grade the ground or land thereof without first
obtaining approval from the city council and cemetery groundskeeper. The
maintenance department shall, whenever required, furnish the true lines of any
lots according to official survey, shall prevent and prohibit any markings of
the same except by official landmarks, and shall prevent and prohibit any
grading thereof that might destroy or interfere with the general slope of the
land. (Res. 2002-1, 2-6-2002, eff. 3-1-2002)
   C.   Placement Of Markers: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
place or cause to be placed any marker or monument on any lot in the cemetery
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city council
regarding the placement, construction and design of all such markers. (1979
Code § 8-236)
CHAPTER 6
TELECOMMUNICATIONS; USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Findings And Intent; Authority
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Administration; General Provisions
7-6-4: Applicability; Exceptions
7-6-5: Franchise Required
7-6-6: Application For Franchise
7-6-7: Compensation, Fees And Payments
7-6-8: Insurance, Record Requirements
7-6-9: Construction, Technical Requirements
7-6-10: Private Property; Obligation To Notify
7-6-11: Transfer Of Franchise And License
7-6-12: Enforcement; Rights Of City
7-6-13: Severability
7-6-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT; AUTHORITY:
   A.   Rights Of Way: The City finds that the rights of way within the City:
      1.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in
the business and social life of the City;
      2.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
      3.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other
public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for
profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare and general economic well-
being of the City and its citizens; and
      4.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation and maintenance in the rights of way.
   B.   Compensation: The City finds that the City should receive fair and
reasonable compensation for use of the rights of way.
   C.   Local Concern: The City finds that while telecommunications systems are
in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve
rights of way, Municipal franchising and vital business and community service,
which are of local concern.
   D.   Promotion Of Telecommunications Services: The City finds that it is in
the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid
development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscrimination basis,
responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability for
City, educational and community services.
   E.   Franchise Standards: The City finds that it is in the interests of the
public to franchise and to establish standards for franchising providers in a
manner that:
      1.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
      2.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use the rights of way to serve the public;
      3.   Fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm that
may flow from such commercial use of rights of way;
      4.   Protects the police powers and rights of way management authority of
the City, in a manner consistent with Federal and State law;
      5.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use
of the City infrastructure;
      6.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of
way; and
      7.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("Act") (P.L. No. 104-104).
   F.   Power To Manage Rights Of Way: The City adopts this telecommunications
Chapter pursuant to its power to manage the rights of way, pursuant to common
law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and
reasonable compensation for the use of rights of way by providers as expressly
set forth by section 253 of the Act. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a
desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or a
part, of the City. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the City concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights of way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the City by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
CITY: Ferron City, Utah.
COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the City.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make-ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than twenty five percent (25%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). Control or
controlling interest, as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.
FRANCHISE: The rights and obligations extended by the City to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way
within the boundaries of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include:
   A.   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the
ordinances and laws of the City;
   B.   Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations on rights of way or public property, including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits
or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the rights of way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter between the City and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to
this Chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be
exercised.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26,
as amended.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights of way.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights of way by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to section 651 et seq., of the
Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the City.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This telecommunications Chapter
concerning the granting of franchises in and by the City for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
PSC: The Public Service Commission or any successor thereto.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust or any other legal entity, but not the City.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the Act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PSC services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights of way.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, resaler or system lessee.
RESALER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter
existing as such within the City.
SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser
or radio frequency energy or optical information, in either analog or digital
format.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications services
provided by a provider within the City that the provider is authorized to
provide under Federal, State and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided within the City, except
that these terms do not include "cable service", as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 USC 521 et seq.) and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. Telecommunications system or systems also
includes an open video system.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider, located in the rights of way
and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or analog,
voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications services.
Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video system.
WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-3: ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
Chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this Chapter
in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall control.
   B.   New Developments: It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend
this Chapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently or economically serve itself or the public. (Ord. 1-
27-98, 1-27-1998)
   C.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the City required under this
Chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the Mayor. A provider shall provide in
any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number of the
person designated to receive notices from the City. A provider shall
immediately notify the City of any change in its name, address or telephone
number. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the City reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
   E.   Construction:
      1.   Federal And State Statutes: This Chapter shall be construed in a
manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State statutes.
      2.   Applicability: This Chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or
renewed after the effective date hereof. This Chapter shall further apply, to
the extent permitted by applicable Federal or State law, to all existing
franchises granted prior to the effective date hereof and to a provider
providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective date hereof.
      3.   Other Applicable Ordinances: A provider's rights are subject to the
police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its
police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the City zoning
and other land use requirements.
      4.   City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any failure of the City
to enforce prompt compliance.
      5.   Construed According To Utah Law: This Chapter and any franchise
granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance
with the substantive laws of the State. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-4: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Providers: This Chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for
providers of telecommunications services and systems that require the use of
the rights of way, including providers of both the system and service, those
providers of the system only and those providers who do not build the system
but who only provide services. This Chapter shall apply to all future providers
and to all providers in the City prior to the effective date hereof, whether
operating with or without a franchise as set forth in subsection 7-6-3E2 of
this Chapter.
   B.   Excluded Activities:
      1.   Cable Television Operators: This Chapter shall not apply to cable
television operators otherwise regulated by the Cable Television Ordinance.
      2.   Wireless Service Facilities: This Chapter shall not apply to
personal wireless service facilities.
   C.   Excluded Providers; Provisions Applicable: Providers excused by other
law that prohibits the City from requiring a franchise shall not be required to
obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this Chapter through
the exercise of the City's police power and not preempted by other law shall be
applicable. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-5: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Nonexclusive Franchise; Authority: The City is empowered and authorized
to issue nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction and
maintenance of systems in the City's rights of way, in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the City and provider.
   B.   Provider Required To Obtain: Except to the extent preempted by Federal
or State law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction,
including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to
constructing a telecommunications system or providing telecommunications
services using the rights of way, and every provider must obtain a franchise
before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via
an open video system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV
companies to the extent the City is not preempted or permitted as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The
fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By
way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights of way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights of
way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned or
subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the
property of others, including the City's property. This subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so
long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
   D.   Current Providers; Time Limit To Request: Except to the extent exempted
by Federal or State law, any provider acting without a franchise on the
effective date hereof shall request issuance of a franchise from the City
within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof. If such request is made,
the provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations.
If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is
not granted, the provider shall comply with the provisions of subsection 7-6-
12D of this Chapter.
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the City under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system
on, over and under the rights of way in order to provide services.
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate Federal, State and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the City, upon the written request of the City,
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   G.   Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter shall have a term of
less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise
shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-6: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
   A.   Required; Form: To obtain a franchise to construct, own, maintain or
provide services through any system within the City, to obtain a renewal of a
franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter or to obtain the City approval of a
transfer of a franchise, as provided in subsection 7-6-11A2 of this Chapter,
granted pursuant to this Chapter, an application must be filed with City on the
form attached to the Ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A, which is hereby
incorporated by reference. The application form may be changed by the Mayor so
long as such changes request information that is consistent with this Chapter.
Such application form, as amended, is incorporated by reference.
   B.   Criteria: In making a determination as to an application filed pursuant
to this Chapter, the City may, but shall not be limited to, request the
following from the provider:
      1.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity.
      2.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the
City for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider.
      3.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of Section
7-6-9 of this Chapter.
   C.   Determination By City: The City, in its discretion, shall determine the
award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations relevant
to the use of the rights of way, without competitive bidding. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-
27-1998)
7-6-7: COMPENSATION, FEES AND PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation; Provider Obligations: As fair and reasonable compensation
for any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, a provider shall have the
following obligations:
      1.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the City to review
an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the City, at the time of application, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee.
      2.   Franchise Fee: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or
business license tax enacted by the City.
      3.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in Chapter 4 of this Title.
   B.   Due Monthly: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month.
   C.   Statement Of Calculation; Certification: Unless a franchise agreement
provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement
showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to
its accuracy.
   D.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the City or to third parties, at
the direction of the City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
Chapter or a franchise; provided however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the
parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding
arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
Arbitration Association.
   E.   Taxes, Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the use of the City
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights of way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
Chapter.
   F.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent State taxes.
   G.   Acceptance Of Fee; Not Construed Satisfaction: No acceptance by the
City of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact
the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed
as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
   H.   Additional Taxes Or Fees Still Applicable: The fee payment is not a
payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment, except as specifically
provided in this Chapter or as required by applicable law. By way of example,
and not limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the
City- owned poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   I.   Operation After Term; Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event
a provider continues to operate all or any part of the system after the term of
the franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable
provisions of this Chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation,
all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such
continued operation; provided, that any such continued operation shall in no
way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a
limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such
continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and
restitution.
   J.   Publication Costs: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-
1998)
7-6-8: INSURANCE, RECORD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Insurance Required: Prior to the execution of a franchise, a provider
will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or
surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and shall obtain and
provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the franchise. A provider
shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the franchise.
   B.   Inspection By City; Management: The City shall have the right to
oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the construction, maintenance and
upgrade of the system, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions
of the franchise and applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain
managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to
enable a provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the
City at all times throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with
the franchise. A provider shall retain such records for not less than the
applicable statute of limitations.
   C.   Records Maintenance: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and
as-built hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic
format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the City's
existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types
of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights of way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks, which shall include annotations of all rights of
ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, as-built maps include file
construction prints. Maps shall be drawn to scale. As-built maps, including the
compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within
thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30) days after
completion of modification and repairs. As-built maps are not required of the
provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing system to
the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the City at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this Section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the State and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this Section.
   D.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by Federal, State or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and
Management Act (GRAMA), making it available only to those who must have access
to perform their duties on behalf of the City; provided, that a provider
notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems
to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling
shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
   E.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this Chapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter or a franchise.
   F.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records; provided, that the City shall not audit
the books and records of the provider more often than annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the
compensation due the City for the period of such audit. In the event the
accounting rendered to the City by the provider herein is found to be
incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty
(30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the City may accept
any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the City
shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is
later found to be incorrect. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-9: CONSTRUCTION, TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance Required; Excavation Permit: No provider shall receive a
franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this
Section governing construction and technical requirements for its system, in
addition to any other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the
City or the franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in
the cost of collocating portions of the system with other systems or with City
utilities. A provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the
excavation ordinance, as provided in Chapter 4 of this Title, before commencing
any work in the rights of way. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Quality And Performance Of Work: All work involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a
safe, thorough and reliable manner, using materials of good and durable
quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency
granted authority by Federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that
any part of the system, including, without limitation, any means used to
distribute signals over or within the system, is harmful to the public health,
safety or welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall,
at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the City to use private property, easements,
poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required. (Ord. 1-27-
98, 1-27-1998)
   D.   Relocation Of System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines; Excavation Requirements: If the grades or lines
of any rights of way are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system,
then a provider shall comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance,
as provided in Chapter 4 of this Title. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998; amd. 1998
Code)
      2.   Emergency; City Authority To Move System: The City may, at any time,
in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its
reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances
on, over or under the rights of way of the City, in which event the City shall
not be liable therefor to a provider. The City shall notify a provider in
writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in
no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this
Section. Notice shall be given as provided in subsection 7-6-3C of this
Chapter.
      3.   Temporary Move For Third Party: A provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the City or any person holding a permit to move
any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances,
temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of said structure.
A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the City for
any such movement of its systems. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
      4.   Change In Rights Of Way; Obligation To Move System: When the City is
changing a right of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the right of way, without cost to the City, to
the extent provided in the excavation ordinance, as provided in Chapter 4 of
this Title. This obligation does not apply to systems originally located on
private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was later
incorporated into the rights of way, if that private easement grants a superior
vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the provider has obtained
an excavation permit. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Protection Of Structures, Landmarks: In connection with the
construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider
shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures
belonging to the City and all designated landmarks, as well as all other
structures within any designated landmark district. A provider shall obtain the
prior written consent of the City to alter any water main, power facility,
sewerage or drainage system, or any other City structure on, over or under the
rights of way of the City required because of the presence of the system. Any
such alteration shall be made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable
basis. A provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the
City to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may
be reasonably specified by the City, any City structure or any other rights of
way of the City involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or
removal of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any
work thereon by or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
   F.   Obstructions Prohibited: In connection with the construction,
maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not
unreasonably obstruct the rights of way of fixed guideway systems, railways,
passenger travel or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior
consent of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements, including, but not
limited to, the National Electric Safety Code.
   H.   Repair Of Rights Of Way: After written reasonable notice to the
provider, unless, in the sole determination of the City, an eminent danger
exists, any rights of way within the City which are disturbed or damaged during
the construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may
be repaired by the City at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as
that prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall
submit to such a provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and
restoring the rights of ways intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount
thereof.
   I.   Maintenance Of System: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National
Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other Federal, State and local laws
or regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the City of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
   J.   Trimming Trees; Authority: A provider shall have the authority to trim
trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and
easement restrictions, upon and hanging over rights of way so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its system. (Ord. 1-27-98,
1-27-1998)
7-6-10: PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance and describe the work to be
performed. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-11: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE AND LICENSE:
   A.   Notification Of Sale:
      1.   PSC Approval: When a provider is the subject of a sale, transfer,
lease, assignment, sublease or disposal, in whole or in part, either by force
or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that
it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the
PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the City of the
nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either:
         a.   The successor entity's certification that the successor entity
unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise
agreement; or
         b.   The successor entity's application, in compliance with Section
7-6-6 of this Chapter.
      2.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with subsection A1a of this Section, the City
designee, as provided in subsection 7-6-12A1 of this Chapter, shall send notice
affirming the transfer of the franchise to the successor entity. If the City
has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this
Chapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an application for the
transfer. The application shall comply with Section
7-6-6 of this Chapter.
      3.   PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists or if
its regulations or State law no longer require approval of transactions
described in subsection A1 of this Section, and the City has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply with this Chapter or the
franchise agreement, it may require an application. The application shall
comply with Section
7-6-6 of this Chapter.
   B.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A1 of this Section:
      1.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
provider's assets to another person;
      2.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more
of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to
create a new controlling interest in a provider;
      3.   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership
or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling
interest in such a provider; or
      4.   The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the
management or operation of such provider or its system. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-
1998)
7-6-12: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Enforcement; Remedies:
      1.   City Designee: The City is responsible for enforcing and
administering this Chapter and the City or its designee, as appointed by the
Mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any franchise
agreement.
      2.   Enforcement Provisions: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Chapter,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/security fund and rights of termination or revocation.
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this Chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this subsection, causes or
events not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation,
acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires.
   C.   Extended Operation; Continuity Of Services:
      1.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall have discretion
to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under
the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to
this Chapter.
      2.   Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier; Negotiate Renewal: If the provider
is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   Abandoned System: In the event that: a) the use of any portion of
the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City to the last
known address of provider; b) any system has been installed in the rights of
way without complying with the requirements of this Chapter or franchise; or c)
the provisions of subsection 7-6-5E of this Chapter are applicable and no
franchise is granted, a provider, except the provider who is an incumbent local
exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such system.
      2.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The City, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights of way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights of way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights of way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
Chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this Section.
      3.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system
in place, a provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City
the ownership of the abandoned system.
      4.   Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this Chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the City shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights of way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
      5.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this Chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights of
way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other
person. (Ord. 1-27-98, 1-27-1998)
7-6-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter is held by any Federal, State or local court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal or
State statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with
regard to the validity of the Ordinance provisions in question are exhausted,
such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of
this Chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability
of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently
repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which
had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, the
provision in question shall return to full force and effect and shall again be
binding on the City and the provider; provided, that the City shall give the
provider thirty (30) days', or a longer period of time as may be reasonably
required for a provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision, written
notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision. (Ord. 1-
27-98, 1-27-1998)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Applications For Connection, Service
8-1-2: Fees
8-1-3: Statement Of Charges; Delinquency
8-1-4: Discontinuance Of Service
8-1-5: Use Without Payment Prohibited
8-1-6: Use Without Authority; Restrictions
8-1-7: Installation Of Water Lines
8-1-8: Pipe Requirements
8-1-9: Water Mains Extended
8-1-10: Sprinkling Vehicles
8-1-11: Access By Department
8-1-12: Motors And Certain Machinery Restricted
8-1-13: Fire Hydrants
8-1-14: Scarcity Of Water
8-1-15: Excessive Use Of Sprinklers
8-1-16: Waste Of Water
8-1-17: Water Meters
8-1-18: Service Outside City
8-1-19: Nonliability For Damages
8-1-20: Stock Watering Lines
8-1-21: Water System Protection
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-4-4 of this code for subdivision regulations.
8-1-1: APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTION, SERVICE:
   A.   Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking
multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a new connection to
the city water system, shall file with the water department for each such
connection a written and signed connection application which is on file in the
office of the water department. (1979 Code § 14-113; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Connection By Subdividers: Whenever a subdivider or developer desires
or is required to install water connections and extensions for a subdivision or
development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into a written extension
agreement, which shall constitute an application for permission to make the
extensions and connections, and an agreement specifying the terms and
conditions under which the water extensions and connections shall be made and
the payments that shall be required. (1979 Code § 14-114)
   C.   Service: Any person who desires or is required to secure water service
when such service is available from the city water system, shall file with the
water department a written application and agreement for the service which is
on file in the office of the water department. (1979 Code § 14-115; amd. 1998
Code)
   D.   Nonowner Service: Property owners of rental properties will be
responsible for the utility billings on these rental properties and all utility
billings will be in the name of the property owner. (Res. 11-14-89-1, 11-14-
1989)
8-1-2: FEES 1 :
   A.   Service Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for
delinquency in payment, connection fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and other
charges incidental to connection and services from the city water system shall
be fixed from time to time by resolution enacted by the city council. The city
council may from time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing and collecting charges for water services and all other rules
necessary for the management and control of the water system. Rates for
services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes of
service established or that may hereafter be established. (1979 Code § 14-117)
   B.   Special Rates: The city council may from time to time fix by agreement
or resolution special rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large
amounts of water service or making use of the water system under exceptional
circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as they may deem proper. (1979
Code § 14-118)
   C.   Complaints; Corrections: The city council is hereby constituted a board
of equalization of water rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any
assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust. They may, if they see fit,
rebate all or any part of the water bill of any indigent person. Persons
seeking an adjustment on a utility bill will be required to appear in person
before the board of equalization to explain the nature of their request. (1979
Code § 14-119; amd. Res. 2003-1, 2-13-2003)
The city treasurer will submit a report to the board of equalization which will
include the following account information: the average usage, the current
usage, and the cost of the services to the city. The board will then make their
decision using the following criteria:
      1.   The amount of time lapsed before the leak was determined.
      2.   The frequency of leaks.
      3.   The circumstances surrounding the leak (cause, age of water line,
etc.).
      4.   The number of times the account has previously been adjusted.
During a twelve (12) month period, the first adjustment to a single account
will require that the owner correct the nature of the problem. If a second
adjustment is requested during a twelve (12) month period then the board shall
adjust only one-half (1/2) of the normal amount. In the event a third
adjustment is requested to a single account in a twelve (12) month period, the
request shall be denied unless the board of equalization deems that
extraordinary circumstances surround the request. (Res. 2003-1, 2-13-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 4 of this title.
8-1-3: STATEMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Statement: The city treasurer shall mail a statement stating thereon
the amount of water services and other utility charges assessed each month. The
statement shall specify the amount of the bill for all services, place of
payment, and date due. (Res. 2001-13, 7-10-2001, eff. 8-1-2001)
   B.   Failure To Pay; Late Charges: Payments on utility accounts will be due
on the twentieth day of each month and considered late and assessed late fees
if not paid by the last day of the month. Delinquent accounts will be subject
to discontinuance of services after the tenth day of the following month and
the customer shall pay the past due amount, late fee and associated reconnect
fees prior to the restoration of service. Notice of delinquency and intent to
disconnect will be printed on the utility bill and no further written notice
may be given. (Res. 2012-3, 5-10-2012, eff. 5-10-2012)
   C.   Discontinued Service: If the water service is thereafter discontinued
for failure to make payment, then before the water service to the premises
shall again be provided, all delinquent water charges must have been paid to
the city treasurer or arrangements made for their payment in a manner
satisfactory to the city. In the event water is turned off for nonpayment of
water charges, then before the water service to the premises shall again be
provided, the customer shall pay, in addition to all delinquent water charges,
such extra charge for turning the water on and off as the city council may have
established by resolution. The city treasurer is hereby authorized and
empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent water charges by an action
at law in the name of the city. (Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011)
8-1-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be
discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit made will be refunded upon discontinuation of service.
(1979 Code § 14-141)
8-1-5: USE WITHOUT PAYMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants or agents to
utilize the city water or sewage system without paying therefor, as herein
provided or, without authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve or
other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done
pursuant to proper application, agreement or resolution. It shall be unlawful
to injure, deface or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer
system, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to the water
system. (1979 Code § 14-120)
8-1-6: USE WITHOUT AUTHORITY; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Turning On After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises for
nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules,
regulations or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow
the water to be turned on or used without authority from the city treasurer.
(1979 Code § 14-122; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families
or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe, connection or water
meter unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by
the city council and the premises served are owned by the same owner. In all
such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with this
subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the service
connections until compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the
property owner shall be primarily liable to the city for all water services
utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the
power of the city to require separate pipes, connections or meters at a
subsequent time. (1979 Code § 14-123)
   C.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water services regularly from his premises or water facilities, either
outside or inside his premises. (1979 Code § 14-124)
   D.   Adjoining Premises: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water
pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without permission from
the Castle Valley Special Service District and subject to such requirements
relating to controls as may be imposed by them. (1979 Code § 14-127B; amd. 1998
Code)
   E.   Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized user in a
recreational vehicle, not including a mobile home, and continuing to live
therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from the
service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period which
shall not exceed one month. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed
unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this Chapter relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (1979 Code § 14-125)
8-1-7: INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair,
alter or connect any water line to the City culinary water system without first
having received a construction permit from the office of the City Treasurer or
from the Castle Valley Special Service District. (1979 Code § 14-137; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Application: Applications for permits to make water connections or
other alteration or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or
indirectly to the City water system must be made in writing by a licensed
plumber, his authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises, who shall
describe the nature of the work to be done for which the application is made.
(1979 Code § 14-138)
   C.   Determination Of Approval: The application shall be granted if the
Castle Valley Special Service District determines that: (1979 Code § 14-138;
amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
      2.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the City. (1979 Code §
14-138)
   D.   Line And Grade Designation: All connections, alterations or
installations shall be to the line and grade designated by the Castle Valley
Special Service District. (1979 Code § 14-138; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Fees: Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such
amounts as the City Council shall from time to time determine by resolution.
(1979 Code § 14-138)
   F.   Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines: In the event that the City in its
sole discretion determines that any water line of the City must be moved or
replaced, the City shall bear that portion of the cost of such move or
replacement which applies to main lines up to the property line of the
customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines from the house of the
customer to his property line shall be borne by the customer. (1979 Code § 14-
139)
   G.   Plumbing Requirements: Permission to connect with the City water system
shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or building to be connected
meets the provisions of the Building and Plumbing Codes of the City. (1979 Code
§ 14-140)
8-1-8: PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep their service pipes
and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at
their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the Castle Valley
Special Service District, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the
purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. (1979 Code § 14-126;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipe used in conjunction
with the water services of the City shall be of such material, quality and
specifications as the City Council may from time to time by resolution provide,
and shall be installed at such distances below ground as may be specified by
regulations relating to the Water Department. All work, alterations or
extensions affecting water pipes shall be subject to the acceptance of the
Castle Valley Special Service District, and no connections with any water mains
shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City
Treasurer. (1979 Code § 14-127A; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-9: WATER MAINS EXTENDED:
   A.   Petition To City Council: Any person, including any subdivider, who
desires to have the water mains extended within the City, and is willing to
advance the whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed
portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the City
Council by petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed
extension accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension
together with an offer to advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall
be verified by the Castle Valley Special Service District. The City Council may
grant or deny the petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare of
existing water users in the City. (1979 Code § 14-143; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Cost Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and map and before
the petition is granted, the City Council shall obtain from the Castle Valley
Special Service District a certified statement showing the whole cost or
expense of making such extension. (1979 Code § 14-144; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Amount Deposited: If the City Council grants the petition, the amount
of the cost of making the extension, as certified by the Castle Valley Special
Service District, shall be deposited with the City Treasurer before any work
shall be done on such extension. The deposit shall be made within thirty (30)
days, or such other time as the City Council shall indicate, after the granting
thereof. (1979 Code § 14-145; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Return Of Deposit: At the time the City Council decides whether or not
to grant petition for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any
portion of the costs is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under
which such refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant. (1979 Code § 14-146)
   E.   Forfeiture: In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of
five (5) years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit
may be forfeited and then transferred to the Water Enterprise Fund. (1979 Code
§ 14-146; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the City. (1979 Code § 14-147)
8-1-10: SPRINKLING VEHICLES:
Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and controlled by the Water
Department through the Castle Valley Special Service District. (1979 Code § 14-
129; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-11: ACCESS BY DEPARTMENT:
The Castle Valley Special Service District shall at all ordinary hours have
free access to any place supplied with water services from the City system for
the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water
service being used and the manner of its use. (1979 Code § 14-130; amd. 1998
Code)
8-1-12: MOTORS AND CERTAIN MACHINERY RESTRICTED:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the City water system for the
purpose of driving motor, syphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose,
except by special permission of the City Council. (1979 Code § 14-132)
8-1-13: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for fire hydrants will be furnished free of charge by the City.
Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be at the expense of the City
and shall be made under the direction of the City. All customers shall grant
the City, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such
hydrants on their premises if the City concludes that hydrants shall be so
installed for the protection of the residents of the City. (1979 Code § 14-142)
8-1-14: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the Mayor
and the City Council be necessary, the Mayor shall by proclamation limit the
use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for any
person, his family, servants or agents to violate any proclamation made by the
Mayor in pursuance of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 14-134)
8-1-15: EXCESSIVE USE OF SPRINKLERS:
   A.   Effect On City Water System: It shall be unlawful for any person to use
such number of outlets simultaneously or to use such sprinkler or combinations
of sprinkler or outlets as will in the opinion of the City Council materially
affect the pressure or supply of water in the City water system or any part
thereof, and the City Council may from time to time, by resolution, specify
combinations or numbers of outlets which may have such effect.
   B.   Order To Discontinue: The City Council shall, after determining that
such improper use exists, notify the affected water user or the owner of the
premises whereon such use occurs of such determination in writing, order such
use discontinued and advise that such continued usage constitutes a violation
of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 14-133)
8-1-16: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water.
      2.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow.
      3.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus.
      4.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (1979 Code § 14-128)
   B.   Refer To City Council: Users of water from the City water system shall
not permit water to continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to
conserve water. If, in the judgment of the Castle Valley Special Service
District or of any of the officers of the City, a user of City water engages in
practices which result in the needless waste of water and continues to do so
after reasonable notice to discontinue wastefulness has been given, the Castle
Valley Special Service District or any officer may refer the matter to the City
Council. (1979 Code § 14-135; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Termination Of Service; Meeting: The City Council may thereupon
consider terminating the right of the individual to use culinary water. If it
elects to consider the matter of termination, it shall give notice to the water
user of the intention to terminate his water connection at least five (5) days
prior to the meeting of the City Council at which termination of water service
is to be considered. The notice shall inform him of the time and place of the
meeting and the charges which lead to the consideration of the termination.
   D.   Appearance By Water User: A water user whose right to utilize City
water is being reviewed shall have opportunity to appear with or without
counsel and present the reasons why his water service should not be
discontinued.
   E.   Determination: After due hearing, the City Council may arrive at a
determination. If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's
service connection, the City Council shall notify him of the decision and of
the period during which the service will remain discontinued. (1979 Code § 14-
135)
8-1-17: WATER METERS:
   A.   Number Of Meters; Dispute: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by
this Chapter, all structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using
water from the City water system must have such number of water meters
connected to their water system as are necessary in the judgment of the Castle
Valley Special Service District to adequately measure use and determine water
charges to the respective users. Whenever a dispute between the Castle Valley
Special Service District and the property owner arises as to the appropriate
number of meters to be installed on any premises, the matter shall be heard and
determined by the City Council after due notice in writing to the parties
involved. (1979 Code § 14-136; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Meters Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the City upon
application for a connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and
other costs as may be established by the City Council from time to time by
resolution. Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the City.
(1979 Code § 14-136)
   C.   Meter Readings: The City Council shall cause meter readings to be taken
regularly and shall advise the City Treasurer thereof for the purpose of
recording the necessary billings for water service. (1979 Code § 14-136; amd.
1998 Code)
   D.   Tampering: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the
discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the
customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on or off
the water, except by an authorized representative of the city, unless special
permission is given by the city through its representatives to the customer to
do so. (1979 Code § 14-136)
   E.   Meter Testing: If a customer submits a written request to the Castle
Valley special service district or city council to test his water meter, the
city may, if under the circumstances it deems it advisable and in its
discretion, order a test of the meter measuring the water delivered to such
customer. If such request is made within twelve (12) months after the date of
the last previous test, the customer may be required to pay the cost of such
test. If the meter is found in such test to record from ninety seven percent
(97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy under methods of testing
satisfactory to the city council, the meter shall be deemed to accurately
measure the use of water. (1979 Code § 14-136; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Estimation In Case Of Failure: If the city's meters fail to register at
any time, the water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated
on the basis of previous consumption during a period which is not questioned.
In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent
(97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall
make such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair
under the circumstances.
   G.   Damage By Customer: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other
materials of the city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or
neglect of the customer shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by
and at the expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and
expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the
city through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the department or collect such costs from the customer. (1979 Code
§ 14-136)
8-1-18: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY 1 :
   A.   Scope: The city may furnish water service from its water system to
persons outside the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 14-151)
   B.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the city limits who
desires to be supplied with water service from the city water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system to
his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present
location, may make application to the city council by petition containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension.
      2.   A map showing the location thereof. (1979 Code § 14-152)
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified to by the
Castle Valley special service district. The city council and the person seeking
such extension may enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under
which the extension may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under
which all or any portion of the cost of installing such extension may be
refunded. (1979 Code § 14-152; amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   An acknowledgement that the city in granting the petition need
supply only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city
council deems beyond the requirements of water users within the city limits,
and that such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of
the city. (1979 Code § 14-152)
   C.   Costs Determined: Upon receipt of such petition and map and before the
petition is granted, the city council shall determine what portion, if any, of
the extension of the city water mains to the city limits the city shall
construct, and shall obtain from the Castle Valley special service district a
verified statement showing the whole cost and expense of making such extension.
Such costs and expenses shall include administrative and supervisory
expenditures of the water department, which shall in no event be deemed to be
less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of materials and labor. (1979 Code §
14-154; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the city limits is connected to city water mains, the
Castle Valley special service district may require a master meter to be
installed near the point where the connection is to be made to the city main.
This installation will be at the expense of the persons served by such
extension according to the regular rates for meter installation. Responsible
parties must agree to pay all bills for water served through the meter at the
applicable water rates. (1979 Code § 14-153; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 4 of this title.
8-1-19: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be held liable for any damage to a water service user by
reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by
fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which
occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act 1 . (1979
Code § 14-131)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 63-30-1.
8-1-20: STOCK WATERING LINES:
   A.   Hookups: Hookups shall be granted by the city council on a case by case
basis.
   B.   City System: In order to qualify for a residential water hookup, in
addition to all other requirements of city ordinances or resolutions, an
applicant must hook up to a residential culinary water line which is part of
the city system and which is approved and accepted by the Castle Valley special
service district and the state board of health and which is maintained by said
Castle Valley special service district. (Res. 8-22-89, 8-22-1989; amd. City
Council Minutes 11-14-1995)
8-1-21: WATER SYSTEM PROTECTION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make any
interconnection whatsoever between the city's culinary water system and
secondary water system, or between either of these two (2) systems to any other
water system (including, but not limited to, any stockwatering system/lines,
private irrigation system/line, public, government, or company irrigation
system/lines, and industrial water system/lines). Any such connections between
such systems shall not be allowed and shall remain unlawful even when backflow
prevention devices, valved connections, temporary pipes or hoses, or any type
of devices are installed.
   B.   As a condition to any person or entity having a connection, whether
existing or new, to the respective culinary or the secondary water systems,
and/or to any use thereof, the city, its officials, employees, or agents, may
enter upon any private property served by either of said water systems, or upon
which either water system may run or be installed, in order to inspect and
determine the nature and appropriateness of any connection or usage. Unless the
city has reason to believe an emergency or exigent circumstances exist
(including, but not limited to, the immediate safety and health of city
inhabitants, and the imperative quality and integrity of the water system) the
city, its officials, employees, and agents shall only enter upon private
property for the purposes set forth above during regular business hours. It
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct
the officials, employees, or agents of the city while in performance of the
duties imposed by this section.
   C.   Any person or entity violating this section shall be guilty of a class
B misdemeanor. Violators shall be responsible for any and all costs and
expenses associated with such unlawful acts or prohibitions, including, but not
limited to, excavation, restoration, and restitution. In addition to said
criminal penalty, the city may terminate culinary water and/or secondary water
system service to any property whereon the owner and/or occupant or any agent
thereof violates this section, or fails to pay applicable fees for connection
to the water system or for usage thereof, or for fines imposed for violating
this section. (Ord. 2003-6, 6-26-2003)
CHAPTER 2
SECONDARY IRRIGATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2-1: Connection Requirements
8-2-2: Administration And Enforcement
8-2-3: Fees
8-2-4: Interconnection With Culinary System Prohibited
8-2-5: Penalty
8-2-1: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Residential: Wherever economically feasible, in the judgment of the
city, an underground secondary irrigation system shall be installed and the
city's permission to run open ditches on city streets and rights of way shall
be revoked. Said secondary irrigation system shall provide water on a seasonal
basis for lawns, gardens and other outside uses. Each residential lot served by
the system shall, upon compliance with this chapter, be furnished with a riser
at the lot boundary. Multi-family dwellings and trailer courts shall likewise
be furnished with a riser at the lot boundaries upon request. Water from the
secondary irrigation system shall not be used in buildings or swamp coolers,
except for greenhouses and buildings used for animal production.
   B.   Commercial: Wherever economically feasible, in the judgment of the
city, commercial properties may be hooked onto the secondary irrigation system,
upon compliance with provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Vacant Lots:
      1.   Hookups shall be established on unused or vacant lots; provided,
that the following requirements are met:
         a.   There is an existing or pending building permit; or
         b.   Said lot is presently served by the open ditch system.
      2.   Said hookups are available only upon compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, application to and approval by the city council and the
payment of all fees and assessments.
   D.   Outside City Limits: Hookups to the secondary irrigation system outside
the city limits shall be considered by application to the city on an individual
case by case basis; provided however, that such connections are discouraged and
fees and charges therefor must reflect the fact that areas outside the city do
not pay city or Castle Valley special service district mill levies.
   E.   Subdivisions: No subdivision, condominium or planned unit development
shall be approved by the city unless the plans for the same include
construction, at developer's own cost, of a secondary irrigation system to the
city's and the Castle Valley special service district's specifications and to
be inspected by the city and the Castle Valley special service district.
   F.   Authorized Personnel Only: It shall be unlawful to hook onto the
secondary irrigation system or to make repairs or maintenance on the same,
except when done by personnel authorized by city. (Ord. 4-26-83, 4-26-1983,
eff. 4-26-1983)
8-2-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Watering Schedule And Uses:
      1.   Water shall be available for use in the secondary irrigation system
during the irrigation season; provided, that the users adhere to the following
stipulations: (Ord. 2003-2, 5-8-2003)
         a.   Watering Hours And Days: No watering is allowed during the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. or as determined by the
city council each year based on the water storage levels. Watering days may
also be set by a schedule to restrict water usage during drought years as
determined by the city council. (Ord. 2006-2, 5-11-2006)
         b.   Watering Days: (Rep. by Ord. 2006-2, 5-11-2006)
Note: In the event Millsite Reservoir should reach full capacity allowing water
to flow over the spillway, all restrictions shall be lifted until at such time
water ceases to flow from the spillway. Immediately upon the water ceasing to
flow over the spillway, all restrictions are again in force. At that time
Ferron City will post notifications at the regular designated posting
locations. It will be the responsibility of the water users to be aware of
these changes. No further notice will be sent. In the event a definite shortage
should occur, Ferron City officials shall call an emergency water meeting to
put into effect an emergency water ordinance. (Ord. 2006-2, 5-11-2006)
         c.   Open Hose Watering: No open hose watering or flood irrigating of
any kind. It is required that some type of restriction device be attached at
the hose opening for watering purposes.
         d.   Waste Of Water: Each property owner shall be responsible for
water runoff from his property. It shall constitute a violation of this chapter
to allow water to run onto land owned by another or by the city. (Ord. 2003-2,
5-8-2003)
      2.   The following items are exceptions to the above rules:
         a.   Necessary watering of outside potted plants.
         b.   Watering of new lawns.
         c.   Watering of trees and shrubs with an installed drip system.
         d.   Washing of vehicles allowed only with the use of a twist nozzle
at the hose opening so that no water waste occurs. (Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011)
      3.   Any violation of this subsection A will constitute the following
penalties:
First offense: Written warning.
Second offense: Fifty dollar ($50.00) fine that must be paid by four thirty
o'clock (4:30) P.M. on the next business day to prevent loss of services. Fee
must be paid prior to services being restored.
Third and subsequent offenses: Loss of secondary water services for fourteen
(14) days and a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. Fee must be paid before
services will be restored. No credits or adjustments will be made to utility
bills for loss of service. (Ord. 2003-2, 5-8-2003)
   B.   Distinctive Coloring: All exposed portions of the secondary irrigation
system shall bear distinctive "red" coloring as prescribed by state statute.
   C.   Inspection Of System: The authorized representatives of the city may
during reasonable hours and with notice to property owners inspect any portion
of the secondary irrigation system on private property.
   D.   Service For Premises Only: It shall be unlawful to provide water from
the secondary irrigation system to property owned by another.
   E.   Sale Of Water Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a
connection to sell or otherwise distribute water from that connection for use
other than on the premises. It shall likewise be unlawful to purchase or
otherwise receive water from a secondary irrigation system connection owned by
another. (Ord. 4-26-83, 4-26-1983, eff. 4-26-1983)
   F.   Cross Connections: Cross connections between the pressurized secondary
water system and the pressurized irrigation system are prohibited. Any physical
connections or arrangement of piping or fixtures which create a cross
connection are illegal. This would include any temporary connections, such as
swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or change over devices or sliding multipart tubes or
other plumbing arrangements. It shall be the responsibility of the customer or
consumer to comply with this subsection. If violations of this subsection exist
or if there has not been any corrective action taken by the consumer within
twenty four (24) hours of the verbal or written notification, then immediate
loss of water services to the premises will take place until the customer has
corrected the problem and received proper verification through appropriate
inspections. (Ord. 2003-2, 5-8-2003)
   G.   Board Of Equalization: The city council is hereby established as a
board of equalization with power to exempt, abate or defer fees due under this
chapter upon a showing of adequate cause. (Ord. 4-26-83, 4-26-1983, eff. 4-26-
1983)
8-2-3: FEES 1 :
   A.   Connections Run With Land: The connection fee and the connection shall
run with the land and shall not be transferred except by written authorization
of the city. The city shall maintain a current list of connections for public
inspection at reasonable times and upon request.
   B.   Annexations, Subdivisions, Condominiums, PUDs: Territory newly annexed
into the city and subdivisions, condominiums and PUDs shall be hooked onto the
system only after construction of the secondary system as set forth by this
chapter and approval by the city, all at the developer's cost. Annexations and
subdivisions shall be approved only if to do so would not interfere with the
present secondary irrigation system.
   C.   Amendments: All fees and rates set by this chapter may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 4-26-83, 4-26-1983, eff.
4-26-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 4 of this title.
8-2-4: INTERCONNECTION WITH CULINARY SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to make any interconnections whatsoever between the
secondary irrigation system and the culinary water system. All secondary
irrigation system main lines, distribution lines and service laterals shall be
in trenches separated at least ten feet (10') from culinary lines. (Ord. 4-26-
83, 4-26-1983, eff. 4-26-1983)
8-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each day such violation continues. The city may
terminate service through the secondary irrigation system and through the
culinary water system to any lot wherein the owner violates any provision of
this chapter or fails to pay the fees as set forth herein. (Ord. 4-26-83, 4-26-
1983, eff. 4-26-1983; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-3-1: Use Of System Mandatory
8-3-2: Application For Service
8-3-3: Fees
8-3-4: Statement Of Charges; Delinquency
8-3-5: Installation And Connection To System
8-3-6: Pipe Requirements
8-3-7: Access By Castle Valley Special Service District
8-3-8: Prohibited Uses And Regulations
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  11-4-5 of this Code for subdivision regulations.
8-3-1: USE OF SYSTEM MANDATORY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having
charge of any premises within the City which is located within three hundred
feet (300') of a sewer main to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other
than by use of the City sewer system. It shall be unlawful to construct or to
continue the use of any other sewage disposal system such as a privy, vault,
cesspool or septic tank on the property, except by written approval of the City
Council in cases of undue hardship. (1979 Code § 14-220)
8-3-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Agreement: Any person who desires or is required to secure sewer
service when such service is available from the City's sewer systems shall
apply therefor to the City Treasurer and file an agreement with the City which
shall be on file in the office of the City Treasurer. (1979 Code § 14-214; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Nonowner Applicants: Property owners of rental properties will be
responsible for the utility billings on these rental properties and all utility
billings will be in the name of the property owner. (Res. 11-14-89-1, 11-14-
1989)
8-3-3: FEES 1 :
   A.   Service Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for
delinquency in payment and connection fees for sewer services from the City
sewer system shall be fixed from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the
City Council. The City Council may from time to time enact rules for levying,
billing, guaranteeing and collecting charges for sewer services and all other
rules necessary for the management and control of the sewer system. (1979 Code
§ 14-216)
   B.   Special Rates: The City Council may from time to time fix by agreement
or resolution special rates and conditions upon such terms as they may deem
proper for users of the sewer service discharging wastes of unusual
characteristics or making use thereof under exceptional circumstances. (1979
Code § 14-217)
   C.   Complaints; Corrections: The City Council is hereby constituted a Board
of Equalization of sewer rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any
assessments or charges deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust. (1979 Code §
14-218)
 
Notes
1 2. See also Chapter 4 of this Title.
8-3-4: STATEMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Statement: The City Treasurer shall mail a written or printed statement
stating the sewer service charges assessed once every two (2) months or at such
other regular intervals as the City Council shall direct. The statement shall
specify the amount of the bill, the place of payment and the date due.
   B.   Notice Of Delinquency: If any person fails to pay his sewer charges
within thirty (30) days of the due date, the City Treasurer shall give the
customer notice in writing of the intent to discontinue the service of water to
the premises unless the customer pays the bill in full within five (5) days
from the date of notice. (1979 Code § 14-219; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Discontinued Service: If the water service is thereafter discontinued
for failure to make payment of the sewer service charges, before the water
service to the premises shall again be provided, all delinquent sewer charges
must have been paid to the City Treasurer or arrangements made for their
payment that are satisfactory to the City (see also subsection 8-1-3C of this
Title).
   D.   Reconnection: In the event water is turned off for nonpayment of sewer
charges, before the water service to the premises shall again be provided, the
customer shall pay, in addition to all delinquent charges, such extra charge
for turning the water on and off as the City Council may have established by
resolution or ordinance. (1979 Code § 14-219)
   E.   Legal Proceedings: If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within
thirty (30) days of the due date, the City Treasurer is hereby authorized to
take all action necessary to enforce collection, including, but not limited to,
the commencement of legal proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction seeking
judgment for the amount of the delinquent fees and service charges and all
costs of collection, including court costs and attorney fees. (1979 Code § 14-
219; amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-5: INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or
indirectly engage in the laying, repairing, altering or connecting of any drain
or sewer pipe connected with or part of the City sewer system without first
having received a permit from the office of the City Treasurer or the Castle
Valley Special Service District. (1979 Code § 14-222; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Licensed Plumber; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect any drain or sewer pipe with the City sewer system unless the person is
a duly licensed plumber or unless, in the absence of a duly licensed plumber,
any proposed connection to, alteration of or change of connection to the sewer
system shall be first submitted to the Castle Valley Special Service District
for review and approval. After such approval, the installation or work done
shall be subject to inspection by the Castle Valley Special Service District.
(1979 Code § 14-221; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Connection To Basement: In order to determine the feasibility of
connecting a basement or proposed basement to the sanitary sewer, the owner or
plumber may make application for a trial sewer survey, the cost of which shall
be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The
result of a trial sewer survey shall not constitute a permit to connect to the
sewer and is merely for information purposes. (1979 Code § 14-228)
   D.   Plumbing Requirements: Permits to connect to the City sewer system
shall not be issued unless the plumbing in the house or building to be
connected is in accordance with the provisions of the Building and Plumbing
Codes of the City. (1979 Code § 14-223)
   E.   Revocation Of Permit: All construction permits for sewer connections or
installations shall be issued to the plumber who is to do the work or to the
owner of the property, subject to the supervision and inspection by the Castle
Valley Special Service District. The City Treasurer or Castle Valley Special
Service District may at any time revoke a permit because of defective work or
because of undue delay in completing the permitted work. (1979 Code § 14-224;
amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-6: PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Good Repair: All users of the sewer services shall keep their service
pipes, connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost
at their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the Castle
Valley Special Service District, shall be allowed to dig into the street for
the purpose of removing or repairing any sewer service pipe or main. (1979 Code
§ 14-225; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipes used in
conjunction with the sewer services of the City shall be of such material,
quality and specifications as the City Council may from time to time by
resolution provide, and shall be installed at such distances below ground as
may be specified by regulations relating to the Castle Valley Special Service
District. All work, alterations or extensions affecting sewer pipes shall be
subject to the acceptance of the Castle Valley Special Service District, and no
connections with sewer mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the City Treasurer. (1979 Code § 14-226; amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-7: ACCESS BY CASTLE VALLEY SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT:
The Castle Valley Special Service District shall at all ordinary hours have
free access to places supplied with sewer services from the City system for the
purpose of examining the apparatus, ascertaining the sewer service being used
and the manner of its use. (1979 Code § 14-227; amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-8: PROHIBITED USES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Scope: The City Council shall have power to and retains the right to
adopt regulations controlling the manner and circumstances under which the
sewer system may be used in addition to the regulatory provisions set forth
expressly in this Chapter. (1979 Code § 14-232)
   B.   Inflammables: It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or
remove any part or portion of any sewer appliance or appurtenance, or to
discharge into a sewer any inflammable gas, gasoline or oil, any calcium
carbide or residue therefrom, or any liquid or other materials or substance
which will emit an inflammable gas when in contact with water, sewage or fire.
Oil separators installed in any building where volatile fluids are used must
not be connected directly or indirectly with a sewer.
   C.   Waste From Certain Establishments: The contents of waste pipes from
water filters, gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages,
wash racks, stores or warehouses containing inflammable substances, car barns,
buildings for the stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other animals, or
plants using milk or processing milk products, and all similar establishments
shall not be disposed of through connection with a sanitary sewer, unless such
contents are discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented. The
construction of such tanks must be approved by the City Engineer, and must be
subject to his inspection, approval or condemnation before cement is poured and
at all times thereafter until completion of such construction. Upon
condemnation by the City Engineer, the sewage from the tanks shall not be
allowed to flow into the sewer until satisfactory alterations have been made
and the construction approved by the City Engineer.
   D.   Obstructive Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person to empty or
discharge into the public sanitary sewer any garbage, refuse or other similar
matter or substance likely to obstruct the sewer, or any substance, solid or
liquid other than the waste products for which the sewer is provided. (1979
Code § 14-231)
   E.   Drainage Waters And Destructive Materials: It shall be unlawful for any
person to connect with a public sanitary sewer any drain or pipe which
discharges rainwater, cellar or surface water, acids, alkalies, lye or other
injurious liquids, or the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch or
other watercourses. No boiler or heating plant shall be directly connected to
the sanitary sewer. The overflow from boilers or heating plants, when cooled to
a temperature not to exceed one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F), will
be allowed to run to a sump, which sump shall be connected to the sewer. The
discharge of the contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines, air
compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses
which contain inflammable substances, buildings for the stabling or keeping of
horses, cows and other animals, and all similar establishments, shall not be
made into or connected with a sanitary sewer, unless such contents are
discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented. Settling tanks
shall be constructed of a material approved by the Castle Valley Special
Service District and shall be at all times subject to their inspection and
approval or condemnation. Upon condemnation by the Castle Valley Special
Service District, the sewage from said tanks shall not be allowed to flow into
the sewer until satisfactory alterations have been made and the construction
approved by the Castle Valley Special Service District. (1979 Code § 14-231;
amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Destruction Of System: It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy,
deface, injure or interfere with the operation of any part or appurtenance of
the sewer system. (1979 Code § 14-235)
   G.   Ownership Of Connecting Lines: Unless provision is expressly made for
ownership of mains or lines by the owner of the adjacent property by means of
written agreement, all lines and mains connecting the sewer system to a
landowner or resident's premises which are situated on the public way between
the main and the property line shall be deemed to be the property of the City
and subject to its absolute control and supervision even though actual
installation may have been performed by the owner or resident of the premises.
(1979 Code § 14-233)
   H.   Sewer Manholes: It shall be unlawful for any person to open any sewer
manhole without permission from the Castle Valley Special Service District.
(1979 Code § 14-234; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
UTILITY FEES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Fees
8-4-3: Waiver Of Utility Fees For Active Military
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
INDEX WATER FEE: A fee charged by the City for a connection to the City's
culinary water system in lieu of the transfer to the City of one or more shares
of water.
WATER LEASE AGREEMENT: The water lease agreement between Ferron Canal and
Reservoir Company and Ferron City dated March 31, 2005, and its amendments.
(Ord. 2006-1, 4-13-2006; amd. Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011; Ord. 2018-3, 7-12-2018)
8-4-2: FEES:
   A.   Monthly fees for culinary, secondary and sewer for both inside and
outside City limits shall be set forth by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Connection, reconnection and relocation fees for both inside and
outside of City limits shall be set forth by the City Council and the Castle
Valley Special Service District.
   C.   Index water fee shall be set forth by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2018-3, 7-12-2018)
8-4-3: WAIVER OF UTILITY FEES FOR ACTIVE MILITARY:
During times of deployment of the head of a household into active duty
overseas, the minimum amount billed on the utility bill for water, sewer,
secondary water and garbage services will be waived.
In order to qualify for the waiver, the applicant shall be required to present
to the City, evidence of the active duty status including the dates, duty
station and location of active duty stationing of the individual known to be
the head of the household.
The person requesting the waiver will be required to notify the City
immediately, of the termination of the active duty of the person for whom the
waiver is received. The City may terminate such waiver at any time that it is
determined that the person receiving the waiver no longer meets the terms or
intent expressed in this section. (Res. 2008-1, 3-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2011-2, 4-
28-2011)
CHAPTER 5
BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: General Purposes
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Responsibilities
8-5-4: Requirements
8-5-5: Discontinuance Of Service
8-5-1: GENERAL PURPOSES:
The purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
   A.   Protection Of Water Supply: To protect the safe drinking water supply
of the City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring
compliance with State and local plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and
other applicable industry standards for water system safety within the
consumer's internal distribution system or private water systems. Compliance
with these minimum safety codes will be considered reasonable vigilance for
prevention of contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public
drinking water systems; and
   B.   Elimination Or Control Of Cross-Connections: To promote reasonable
elimination or control of cross-connections in the plumbing fixtures and
industrial piping system of the consumer, as required by State and local
plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and other applicable industry
standards to assure water system safety; and
   C.   Administration Of Backflow Prevention: To provide for the
administration of a continuing program of backflow prevention which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all
drinking water systems. (1998 Code)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings specified,
unless a different meaning is clearly evident from the context:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: Accepted by the Utah Department of Health, Bureau
of Drinking Water/Sanitation, as meeting an applicable specification or as
suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the purveyor's public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's
public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring,
river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These
waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not
have authority for sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under
pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any sources other than the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the Utah Plumbing Code, chapter 10, (appendix J), or subsequently
adopted substitute provisions, and the Cross-Connection Control Program for
Utah.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
nonpotable water, sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or
other materials.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
which may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other material of
questionable quality to come in contact with potable water inside a
distribution system. This would include any temporary connections, such as
swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multi-part tubes or
other plumbing arrangements.
CROSS-CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water
system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention
assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's
water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot
be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection
(isolation).
CROSS-CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a
nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
WATER PURVEYOR: The person designated to be in charge of the Water Department
of Ferron City, is invested with the authority and responsibility for the
implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (1998 Code)
8-5-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   City:
      1.   The City shall be responsible for the protection of the drinking
water distribution system from foreseeable conditions leading to the possible
contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the backflow of
contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
      2.   Drinking water system surveys or inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by individuals
deemed qualified by and representing the City. Survey records shall indicate
compliance with the aforementioned health and safety standards. All such
records will be maintained by the City.
      3.   The City shall notify in writing all consumers of the need for the
periodic system survey to ensure compliance with existing applicable minimum
health and safety standards.
      4.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for
containment control required at the service entrance shall be determined from
the results of the system survey.
   B.   Consumer:
      1.   To comply with this Chapter as a term and condition of supply and
consumer's acceptance of service is admittance of his/her awareness.
      2.   It shall be the responsibility of the customer or consumer to
purchase, install, test and maintain any backflow prevention device or assembly
required to comply with this Chapter.
   C.   Plumbing Official:
      1.   The Plumbing Official's responsibility to enforce the applicable
sections of the Plumbing Code begins at the point of service (downstream or
consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the developed length of
the consumer's water system.
      2.   The Plumbing Official will review all plans to ensure that
unprotected cross-connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water
system. If a cross-connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the
installation of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device or
assembly in accordance with the Utah Plumbing Code.
      3.   Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so by an approved
air gap or approved mechanical backflow prevention assembly, properly installed
and in accordance with the Utah Plumbing Code.
   D.   Technician, Surveyor Or Repair Person:
      1.   Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test,
repair or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the certified backflow
technicians, surveyors or repair persons will have the following
responsibilities:
         a.   Ensuring acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
         b.   Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the consumer, water
purveyor, and the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation on forms approved for
such use by the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation, and within the time frames
prescribed by the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation.
         c.   The reports shall include the list of materials or replacement
parts used.
         d.   Ensuring replacement parts are equal in quality to parts
originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
         e.   Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics
of the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
         f.   A certified technician shall perform all tests of the mechanical
devices or assemblies and be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all
tests and reports.
         g.   Ensuring his license is current, the testing equipment being used
is acceptable to the State, and is in proper operating condition.
         h.   Be equipped with, and be competent to use, all necessary tools,
gauges and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow
prevent assemblies.
         i.   The certified technician conducting the test must tag each
double-check valve, pressure-vacuum breaker, reduced-pressure backflow assembly
and high-hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date tested and by whom.
The technician's license number must also be on this tag.
      2.   In the case of a consumer requiring a commercially- available
technician, any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report
the results of that test to the consumer, water purveyor and the Bureau of
Drinking Water/Sanitation. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need of
repair, a licensed plumber shall make the actual repair. (1998 Code)
8-5-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Protection Of Water Supply: No water service connection to any premises
shall be installed or maintained by the public water purveyor unless the water
supply is protected as required by State laws, regulations, codes and this
Chapter. Service of water to a consumer found to be in violation of this
Chapter shall be discontinued by the water purveyor after due process of
written notification of violation and an appropriate time suspense for
voluntary compliance, if:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this Chapter for control
of backflow and cross-connections is not installed, tested and maintained; or
      2.   If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed
or bypassed; or
      3.   If an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises; or
      4.   If the periodic system survey has not been conducted.
   B.   Inspection Of Customer's System: The customer's system shall be open
for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the
water purveyor to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or
sanitary hazards, including violation of this Chapter, exist and to audit the
results of the required survey (subsection 8-5-3A2 of this Chapter).
   C.   Installation Of Approved Prevention Assembly: Whenever the public water
purveyor deems a service connection's water usage contributes a sufficient
hazard to the water supply, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on the service line of the identified consumer's water system, at or
near the property line, or immediately inside the building being served; but,
in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
   D.   Type Of Protective Assembly: The type of protective assembly required
under subsection C of this Section, shall depend upon the degree of hazard
which exists at the point of cross-connection (whether direct or indirect),
applicable to local and State requirements resulting from the required survey.
   E.   Previously Approved Assemblies: All presently installed backflow
prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this Section but
were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of
installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the
inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection F of this Section, be
excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the water purveyor is
assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever
the existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than
minimum maintenance, or when the water purveyor finds that the operation or
maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be
replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the local and
State requirements.
   F.   Inspection And Maintenance Requirements: It shall be the responsibility
of the consumer at the premises where backflow prevention assemblies are
installed to have certified surveys or inspections and operational tests made
at least once per year at the consumer's expense. In those instances where the
public water purveyor deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified
surveys or inspections and tests at a more frequent interval. It shall be the
duty of the public water purveyor to see that these tests are made according to
the standards set forth by the State Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking
Water/Sanitation.
   G.   Testing Backflow Prevention Assemblies: All backflow prevention
assemblies shall be tested within ten (10) working days of initial
installation.
   H.   Safety Hazards: No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so
as to create a safety hazard. Example: installed over any electrical panel,
steam pipes, boilers, pits or above ceiling level. (1998 Code)
8-5-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
If violations of this Chapter exist or if there has not been any corrective
action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the written notification
of deficiencies noted within the survey, then the public water purveyor shall
deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical
break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in
conformance with the State and City statutes relating to plumbing, safe
drinking water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (1998
Code)
CHAPTER 6
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Water Conservation Plan Act
8-6-3: Description
8-6-4: Water Supply
8-6-5: Current Water Use
8-6-6: Historical Usage
8-6-7: Water Conservation Challenges and Concerns
8-6-8: Current Conservation Measures And Programs
8-6-9: Water Conservation Goals
8-6-10: Additional Conservation Measures
8-6-11:    Implementing And Updating The Ferron Water Conservation Plan
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The Division of Water Resources has been charged with the
administration of the Utah Water Conservation Plan Act;
   B.   The Utah Water Conservation Plan Act (73-10-32, UCA) requires water
conservancy districts and public water systems with more than five hundred
(500) connections to submit Water Conservation Plans every five (5) years;
   C.   The Governor of Utah has announced a conservation goal to reduce two
thousand (2,000) base per capita use by at least twenty-five percent (25%) by
the year 2025;
   D.   Ferron City operates a culinary and secondary water system;
   E.   Ferron City Officials are concerned about water conservation and the
pressing need to use water in an efficient manner, allowing for future
sustained growth of the city;
   F.   The Ferron City Water Conservation Plan identifies ways to reduce the
consumption of water;
   G.   The attached Ferron City Water Conservation Plan is adopted to meet the
requirements of the Utah Water Conservation Plan Act (73-10-32, UCA). The plan
will be amended no less than every five (5) years and will play a vital role in
the future development of Ferron, Utah. (Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-2: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN ACT:
Due to the continued growth in Utah, many citizens and leaders are becoming
increasingly aware and concerned for the future cost and availability of water.
The state legislature has also voiced concern and addressed this issue in the
Water Conservation Plan Act ( House Bill 418), which passed in the 1998
session, and its revision (House Bill 153), passed in the 1999 session, and
further amendments in the 2004 session (House Bill 71). The Act has been
codified in the Utah State Code, Section 73-10-32. The Ferron City Water
Conservation Plan has been written to address the concerns of both leaders and
citizens in the City of Ferron. (Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-3: DESCRIPTION:
Ferron is a small rural community located in western Emery County situated
between Ferron Mountain in the Manti Lasal Range to the west and the San Rafael
Swell to the east. Throughout Ferron's history, farming and raising livestock
has been a main part of the culture. With the construction of the Hunter Power
Plant in the 1970's Ferron's economic growth became tied to the coal and power
industries. Ferron's population in 2000 was 1623 residents. Ferron has a
current population of 1626 residents (2010 census). The Ferron City General
Plan, written in 2007 projected a nineteen percent (19%) increase in population
over the next twenty (20) years. This projection, due to minimal growth in
industry, suggests that the demand for water should stay within the capacity
that is currently used to take care of the needs of the city.
Ferron City leaders are committed to maintaining the rural feel and open space
setting that is Ferron. Ferron has worked in cooperation with the Ferron Canal
and Reservoir Company to assist water delivery to the farmers located both
within and outside of city limits via water stock lines.
In keeping the rural feel of the city, the largest zone within the city is the
R-1-10,000 Zone. This zone contains many residential lots that exceed the
requirements. It also contains churches, schools and small farm pastures that
are typically large water users. Much of the farm ground in this zone is
watered under a special agreement that was made with the Ferron Canal and
Reservoir Company, so that farmers can utilize the secondary water system to
deliver individual shares of water. This reduces the amount of secondary water
needed by the city to water large areas of ground. Although the industrial zone
is also a large percentage of the city, there are currently no businesses in
the industrial zone that are large consumers of water.
Zone
Zone
RA- 1 Residential Agricultural one acre min    5%
RA-2 Residential Agricultural one acre min lot 1%
R-1-10,000 10,000 sq. ft. min lot size         29%
R-1-7,500 7,500 sq. ft. min lot size           28%
R-2-7,500 7,500 sq. ft. min lot size           5%
R-3-7,500 7,500 sq. ft. min lot size           0.5%
Central Commercial                                4%
Highway Commercial                                27.5%
 
(Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-4: WATER SUPPLY:
Millsite Reservoir, completed in the early 1970's supplies both the culinary
and secondary water for the city. Water in the Reservoir is managed by the
Ferron Canal and Reservoir Company. Ferron City owns 1660 shares of water stock
which during normal years is calculated at 0.75 acre foot per share and
averages one thousand two hundred and forty-five (1,245) acre feet of water.
These shares are used to supply the water for both the culinary and secondary
systems. Castle Valley Special Service District maintains the water treatment
plant and delivers the water to the residents of Ferron. In 2005, Ferron
entered into a contract with the Ferron Canal and Reservoir Company to purchase
up to three hundred (300) acre feet of water each year for the city's culinary
needs. This agreement allows the shares owned by the city to be dedicated for
secondary use. There are approximately seven hundred and ten (710) culinary
connections in Ferron with an average three hundred and thirteen (313) GPCD.
This average is slightly higher than the state average of two hundred and sixty
(260) GPCD due to the large amount of culinary water that is used to water the
city owned Millsite Golf Course when the secondary water is not available.
Ferron City has approximately five hundred and forty (540) secondary
connections through which untreated water is delivered to users by the Castle
Valley Special Service District. The secondary water is available from mid
April through the first of October during normal water years. Secondary water
usage is monitored through the summer months and restrictions are set in place
during drought years as needed.
Historically, Ferron City has required developers to turn in one share of water
stock per culinary connection and one (1) share per acre of land for secondary
connections. In 2006 Due to the hardship of obtaining water stock, Ferron's
leaders felt that the requirement of turning in water stock for connections was
limiting the growth of the city. Thus, they passed regulations that allowed
developers to pay a fee in lieu, equivalent to the price of water stock, to the
city in order to obtain water connections. This was continued for a period of
five (5) years during which time nineteen (19) new homes were constructed. In
2011, fearing that the practice may someday prove detrimental to the city
supply of water, and due to the fact that the city could no longer purchase
water shares with the funds received from the fees, the ordinance was repealed.
(Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-5: CURRENT WATER USE:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8ff4fc892cbeaa17558e6c2a6caadd96a1e0aaa5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1283.png]
 
As illustrated in the cart above, secondary water usage varies from year to
year based on the amount of water available for use. In 2003 and 2004 the area
experienced a drought. Water use was restricted and strict penalties were put
in place. During the drought citizens were provided with education
opportunities to learn appropriate ways to conserve water. From 2007 through
2011 the water supply was abundant. During the spring of 2011 the city
experienced flooding due to the high runoff and citizens were encouraged to use
all the water that they needed. It may be noted that with the exception of
drought years, the spillway at the reservoir overflows and "free water" is
given. Water used during the runoff from the spillway is not counted against
the water allotted for use and the count is started over, thus the final data
shows that the water used is over the amount allotted for the year. (Res. 2013-
9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-6: HISTORICAL USAGE:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8ff4fc892cbeaa17558e6c2a6caadd96a1e0aaa5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1287.png]
 
(Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-7: WATER CONSERVATION CHALLENGES AND CONCERNS:
   A.   Ferron City has determined that some of the main challenges and
concerns to water conservation are the following;
      1.   Many Citizens lack basic knowledge and understanding of how much
water is needed to maintain healthy landscaping and how to consistently
conserve the use of indoor water. Current practices seem to be based on
convenience rather than actual plant need and supply considerations.
      2.   Drought tolerant plants and landscaping are not promoted locally and
at times it is difficult to purchase drought tolerant plants and trees in local
nurseries.
      3.   Many homeowners have large areas of grass and other water intensive
landscaping.
      4.   Ferron City Ordinance
10-4-18  requires front and side yards to be landscaped however; there is no
reference to drought tolerant plants or water wise landscaping in the
ordinance.
      5.   The current water pricing and billing system, while adequate to
cover the expenses in the water fund, lacks incentives for citizens and
businesses to use water in a more conscious and efficient manner.
      6.   Secondary water is not metered, thus it is difficult to determine if
water is wasted.
      7.   Water that spills from the Millsite Reservoir is channeled
downstream and unavailable for use in the city secondary system.
      8.   Storage capacity in the Millsite Reservoir has declined due to the
increase in sediment entering the reservoir.
   B.   Each challenge recognized gives the city an opportunity to improve. The
first four (4) challenges can be addressed through well thought out
conservation education opportunities. Local religious groups, schools and city
publications can be used as a means to distribute education materials.
   C.   Revising current ordinances to promote water conservation landscaping
and xeriscaping is a good way to allow citizens to become familiar with native
drought tolerant plants. Samples of drought tolerant landscaping and
xeriscaping can be obtained and on file at the city office and made available
for new development. Furthermore, the example of the city use of drought
tolerant landscaping around city buildings and in city parks will promote the
cause and assist in acquainting citizens with water conservation measures and
practices. Challenges five through seven allow the city to partner with other
entities to develop additional conservation measures. Although it is difficult
at best to accurately determine the amount of water wasted through the
secondary system, the city may benefit from working with the Ferron Canal and
Reservoir Company to assess programs and methods that will provide more water
storage for use in drought years. Ferron City leaders have established working
relationships with members of the Ferron Canal and Reservoir Company Board and
are continually looking for ways to partner resources with the company to
address these issues which will include dredging of the reservoir when
conditions permit. (Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-8: CURRENT CONSERVATION MEASURES AND PROGRAMS:
Ferron City currently implements the following water conservation measures and
procedures:
   A.   Secondary water system. Secondary water (pressurized irrigation water)
is supplied to residents of Ferron City from April to October, for outside
watering of lawns and gardens. The use of secondary water conserves on culinary
water but is not to be perceived as an opportunity of unrestrained use of
water.
   B.   Public Awareness. Ferron City provides water conservation tips and
updates on the secondary water usage in the newsletter that is delivered to
each resident on a monthly basis. During short water years additional
information has been posted weekly at the City Hall and Post Office.
   C.   Water System Maintenance. Ferron City recently installed a culinary
meter system that allows the city to read meters each month of the year. This
system has the ability to detect and log areas that appear to have leaks. This
information is provided immediately to users so that leaks can be fixed in a
timely manner.
   D.   Waste Prohibiting Ordinance. Ferron City Ordinance
8-1-16  prohibits wasting water and discourages practices that allow water to
be wasted such as watering with an open hose, washing vehicles and allowing
sprinklers to spray so that water is running down the curb. Furthermore, the
city ordinance supports the states suggested regulations of no watering between
the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. (Res. 2013-9,
12-12-2013)
8-6-9: WATER CONSERVATION GOALS:
In pursuit of solutions to the problems previously identified and in order to
objectively evaluate the City's progress in promoting water conservation, the
following goals have been identified:
   A.   Reduce the city per capita indoor water use by two percent (2%)
annually for the next five (5) years.
   B.   Use drought tolerant landscaping in city parks and around city
buildings.
   C.   Encourage drought tolerant landscaping in residential areas by
reviewing current ordinances and making revisions to promote water
conservation.
   D.   Educate citizens on indoor and outdoor water conservation by providing
continued information in city newsletters and on the city website.
   E.   Investigate and consider adopting an inclining block rate, encouraging
citizens to conserve through increased rates for water used in excess of a
reasonable amount.
   F.   Partner with local agencies, the Ferron Canal and Reservoir Company,
the BLM, and the Castle Valley Special Service District to initiate the removal
of sediment from the Reservoir, replace infrastructure and to develop new
infrastructure in increasing water storage. (Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-10: ADDITIONAL CONSERVATION MEASURES:
   A.   Ferron City wishes to continue certain water conservation measures as
part of this Water Conservation Plan. In order for the city to accomplish the
goals listed specific measures must be taken. Compliance with emergency
measures would be mandatory when deemed appropriate and could be enforced by
the assessment of fines and restriction of water use. Compliance with non-
emergency measures would not be mandatory but could be influenced by billing
rate adjustments, education, awareness and community involvement. Water
Conservation measures are summarized below.
   B.   Emergency Measures:
      1.   Water city properties on a minimal schedule of every two (2) or
three (3) days, one property at a time.
      2.   Eliminate watering of city property in cases of severe shortages or
drought.
      3.   Reduce the number of flower pots and planters on city properties in
cases of shortages and drought.
      4.   Hold educational public meetings on water supply and conservation
measures.
      5.   Strictly enforce water schedule and if necessary, reduce schedule to
meet the supply.
      6.   Strictly enforce the imposition of fines and loss of secondary water
services for non compliance with adopted schedules.
   C.   Non Emergency Measures:
      1.   Sweep sidewalks and driveways instead of using hoses to clean them
off.
      2.   Wash vehicles with a bucket of soapy (biodegradable) water and rinse
while parked on or near landscaped area so that all water running off goes to
beneficial use instead of running down the gutter. Use twist style nozzle at
the end of the hose so that water is not allowed to run when not being used.
      3.   Check for and repair all leaks in pipes, hoses, faucets, couplings,
valves, etc. Verify there are no leaks by turning everything off and checking
your water meter to see if it is still turning. (Some underground leaks may not
be visible due to draining off into storm drains, ditches, or travel outside
your property).
      4.   Do not water on hot, sunny or windy days. You may actually end up
doing more harm than good to your landscape as well as waste a significant
amount of water.
      5.   Use mulch around trees and scrubs, as well as in your yard to retain
as much moisture as possible. Areas with drip systems will use much less water,
particularly during hot dry and windy conditions.
      6.   Keep your lawn well-trimmed and all other landscaped areas free of
weeds to reduce overall water needs of your yard.
   D.   Indoor Use:
      1.   Do not use toilets as a waste basket. Put all tissues, wrappers,
diapers, cigarette butts, etc. in the trash can.
      2.   Check toilet for leaks. Is the water level too high? Put a few drops
of food coloring in the tank. If the bowl becomes colored without flushing,
there is a leak. For those who do not have a low volume toilet, put a plastic
bottle full of sand and water in the tank to reduce the amount of water used
per flush, being careful to not reduce the amount of water so that it takes two
flushes to make the toilet work. Be sure that containers do not interfere with
the flushing mechanisms.
      3.   Take short showers with the water turned up only as much as it is
necessary. Turn the shower off while soaping up or shampooing. Install low flow
shower heads and/or other flow restriction devices.
      4.   Do not let the water run when you are brushing your teeth or
shaving. Fill the sink or a glass instead.
      5.   Wash only full loads of laundry or adjust the water level
appropriately for the amount of clothes you are washing. Most machines will use
forty (40) gallons or more of water for each load whether it is two socks or a
full weeks worth of clothes.
      6.   Repair any leaks within the house. Even a small slow drip can waste
up to fifteen (15) or twenty (20) gallons per day.
      7.   Know where your main shut off valve is located and that it works.
Shutting the water off yourself when a pipe leaks or breaks will not only save
water but will eliminate or minimize damage to your property.
      8.   Keep a jar or jug of water in the refrigerator for a cold drink
instead of running water from the tap until it is cold. You can put several
glasses of water down the drain for one drink of water.
      9.   Stop the sink when rinsing vegetables, dishes or anything else; use
only a sink full of water instead of continually running water down the drain.
      10.   Wash only full loads of dishes in the dishwasher. Let pans soak
rather than running the water over them while you are scrubbing them clean.
(Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
8-6-11: IMPLEMENTING AND UPDATING THE FERRON WATER CONSERVATION PLAN:
Ferron City's Water Conservation Plan will be discussed in a public meeting and
will be made available to the public via Ferron City's website or upon request
at the Ferron City Hall. Furthermore, the public is encouraged to comment on
this water conservation plan during scheduled public hearings held once every
five (5) years. (Res. 2013-9, 12-12-2013)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Code Adopted
9-1-2: Building Inspector
9-1-3: Building Permit Required
9-1-4: Fee Schedule
9-1-5: Penalty; Exception
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the uniform building codes and standards currently in
effect and also adopts any future regulations or changes which may occur as
future standards are approved and passed on by the state of Utah department of
commerce and professional licensing 1 . (Res. 12-13-94-1, 12-13-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 58-56-4.
9-1-2: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
Ferron City shall issue a contract for the services of a building inspector as
the building inspector for the city. (Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
9-1-3: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Application And Plans: A building permit shall be secured from the
building inspector upon approval of the Ferron City zoning clearance
application. The said application must be accompanied by plans and
specifications in duplicate, when required by the building inspector, and must
be verified by the person who will perform or be in charge of the construction
or alteration. (Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
   B.   Variations Of Plan Prohibited: No material variation from the approved
plan shall be allowed unless such variation shall first have been approved in
writing by the building inspector. (1979 Code § 9-524)
   C.   Zoning Clearance Application: All building projects that by law require
a building permit shall first be approved with a zoning clearance from Ferron
City. A zoning clearance application obtained from the office of city recorder
must be filled out and returned to said office to be presented to the zoning
administrator or planning commission for review and determination that the plan
conforms to this code. Approved plans will be forwarded to the building
inspector, who shall review the plan to determine whether the proposed
construction or alteration conforms to the building codes. The building
inspector may approve or disapprove the plans. If approved, the permit will be
issued. If disapproved, the plans may be returned to the city zoning
administrator or the planning commission for further review if the building
inspector deems that any building constructed or being constructed, or which
would be or may result, if constructed, in violation of any ordinance of the
city. (Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
9-1-4: FEE SCHEDULE:
Permit fees shall be collected by the building inspector in an amount
determined by the office of the building inspector and Ferron City. (Ord. 2010-
1, 1-28-2010)
9-1-5: PENALTY; EXCEPTION:
   A.   It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any homeowner, and a class B
misdemeanor for any person who receives payment or anything of value, to
construct or alter any building or structure, except a fence, without first
securing the permit required by this chapter. Such misdemeanor violations shall
be subject to penalty, upon conviction, as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   This section shall not apply where the retail cost of the materials
used in the construction or alteration is less than one dollar ($1.00), except
that it shall apply in all cases where the construction or alteration results
in an enlarged structure or affects the walls of the building or structure.
(1979 Code § 9-521; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Electrical Code Adopted
9-2-2: Enforcement Official
9-2-3: Permit Required
9-2-4: Permit Fees
9-2-5: Electrical Installations
9-2-6: Inspection
9-2-7: Electrical Disturbances
9-2-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts the uniform building codes and standards currently in
effect and also adopts any future regulations or changes which may occur as
future standards are approved and passed on by the State of Utah Department of
Commerce and Professional Licensing 1 . (Res. 12-13-94-1, 12-13-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 58-56-4.
9-2-2: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The Building Inspector shall perform all functions of electrical inspection and
shall, among other things, inspect and supervise the construction, installation
and repairs of all electric light and power wiring, fixtures, appliances or
apparatus installed within the limits of the City and shall require compliance
with the provisions of the Electrical Code. Wiring, fixtures and apparatus
heretofore installed need not necessarily be made to conform strictly to all
the provisions of the Electrical Code. The Building Inspector shall require the
correction of such defects as he deems actually dangerous to life or property.
Those same enforcement standards established in the Uniform Building Code shall
be followed by the Building Inspector for all electrical work. (1979 Code § 9-
541)
9-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No alterations or additions shall be made in existing wiring, nor shall any
wiring or any apparatus which generates, transmits, transforms or utilizes any
electricity be installed without first obtaining a permit therefor, except
minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses,
changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop
cords. Applications for such permit describing such work shall be made in
writing and shall conform as far as practicable to the requirement set forth in
subsection 9-1-3A of this Title. This Section shall not apply to installations
in powerhouses and substations belonging to electric light companies. No permit
shall be issued to any applicant for a permit during the time that he shall
fail to correct any defective electrical installations after he has been duly
notified to correct such defective work by the Building Inspector. (1979 Code §
9-542)
9-2-4: PERMIT FEES:
The electrical permit fees applicable in the City for use under the Electrical
Code shall be in such amount as established by the City Council. (1979 Code §
9-543; amd. 1998 Code)
9-2-5: ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Business License Required: No person shall engage in the installation,
alteration, repair or construction of any electrical work, wiring, fixtures,
appliances or equipment inside or outside of any building, except work done for
or on the property of the City, without first securing a business license and
paying the fee therefor as provided in Section
9-2-4 of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-551)
   B.   Notification To Building Inspector: It shall be unlawful for any person
to do or cause to be done any electrical wiring or other electrical
installation in a building or structure within the City without first notifying
the Building Inspector of the kind and nature of such electric wiring or other
electrical installation and the location of the building or structure in which
the same is to be installed. (1979 Code § 9-552)
   C.   Subject To Supervision And Inspection: All electric wiring or other
electrical installations shall be subject to supervision and inspection by the
Building Inspector. It shall be unlawful for any person to do or cause to be
done any electrical wiring or electrical installations without first obtaining
the permit required by Section
9-2-3 of this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-553)
   D.   Unlawful Installation:
      1.   Disconnection; Seal: If the Building Inspector shall find any part
of any electric light or power wiring, appliances, apparatus or fixtures in or
upon any building in the City to have been installed without permit, or
installed not in accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code or to be
dangerous to life or property, the Inspector shall have the right and power to
disconnect such defective work, fixtures, appliances or apparatus and place a
seal upon the same, and shall at the same time give written notice of such
disconnection to the owner or occupant of the building.
      2.   Removal Of Seal: After such disconnected wiring, fixtures,
appliances or apparatus have been put in the condition required by this
Chapter, the seal so placed shall be removed by order of the Inspector. (1979
Code § 9-554)
9-2-6: INSPECTION:
   A.   Notification; Issuance Of Certificate: Upon completion of the
installation of any electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus in or
on any building, it shall be the duty of the person doing the work to notify
the Building Inspector, who shall cause the same to be inspected and, if
approved, to issue a certificate of inspection which shall contain the date of
such inspection and a statement that the installation is approved. (1979 Code §
9-555)
   B.   Unlawful To Connect Current Without Certificate: It shall be unlawful
for any person to turn on or connect the current with such installation until
such certificate shall be issued and it shall also be unlawful to make any
change, alteration or extension in or to the installation of any electrical
wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus in or on any building after
inspection without notifying the Building Inspector and securing a permit to do
so. (1979 Code § 9-555; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Exception: The requirement of permits, inspection and supervision shall
not apply to minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches,
replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and
repairing drop cords, and wiring for appliances and devices operating at less
than 25 volts. (1979 Code § 9-555)
9-2-7: ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
   A.   Declared Nuisance: Electrical installations for signs, equipment or
other facilities which create electrical disturbances that cause interference
with normal radio or television reception beyond the immediate vicinity of such
electrical installations are hereby declared to be a nuisance. The owners or
operators thereof shall so install and maintain such installations as to avoid
or eliminate such interference, using all known means and devices for such
purpose, such as proper grounding, connections, condensers, resistors and live
chokes.
   B.   Abatement: The Building Inspector shall withhold or withdraw approval
of any electrical installation causing the above disturbance, and is hereby
authorized to take all steps necessary for the abatement of such conditions.
(1979 Code § 9-544)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Plumbing Code Adopted
9-3-2: Scope
9-3-3: Building Inspector
9-3-4: Permits
9-3-5: Permit Fees
9-3-6: Reinspection Charges
9-3-7: Allowance For Exception
9-3-8: Right Of Entry
9-3-9: Interest In Sale Of Equipment Prohibited
9-3-10: Power To Condemn
9-3-11: Penalty
9-3-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the uniform building codes and standards currently in
effect and also adopts any future regulations or changes which may occur as
future standards are approved and passed on by the state of Utah department of
commerce and professional licensing 1 . (Res. 12-13-94-1, 12-13-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 58-56-4.
9-3-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to, but not be limited to, all new
construction, relocated buildings and to any installation, alteration, repair
or reconstruction of a plumbing system within the city, except as otherwise
provided for in this chapter. (1979 Code § 9-562)
9-3-3: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Created: (Rep. by Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
   B.   Duties: The building inspector shall issue permits to properly
licensed, bonded and registered persons. Licensing should be for work to be
done within the scope of this chapter. The building inspector: (1979 Code § 9-
563; amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   Shall order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to
enforce compliance with all provisions of the plumbing code.
      2.   Shall investigate any construction or work regulated by this chapter
and issue such notices and orders as are necessary to prevent or correct
dangerous or unsanitary conditions.
      3.   May recommend the revocation of any license to the state department
of business regulation for cause and report to the department of business
regulation all violations of this chapter by journeymen, apprentices or
contractors. (1979 Code § 9-563)
9-3-4: PERMITS:
   A.   Required; Application: No plumbing shall be installed, nor additions or
alterations made in existing plumbing, except as provided in subsection C of
this section, without first obtaining a permit. Application for such permits
shall be in writing to the city recorder and shall describe the nature of the
work to be done and affirm that the plumbing will conform to the plumbing code.
No permit shall be issued to any applicant during the time that he shall fail
to correct any defective plumbing installed by him after he has been notified
in writing by the building inspector of the defective work. (1979 Code § 9-568;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Homeowner's Permit: Any permit required by this chapter may be issued
to any person to do any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this chapter in
a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the
usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings, in
the event that any such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and
accessory buildings and quarters and that the same are occupied by or designed
to be occupied by the owner; and further provided, that the owner shall furnish
the building inspector with a complete layout drawing of the proposed work,
satisfies the building inspector that he has a working knowledge of the
requirements contained in this chapter, pays the necessary fees and calls for
all inspections required by this chapter. (1979 Code § 9-573; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   Repairs which involve only the working parts of a faucet or valve,
the clearance of stoppages, the repairing of leaks or the replacement of
defective faucets or valves may be made without a permit; provided, that the
permits shall be procured to replace fixtures, traps, soil, waste and vent
pipes, unless waived by the Building Inspector. (1979 Code § 9-572; amd. 1998
Code)
      2.   Any person regularly employed by an owner or lessee of property, or
his agents, for the sole purpose of operating and maintaining such property and
to make minor repairs thereof, and any owner or lessee of property, shall be
exempt from the provisions of this Chapter when doing work for which permits
are not required. (1979 Code § 9-572)
   D.   Denial: The Building Inspector may refuse to issue permits for any
plumbing work to any person who has had a permit revoked in accordance with
this Chapter during such time as such person fails to perform plumbing work in
conformance with this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-571; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Expiration: Every permit issued by the Building Inspector shall expire
and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within sixty (60) days from the date such permit is issued, or if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work
is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or more. (1979 Code
§ 9-570; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Revocation: The Building Inspector may revoke any permit when the
person to whom the permit is issued fails, neglects or refuses to do the work
thereunder in conformance with this Chapter, or when the permit is issued in
error. (1979 Code § 9-569; amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-5: PERMIT FEES:
Before a permit shall be issued, permit fees in the amount as established by
table 1-1 of the Uniform Building Code shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
(1979 Code § 9-574; amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-6: REINSPECTION CHARGES:
After notice that any plumbing work is ready for inspection, if the Building
Inspector calls at the place designated to make such inspection and finds the
work not ready for inspection, he shall charge an additional fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00) (see table 1-1 in Uniform Building Code) for each additional
inspection required, except that the City Council may from time to time change
the inspection fee required in this Section by resolution. (1979 Code § 9-575;
amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-7: ALLOWANCE FOR EXCEPTION:
Where structural conditions impose extreme difficulty in fully complying with
the plumbing regulations of this Chapter, any aggrieved party may apply in
writing to the Building Inspector for special permission to deviate from the
regulations. If, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, such deviation is
reasonable and does not create an unsanitary or unsafe condition, he shall
recommend to the City Council that the request for deviation be approved or
disapproved, or that approval is subject to such conditions as the City Council
may require. The City Council, on review, may approve or disapprove the
application or vary the conditions on which approval is granted. (1979 Code §
9-564; amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-8: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Building Inspector shall have the right of entry within reasonable hours to
any building or premises for the purpose of inspection or to investigate any
work or conditions governed by this Chapter. (1979 Code § 9-565; amd. 1998
Code)
9-3-9: INTEREST IN SALE OF EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED:
The Building Inspector and his assistants shall not in any way engage in the
sale or installation of plumbing equipment upon which they are required to make
inspection hereunder. (1979 Code § 9-567; amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-10: POWER TO CONDEMN:
   A.   Granted; Penalty: The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to condemn
and order repaired, removed, replaced or changed any plumbing found in any
unsanitary condition or not in accordance with this Chapter. Failure to comply
with the order within a reasonable time is an infraction, subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code § 9-566; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Refusal To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or
occupant of any building or premises to fail, neglect or refuse to repair,
remove, replace or change within ten (10) days after written notice to do so
from the Building Inspector, any plumbing condemned by such Inspector;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any occupant not responsible
for the installation or repair of the condemned plumbing. (1979 Code § 9-576;
amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-11: PENALTY:
   A.   Homeowner, Building Owner Or Manager: The violation of any provision of
this Chapter by any homeowner, building owner or manager of any building,
apartment, hotel, motel or other structure shall be an infraction, subject to
penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Person Receiving Payment: The violation of any provision of this
Chapter by any person who receives payment or anything of value for performing
such work shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code § 9-577; amd. 1998 Code)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title, Intent And Purpose
10-1-2: Declaration
10-1-3: Interpretation
10-1-4: Conflict
10-1-5: Responsibility For Violations
10-1-6: Penalty
10-1-1: TITLE, INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title shall be known as, and shall be entitled THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF
FERRON CITY, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded. It is the intent and
purpose of the City Council to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of
the City by guiding development within the City in accordance with a
Comprehensive Plan which has been designed:
   A.   To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development in the area.
   B.   To promote safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards and other
dangers.
   C.   To promote sanitation and health of the inhabitants.
   D.   To discourage undue scattering of population and unnecessary
expenditures of the monies for excessive streets, water and sewer lines and
other public requirements.
   E.   To stabilize and improve property values.
   F.   To protect the residents from objectionable noise, odor, dust, fumes
and other deleterious substances or conditions.
   G.   To promote a more attractive and wholesome environment. It is also the
intent and purpose of the City Council that the regulations and restrictions as
set forth in this Title shall be so interpreted and construed as to further the
purposes of this Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-1-2: DECLARATION:
In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof and regulations and
restrictions applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration
was given, among other things, to the suitability of the land for particular
uses and to the character of the zone, with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying this Title, the provisions thereof shall be held
to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Except as specifically herein
provided, it is not intended by the adoption of the Ordinance codified herein
to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any
existing provisions of law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to
law relating to the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration
or enlargement of any building or improvement; nor is it intended by this Title
to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other
agreement between parties; provided however, that in cases in which this Title
imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other existing
provisions of law or ordinance, then in such case the provisions of this Title
shall control. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-1-4: CONFLICT:
Whenever regulations in this Title require higher standards than are required
in other ordinances or laws, the provisions of this Title shall govern.
Whenever regulations of other ordinances or laws require higher standards than
the provisions of this Title, then said other ordinances or laws shall govern.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of
this Title are hereby repealed. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-1-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders
and other persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the
erection, altering, changing or remodeling of any building or structure to see
that a proper permit has been granted before such work is begun. Any such
architect, builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any such
work without a permit having been issued is in conflict with the requirements
of this title and shall be deemed guilty of violation of this title in the same
manner and to the same extent that the owner of the premises or the persons for
whom the use is established, or for whom such buildings are erected or altered,
and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for violation. (Ord. 4-
8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall erect, construct or reconstruct any building which
involves structural alterations or which involves an increase in floor area
without first obtaining a zoning clearance from the city and a permit therefor
from the building inspector shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any person who shall change the use of any building or
other structure or use of any land within the city in violation of the
provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Intent
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council to define certain words and phrases as a
means of facilitating understanding of terms which may not be universally
understood in the sense that the city council intends that they should be
understood. (Ord. 2006-1, 4-13-2006)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AGRICULTURE: The growing of soil crops in the customary manner in the open or
in an enclosed greenhouse structure. It shall include livestock raising
activities.
APARTMENT HOUSE (MULTIPLE DWELLING): Any building or portion thereof which is
designed, built, rented or leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is
occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the premises.
APPROVED WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: The Ferron City water system.
BASE FLOOD, 100-YEAR FLOOD: The flood with a level of flow having a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE: A building containing not more than one kitchen,
where for compensation, meals are provided pursuant to previous arrangements on
a daily, weekly or monthly basis as distinguished from a motel, cafe or rooming
house.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building.
BUILDING LINE: A line designating the minimum distance which buildings must set
back from a street or lot line.
BUILDING, MAIN: One or more of the principal buildings upon a lot.
CARPORT: A structure not completely enclosed by walls for the shelter of
automobiles.
CLINIC: A building used for the diagnosis and treatment of ill, infirm and
injured persons, but which building does not provide board, room or regular
hospital care and services.
CLUB: A building used, occupied and operated by an organized association of
persons for social, fraternal, religious or patriotic purposes, whose
activities are confined to the members and their guests, but shall not include
any organization, group or association, the principal activity of which is to
render a service usually and ordinarily carried on as a business.
COMMON AREA: An area designed to serve two (2) or more dwelling units or
separate uses with convenient access to the area.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A coordinated plan, which has been prepared and adopted for
the purpose of guiding development, including, but not limited to, a plan or
plans of land use, circulation, housing and public facilities and grounds.
CONDITIONAL USE: Generally, a use which requires approval of the planning
commission, board of adjustment or city council before the zoning administrator
may issue a permit therefor. Uses which require individual consideration of
surrounding conditions and circumstances to carry out the intent and purpose of
the land use plan. A use for which a conditional use permit is required by this
title.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definition of Rest Home, Nursing Home, Convalescent
Home.
CONVENTIONAL ("STICK BUILT") CONSTRUCTION: A dwelling which is constructed in
compliance with the provisions of the building, mechanical, electrical and
plumbing codes adopted by the state of Utah.
CURB CUT: A cut in the curb line for the passage of vehicles.
DENSITY: Density of population measured by the number of dwelling units per
acre of land.
DRIVE-IN RETAIL: Any form of merchandising, serving or dispensing of goods in
which the customer is serviced while in his automobile.
DWELLING: A building or other structure intended, whether permanently or
temporarily, for human habitation and having at least eight hundred forty (840)
square feet of living area.
DWELLING, BACHELOR: A dwelling unit which is occupied by four (4) or more
nonrelated adults.
DWELLING, CARETAKER: A dwelling which is occupied by a person whose function is
to watch or take care of a business or industry which is located on the same
premises as the dwelling.
DWELLING, CONVENTIONAL: A dwelling which is constructed in compliance with the
provisions of the uniform building code, uniform mechanical code, national
electrical code and state plumbing code as adopted by the city.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building containing three (3) or more separate
dwelling units, each of which is designed for occupation by one family.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building containing one dwelling unit which is designed
for or occupied by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing two (2) separate dwelling units,
each of which is designed for or occupied by one family.
DWELLING UNITS: One or more rooms in a building designated for living purposes
having one kitchen or set of cooking facilities and an independent water closet
and bathing facilities.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together in a single dwelling unit and maintaining a common
household. A family may include two (2), but not more than two (2) nonrelated
individuals, a fraternity, club or institutional group.
FENCE, SIGHT OBSCURING: A fence having a height of at least six feet (6') above
grade which permits vision through not more than ten percent (10%) of each
square foot more than eight inches (8") aboveground.
FINAL PLAT, RECORD OF SURVEY MAP: A plat or plats of surveyed land within a
subdivision or other large scale development, which has been prepared in
accordance with applicable city standards and/or state statutes for the
purposes of recording in the office of the county recorder.
FLOOR AREA: The floor area of a building is the sum of the areas of several
floors of the building, including basements, mezzanines and penthouses, of
headroom height, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of
walls separating buildings. The floor area does not include unoccupied features
such as pipe trenches, exterior terraces or steps, chimneys, roof overhangs,
etc.
FRACTIONAL NUMBERS OR MEASUREMENTS: In determining the requirements of this
title, whenever a fraction of a number or a unit is one-half (1/2) or more, and
whenever a fraction of a number or a unit resulting from a computation is one-
half (1/2) or more, said fraction shall be considered as a whole number or a
unit, where the fraction is less than one-half (1/2), said fraction shall not
be included in determining requirements.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or part thereof designed for the parking or
temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
GRADE: A. For buildings fronting one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk
or centerline of street, whichever is higher, at right angles to the midpoint
of the fronting wall.
   B.   For buildings fronting more than one street, the average of the
elevations of the sidewalk or centerline of street, at right angles to the
midpoint of the fronting walls.
   C.   For buildings having no wall fronting the street, the average level of
the sidewalk or centerline of surrounding streets, whichever is higher.
HUD (FEDERAL HOUSING) CODE: The federal manufactured housing construction and
safety standards act of 1974.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance from the grade to top of the building
walls. Where the building walls vary in height along a side, the height of the
building shall be determined by multiplying the length of each section of said
wall by its height and dividing the sum derived therefrom by the total length
of said wall.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation conducted within a dwelling and carried on by
persons residing in the dwelling.
JUNKYARD: A place where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled or stored,
including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and
places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building or where salvaged
materials are kept incidental to manufacturing operations conducted on the
premises.
KENNEL: Land or buildings used in the keeping of four (4) or more dogs over six
(6) months old.
LAND USE PLAN: A plan adopted and maintained by the city council which shows
how the land should be used; an element of the master plan.
LANDSCAPE PLAN, PLANTING PLAN: A plan showing the location and dimensions of
plants, irrigation equipment, curbs and other protective features around the
edge of the planting beds and the location and species of plants to be planted.
LANDSCAPING: The use and integration of a combination of planted trees, shrubs,
vines, ground covers, lawns, rocks, fountains, pools, artworks, screens, walls,
fences, benches or surfaced walkways set into an aesthetically pleasing
arrangement as determined by the planning commission or their authorized
representatives. However, the use of structures or surfaced walkways, alone, in
the absence of planted trees, lawns, etc., shall not meet the requirements of
this title.
LIVESTOCK CORRAL: A place or pen where livestock are kept on a seasonal basis
as part of an agricultural enterprise or operation as distinguished from a
livestock feed yard.
LIVING OPEN SPACE: That portion of the yards on a zoning lot which is not used
by automotive vehicles, but reserved for outdoor living space, recreational
space and landscaping.
LODGING HOUSE: See definition of Boarding House, Lodging House.
LOT: A single parcel or tract of land.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at a junction of two (2) public streets or situated
on a curved street or way, the radius of which is thirty five feet (35') or
less and where the angle formed by the intersection of the tangent is one
hundred five degrees (105°) or less.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot designated on a subdivision plat or deed, duly recorded
pursuant to statute in the county recorder's office. A lot of record may or may
not coincide with a zoning lot.
LOT, ZONING: A parcel of land which:
   A.   Complies with all existing area frontage, width and supplementary
requirements of the zone in which it is located.
   B.   Has frontage on: 1) a city street that has been accepted in accordance
with city standards and is in use by the public; or 2) a private right of way
within an approved large scale development.
   C.   Is shown as a separate lot in an approved subdivision plat or large
scale development plan, which plat or plan has been approved in accordance with
the applicable ordinances or which is exempted from compliance with said
ordinances.
LOW IMPACT BUSINESS: A business that does not have an external impact greater
than the impact of normal residential use. There shall not be more than five
(5) employees at the physical location at one time. There will be no unusual
traffic (delivery trucks, commercial vehicles, heavy equipment, client
vehicles, etc.) permitted either on or off site which are not customarily
observed in residential use. There will be no unusual amounts of waste, dust,
odors, noise and other contamination generated at the location.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A manufactured home is a transportable structure in one or
more modules which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with a permanent foundation and footings when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems
contained therein. For the purposes of this title, the definition of a
manufactured home shall be construed to include mobile homes that are at least
eight hundred forty (840) square feet and consists of one or more modules and
is attached permanently to an approved foundation and footing, provided the
units are manufactured after June of 1976, and stamped approved by HUD and
contains the federal insignia proof of approval on display and visibly
accessible.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK: An area or tract of land used to accommodate
two (2) or more manufactured and/or mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME: A dwelling unit designed to be transported, after fabrication, on
its own wheels or on detachable wheels and which is ready for occupancy as an
independent dwelling unit, except for connection to utilities and/or location
on a foundation. The term "mobile home" shall include homes which were
manufactured elsewhere on or before June of 1976, and moved into an area for
use as permanent housing.
MODULAR UNIT: A dwelling that is assembled at the building site from
manufactured sections or modules which meet the construction standards for
conventional construction, specifically those adopted by the Utah uniform
building code commission pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-4.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building, structure or portion thereof, which does
not conform to the regulations of this title applicable to the zone or district
in which such building is situated but which was in existence on the effective
date hereof.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of premises which does not conform to the regulations
of this title, but which was in existence on the effective date hereof.
NURSERY, DAYCARE: A home or building in which children are tended or kept for
compensation. Does not include overnight accommodations for such children as
does a foster home or orphanage.
PARKING SPACE: Space within a building or parking area, exclusive of driveways,
ramps, columns, office and working area, for the parking of a motor vehicle,
not less than twenty feet (20') in length and not less than eight and five-
tenths feet (8.5') in width.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Vehicles which include camp trailers (including fifth
wheel camp trailers), campers and motor homes and are not usually designed or
intended to be a permanent dwelling.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COURT: An area or tract of land used to accommodate two
(2) or more recreational vehicles.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building or other structure which is
incidental to and which is constructed on the same zoning lot as the dwelling
for the exclusive use of the residents of such dwelling, including, but not
limited to, a detached garage or carport for not more than three (3)
automobiles, swimming pools, pergolas, tennis courts and private greenhouses.
REST HOME, NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME: A building for the care and keeping
of elderly or infirm people afflicted with infirmities or chronic illness.
SALVAGE YARD: See definition of Junkyard.
SETBACK: The shortest distance between the property line and the foundation
wall or main frame of the building.
SIGN: Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of
bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including
a flag pole.
SIGN, ACCESSORY: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted on the premises.
SIGN, AREA OF: The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background
material whether painted or applied. Where a sign consists of individual
letters attached to or painted on a building or wall or window, the area of the
sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses
all the letters or symbols.
SIGN, NONACCESSORY BILLBOARD: A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than
on the premises, and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is not specifically permitted in
a zone, such as an industrial use in a residential zone, but which is permitted
as a special exception to this title, subject to compliance with conditions
prescribed by the board of adjustment.
STREET, MAJOR: One of the principal thoroughfares, as shown or designated on
the master street plan.
STREET, MINOR: Any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to
property, which street is not shown on the master street plan, as a principal
thoroughfare.
VARIANCE: A waiver of specific regulations of this title granted by the board
of adjustment in accordance with the provisions set forth in this title for the
purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances
applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same zone.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied or unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: The minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the
front line of the building or any projection thereof, excluding nonenclosed
steps. On a corner lot, the front yard may be applied to either street.
YARD, REAR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building, measured
from the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear lot line,
and extending for the entire width of the lot. In case of a corner lot where
the building facade faces on the side street, the rear yard may be established
from the side of the house to the side property line.
YARD, REQUIRED: The open space around buildings which is required by the terms
of this title.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd.
Res. 2-25-97-2, 2-25-1997; 1998 Code; Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004; Ord. 2006-1, 4-
13-2006; Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011; Ord. 2019-2, 10-10-2019)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Building Permits
10-3-2: Licenses
10-3-3: Construction Defined
10-3-4: Zoning Administrator
10-3-5: Board Of Adjustment
10-3-1: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Required; Application: No person shall commence to construct, alter or
move a building or structure, or to make a change in use of any land within the
territory shown on the zone map which has been adopted as a part of this title
without first submitting an application and obtaining a permit therefor from
the zoning administrator or other authorized officer; provided however, that
permits for the moving of structures shall be granted only in compliance with
the requirements as set forth in section
10-8-7 of this title. Said permit shall also be required for the moving and/or
improvement of mobile homes, demountable homes, manufactured homes and similar
movable structures, except when being moved from outside the city into an
approved manufactured home park. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-
16-2004)
   B.   Plans Required: All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by plans which have been drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing
buildings, and, as required, the location and layout of off street parking and
a planting plan showing how the premises will be landscaped. A careful record
of said application and plans shall be kept in the office of the building
inspector for a period of five (5) years from the date of receipt thereof.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
   C.   Compliance: From the time of the effective date hereof, permits shall
not be granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure
or for the moving of a building or structure onto a lot or for the change in
use of any land, building or structure, if such construction, alteration,
moving or change in use would be a violation of any provision of this title,
nor shall any sewer or water service line or electric utilities be installed to
serve the premises if such use would be in violation of this title. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986)
10-3-2: LICENSES:
No license shall be issued by an official or employee vested with the duty and
authority to issue licenses which would not be in conformance with the
provisions of this title. Any license so issued shall be null and void. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-3-3: CONSTRUCTION DEFINED:
For the purpose of the above provision, "construction" and "alteration" shall
be defined as the erection, reconstruction, remodeling or razing of any
structure to the extent of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in replaceable value.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-3-4: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointed: The zoning administrator appointed under the direction of
the mayor and council is hereby designated to act in conjunction with the
building inspector, who shall be charged with the administration and
enforcement of this title. The city council may also appoint other officers to
assist in the administration and enforcement of this title.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to approve zoning
clearance applications prior to submission to the building inspector. He shall
enforce all of the provisions of this title, entering actions in the courts,
when necessary and upon approval from the city council; and his failure to do
so shall not legalize any act in violation of such provisions.
      2.   Upon appeal to the board of adjustments or acting appeal authority
of any matters on which said board is required to pass, the zoning
administrator shall forthwith transmit all papers, records and other pertinent
data pertaining to the appeal to the board of adjustment or acting appeal
authority as required by the terms of this title. The zoning administrator
shall also refer matters to the planning commission and city council as set
forth in this title. (Ord. 2010-1, 1-28-2010)
10-3-5: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 1 :
   A.   Created, Members, Terms: There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment
which shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed by the City
Council for a term of five (5) years; provided, that the terms of the members
of the first Board so appointed shall be such that the term of one member shall
expire each year. One member but not more than one member of the Planning
Commission shall be a member of the Board of Adjustment. Any member may be
removed for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a public
hearing, if such public hearing is requested. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose term has not been completed.
   B.   Organization, Meetings, Records: The Board of Adjustment shall organize
and elect a chairperson and adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of
this Title. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairperson
and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairperson or, in his
absence, the acting chairperson, shall conduct all meetings and may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such facts, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official acts, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record. Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed
in the conduct of meetings wherever applicable.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The Board of Adjustment shall have judicial power to
interpret the provisions of this Title. It shall also have administrative
duties to grant variances and special exceptions or conditional use permits, as
follows:
      1.   Interpret Ordinance And Map:
         a.   Intent: It is the intent of this provision to provide a way
whereby applicants who think that the Zoning Administrator is in error or does
not interpret the provision of the Zoning Title correctly, to obtain a relief
from such error in an expeditious and inexpensive manner without having to
resort to the courts.
         b.   Duty To Interpret: The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or refusal made in the enforcement of this Title. The
Board of Adjustment shall also interpret the Zone Map and boundaries thereof in
cases of dispute or disagreement.
      2.   Grant Variances: The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal,
variances from the terms of this Title pertaining to area and width of lot,
size of yards and height and size of buildings, where owing to special
conditions peculiar to the property, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this Title would result in a hardship which is unnecessary in carrying out the
intent of this Title. Before any variance may be granted, however, it must be
shown that:
         a.   The variance will not substantially affect the Comprehensive Plan
of zoning and that adherence to the strict letter of this Title will cause
difficulties and hardships upon the petitioners, which are unnecessary in order
to carry out the purposes of this Title.
         b.   Special circumstances attach to the property covered by the
application that do not apply to other property in the same zone.
         c.   That because of said special circumstances, property covered by
the application is deprived of privileges possessed by other properties in the
same zone; and that the granting of the variance is essential to the enjoyment
of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone.
         d.   That the difficulties and hardships were not created by any act
of the appellant subsequent to the effective date of the regulation appealed
from.
      3.   Grant Certain Special Exceptions Or Conditional Uses:
         a.   Intent: There are certain uses which are not permitted within
particular zones unless they are made to comply with conditions which are
compatible with other uses in the same zone. It is the intent of this provision
to authorize the Board of Adjustment to use its discretion in prescribing these
conditions. However, the Board of Adjustment may not authorize a conditional
use unless such use is specifically permitted by the terms of this Title.
         b.   Duty To Prescribe Conditions: The Board of Adjustment shall hear
and decide requests for "special exceptions", but only when authorized by the
terms of this Title to do so. In deciding whether or not to grant a special
exception, the Board shall be guided by the conditions set forth in this Title
with respect thereto, which conditions shall be deemed to be the minimum
standards which must be complied with.
      4.   Attach Reasonable Conditions: The Board of Adjustment may attach
reasonable conditions or requirements to the grant of a variance, special
exception or conditional use which the petitioner must comply with as a
condition of the grant or approval. A time limit of one year shall be attached
to the exercise or nonexercise of any grant unless specifically extended by
action of the Board. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
      5.   Reverse Or Affirm Zoning Administrator: In performing the duties and
powers as set forth herein, the Board of Adjustment is hereby empowered to
reverse or affirm wholly or partly or modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination of the Zoning Administrator and may make such order or
requirement as ought to be made; provided however, that in interpreting and
applying the provisions of this Title, the requirements contained herein shall
be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the purpose set forth. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Authority Limited: The powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment are
limited to judicial and administrative matters as set forth in this Title. The
Board of Adjustment shall not have the authority to amend this Title, nor to
correct what it may consider to be an unwise requirement. Nevertheless, the
Board of Adjustment shall have powers and duties as set forth in this Title and
within the limitations and intent of the provisions of this Title, shall
perform its duties and shall have the power to perform those acts as herein set
forth.
   E.   Vote: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be
necessary to decide upon any matter upon which it is required to pass. (Ord. 4-
8-86, 4-8-1986)
   F.   Appearances Before Board:
      1.   Application; Fee: Any citizen or person, or any officer of a City
department may appeal to the Board of Adjustment by filing a request in writing
with the Zoning Administrator and by paying a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00), provided such appeal is made within thirty (30) days from the grant
or refusal of a building permit by the Zoning Administrator. The request to
appear before the Board of Adjustment shall be made on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Procedure: Upon receipt of the application, the Zoning Administrator
shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Board of Adjustment
shall review the application and shall return the same to the Zoning
Administrator with its decision pertaining thereto within thirty (30) days.
Failure to return said application within thirty (30) days shall constitute
approval. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the
District Court on application and notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due
cause shown.
      3.   Hearing: The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof by posting in three (3)
public places and by mail to adjacent property owners, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Any party may appear at the hearing, in person or by
agent or by attorney.
      4.   Action Of The Board: The Board of Adjustment shall make
determinations in harmony with the provisions of this Title and shall notify
the Zoning Administrator of the action taken.
      5.   Recourse From Decision: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment may have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom
in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided, that petition for such relief
is presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of such
decision to the office of the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 10-9-701 et seq.
CHAPTER 4
SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Intent
10-4-2: Yards
10-4-3: Every Dwelling On Zoning Lot
10-4-4: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space Prohibited
10-4-5: Accessory Buildings Prohibited As Living Quarters
10-4-6: Storage Prohibited In Residential Zones
10-4-7: Height Regulations
10-4-8: Location Of Auxiliary Buildings
10-4-9: Drainage
10-4-10: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
10-4-11: Effect Of Street Plan
10-4-12: Exception To Front And Side Setback
10-4-13: Concessions In Public Parks And Playgrounds
10-4-14: Sewage Disposal
10-4-15: Location Of Gasoline Pumps; Lot Size
10-4-16: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-4-17: Motor Vehicle Access
10-4-18: Landscaping
10-4-19: Signs
10-4-20: Pollution Prevention
10-4-21: Recreational Vehicles, Mobile Homes And Manufactured Homes
10-4-22: Garage/Yard Sales
10-4-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to accumulate under one heading, regulations
which apply to two (2) or more zones, rather than to repeat them several times.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-2: YARDS:
   A.   Space For One Building Only: No required yard or other open space
around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any
building, which is needed to comply with the provisions of this title, shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall
any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as
providing the yard or open space on the lot whereon a building is to be erected
or established.
   B.   Unobstructed; Exceptions: Every part of a required yard shall be open
to the sky and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and except
for ordinary and customary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and
other ornamental features and unenclosed steps and unwalled stoops, porches and
carports, which may project up to three feet (3') into a required yard. No
projection into a required court which is provided in connection with a court
apartment shall be constructed except for customary sills, belt courses and
cornices which may extend into a court not more than sixteen inches (16").
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-3: EVERY DWELLING ON ZONING LOT:
Only one building which contains a dwelling shall be located and maintained on
a "zoning lot", as defined in this title, except for dwellings within a
manufactured home park or other large scale development. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-
1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-4-4: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE PROHIBITED:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart
from such lot or building unless other space so complying is provided. (Ord. 4-
8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-5: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS PROHIBITED AS LIVING QUARTERS:
Living and sleeping quarters in any building other than the main residential
building is prohibited. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-6: STORAGE PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles: The storage and/or continuous parking of trucks
having a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) tons or greater, and
construction equipment such as bulldozers, graders, compressors, etc., shall
not be permitted in any residential zone; provided, that construction equipment
may be stored on a lot during construction of a building thereon, but not to
exceed one year.
   B.   Junk And Debris: No yard or other open space surrounding an existing
building in any agricultural or residential zone, or which is hereafter
provided around any building in any agricultural or residential zone, shall be
used for the storage of junk, debris or obsolete vehicles; and no land shall be
used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-4-7: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public Buildings: Public buildings and churches may be erected to any
height, provided the building is set back from required building setback lines
a distance of at least one foot (1') for each additional foot of building
height above the maximum height otherwise permitted in the zone in which the
building is located.
   B.   Dwellings and Fences: Minimum: No dwelling shall be erected which has a
ceiling height of less than seven feet six inches (7'6") or one story above
grade, whichever is greater. No fence or wall shall be constructed higher than
four feet (4') above the ground in any required front or side yard that fronts
on a street. The Planning Commission may approve special situations on written
request, taking public safety into consideration. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd.
Ord. 12-8-2021)
10-4-8: LOCATION OF AUXILIARY BUILDINGS:
See subsection 10-12-5A of this title. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004)
10-4-9: DRAINAGE:
Surface water from rooftops, lots or irrigation ditches shall not be allowed to
drain onto adjacent lots or streets. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-10: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction which will obscure the
view of automobile drivers shall be placed on any corner lot within a
triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them
at points of forty five feet (45') from the intersection of the street lines.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-11: EFFECT OF STREET PLAN:
Wherever a front or side yard is required for a building, which building abuts
on a proposed street which has not been constructed, but which has been
designated by the planning commission as a future street, the depth of such
front or side yard shall be measured from the planned street lines. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-12: EXCEPTION TO FRONT AND SIDE SETBACK:
The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two (2) existing
dwellings in any residential zone may be the same as the average for said two
(2) existing dwellings, provided the existing dwellings are on the same side of
the street and are located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each other.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-13: CONCESSIONS IN PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS:
Concessions, including, but not limited to, amusement devices, recreational
buildings and refreshment stands, shall be permitted on a public park or
playground when approved by the city council. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-14: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Where domestic sewage disposal facilities are used which are not connected to a
public sewer, approval of such facilities shall be obtained from the county
health department before a building permit shall be issued therefor. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-4-15: LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS; LOT SIZE:
All gasoline service station pumps shall be set back at least twenty feet (20')
from all property lines. Lots from which gasoline is dispensed to customers at
retail shall be not less than seventy five feet by one hundred feet (75' x
100') in size. Canopies over the pump islands may extend within five feet (5')
to the property lines. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-4-16: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Off Street Parking: Adequate off street parking and loading shall be
provided. The number of spaces, size of spaces and the standards relating to
access, circulation, lighting location, control and design shall be in
accordance with city standards.
   B.   Off Street Loading: Off street loading and unloading space shall be
provided on the same lot for every building used for manufacturing, storage,
warehousing, goods display, department store, grocery, hotel, hospital,
mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other use similarly involving the receipt or
distribution by vehicle of materials or merchandise. Such space, unless
otherwise adequately provided, shall include a minimum ten foot by twenty five
foot (10' x 25') loading space with a minimum fourteen foot (14') height
clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor space in the
building or fraction thereof. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-17: MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS:
Access to all lots and parcels of land having a frontage on a public street
shall be controlled as follows:
   A.   Number Of Driveways: Access shall be by not more than two (2) driveways
from any one street, except as may be permitted by the board of adjustment,
when it can be shown that additional driveways will promote traffic safety.
   B.   Distance Between: Driveways shall be not closer to each other than
twenty feet (20').
   C.   Width: Each driveway shall be not more than thirty feet (30') in width
in any commercial or industrial zone measured at right angle to the centerline
of the driveway. In residential zones, driveways shall be not more than twenty
feet (20') in width except when approved for large scale developments.
   D.   Corner Lots: On corner lots, no driveways shall be closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the point of intersection of the front property line with the
side property line which abuts upon a street.
   E.   Curb Or Fence: Where there is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalk,
a curb or fence may be required by the city. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-18: LANDSCAPING:
Front yards and side yards of all dwellings which front on public streets must
be landscaped, except that up to twenty five percent (25%) of the front yard or
side yard which faces on a public street may be devoted to driveways and off
street parking. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-19: SIGNS:
Advertising signs shall be regulated as follows:
   A.   Residential Zones: No advertising signs of any kind shall be allowed in
any residential zone, except signs pertaining to the sale or lease of
residential property and except for name plates or signs indicating the
existence of an office or a professional person and a home occupation.
   B.   Setback: All advertising signs shall be set back from public streets a
distance at least equal to the distance that buildings are required to be set
back within the zone in which said signs are located.
   C.   Screening Requirements: Except in those zones where nonaccessory signs
are permitted, all signs shall display thereon only information pertaining to
products or services sold on the premises.
   D.   Permit Required: Regardless of cost, no sign shall be erected or placed
within the city, without first making application for and obtaining a building
permit therefor, except temporary window and political posters, temporary signs
pertaining to the sale of adjacent property and nameplates or identification
signs indicating the existence of an approved home occupation or professional
office. In addition to the requirements of this title, all signs located within
six hundred sixty feet (660') of the right of way line of a federally
designated highway shall conform to the standards and regulations for such
signs established by the state. Any approval of permits required by said
regulations shall be in addition to the building permit hereinabove required
and construction or placement of a sign shall not be commenced until all
approvals and permits have been obtained. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-20: POLLUTION PREVENTION:
Any use which emits or discharges gases, fumes, dust, glare, noise or other
pollutants into the atmosphere in amounts which exceed the standards as
prescribed by the Utah state air conservation board or the board of health, and
any use which emits or discharges liquids or solid material onto the soil or
water in amounts which result in pollutants entering ground water in amounts
exceeding the standards prescribed by the Utah state water pollution control
board or the board of health, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-4-21: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   Recreational Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to place any recreational
vehicle on any lot or parcel of land in the area covered by the zoning map and
to use the same for human habitation, except when located in a licensed
recreational vehicle court or licensed mobile home park.
   B.   Mobile Homes: It shall be unlawful to place any mobile home on any lot
or parcel of land in the area covered by the zoning map except as a direct
replacement for a mobile home previously occupying that same lot or parcel.
(Ord. 2010-5, 3-25-2010)
   C.   Manufactured Homes In Manufactured (Mobile) Home Parks: When placed in
a licensed manufactured home park, the home will be installed according to
manufacturer's installation manual specifications or, if a used manufactured
home and an appropriate installation manual is not available, by ANSI standard
A225.1.
   D.   Manufactured Home On Regular Building Lots: It shall be unlawful to
place a manufactured home on any lot or parcel of land in an area covered by
the zoning map and to use the same for human habitation except in compliance
with one or more of the following conditions:
      1.   When temporarily located (not to exceed 1 year) on a lot on which a
building is being constructed and the manufactured home is connected to
approved water and sewer facilities, such connections not to exceed one year.
      2.   When placed in a licensed manufactured home park.
      3.   When placed on a zoning lot that complies with the regulations of
the zone in which the manufactured home is located, provided:
         a.   The manufactured home and site comply with the use, width,
location, height, size of building and special provision requirements for
structures within the zone;
         b.   The manufactured home is independently connected to an approved
water supply and sewage disposal facility;
         c.   The manufactured home is constructed in accordance with the
building code for manufactured homes in effect within the city;
         d.   The manufactured home is placed upon a permanent masonry type
foundation and the masonry type skirt in compliance with: (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-
2004)
            (1)   Manufactured homes placed upon city lots must have permanent
concrete footings and a six inch (6") (or more) concrete or masonry foundation
wall (skirting) that complies with manufacturer's or HUD engineered design and/
or building inspector approval. (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004; amd. Ord. 2010-1, 1-
28-2010)
            (2)   Skirting, masonry type, minimum six inches (6") wide or
approved by the city building inspector.
            (3)   Trailer tongues and other visible means used in transporting
shall be removed;
         e.   That according to the records of the county recorder, the
ownership of the lot and the manufactured home are in the same ownership;
         f.   The manufactured home will be entered upon the tax rolls of Emery
County as real property as evidenced by a letter or other proof from the county
assessor;
         g.   The manufactured home and site comply with the same rules as any
dwelling in that zone, including, but not limited to, width, location, height,
size of dwelling, and special provision requirements for structures within that
zone, consists of one or more modules and is attached permanently to an
approved foundation and footings, provided the unit(s) is/are manufactured
after June 1976, and stamped approved by HUD and contains the federal insignia
proof of approval. (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-4-22: GARAGE/YARD SALES:
The following standards shall apply to all garage/yard sales within the city
limits:
   A.   Frequency: Frequency limited to three (3) times per calendar year.
There shall be no more than three (3) garage/yard sales at one location per
calendar year. The "calendar year" is defined as January 1 through December 31.
Garage/yard sale events must be separated by at least a fourteen (14) day
period.
   B.   Duration Of Sale: A garage/yard sale is permitted for a period no
longer than three (3) consecutive days and provided that the conduct of the
sale does not create a nuisance.
   C.   Location Of Garage/Yard Sale: The garage/yard sales shall be located at
the actual residence or business of the owner of the materials to be sold. In
the occurrence of a neighborhood garage/yard sale event (i.e., 3 to 5 neighbors
pool their belongings into a super garage/yard sale), the materials must be
located at the residence or business of one of the participating sellers.
   D.   Signs For Garage/Yard Sales: Signs shall be no larger than twenty eight
inches by twenty two inches (28" x 22"), and shall not obstruct the view of
regular traffic or cause a nuisance. Signs shall not be placed in the public
right of way or erected any earlier than twenty four (24) hours before the sale
and shall be removed twenty four (24) hours after the sale.
   E.   Punishment: Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of
violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both as allowed by state
law.
      1.   Each day that a violation of this section occurs or is permitted, is
deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-1, 11-12-2015)
CHAPTER 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Zones Established
10-5-2: Official Zone Map
10-5-3: Boundaries Of Zones
10-5-4: Regulations Within Zones
10-5-1: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes of this title, the city is hereby divided
into zones as follows:
RA-1       Residential-agricultural zone
RA-2       Residential-agricultural zone
R-1-10,000 Residential zone
R-1-7500   Residential zone
R-2-7500   Residential zone
R-3-7500   Residential zone
CC-1       Central commercial zone
H-1        Highway commercial zone
SC-1       Planned shopping center zone
I-1        Industrial zone
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2008-2, 3-27-2008)
10-5-2: OFFICIAL ZONE MAP:
   A.   Record: The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on
the official zone map of the city and said map is hereby declared to be an
official record and a part of this title.
   B.   Amendments, Changes: Whenever amendments or changes are made in zone
boundaries, such amendments or changes shall be made on the official zone map
promptly. No amendment or change shall become effective until after it has been
properly noted and attested to on the official zone map.
   C.   Conformance: No changes of any nature shall be made in the official
zone map, except in conformity with the procedure set forth in this title. Any
unauthorized changes of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a
violation of this title and punishable as provided in this title.
   D.   Final Authority: Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the
official zone map which may from time to time be made or published, the
official zone map, which shall be located in the office of the city recorder,
shall be the final authority in determining current zoning status. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986)
10-5-3: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the
following rules shall apply:
   A.   Street Or Alley Lines: Where the intended boundaries on the zone map
are approximately street or alley lines, said street or alleys shall be
construed to be the zone boundaries.
   B.   Lot Lines: Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines,
said lot lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries, unless otherwise
indicated.
   C.   Unsubdivided Land: Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the
zone boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale of measurement shown
on the map.
   D.   Uncertainty: Where other uncertainty exists, the board of adjustment
shall interpret the map. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-5-4: REGULATIONS WITHIN ZONES:
Within each of the zones, the use, location, height and size of buildings and
structures, the use of land and size of lots, yards, courts and other open
spaces and the density of population are regulated as set forth in chapter 6,
articles 6A through 6J, of this title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
CHAPTER 6
REGULATIONS WITHIN ZONES
ARTICLE A. RA-1 RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6A-1: Intent
10-6A-2: Permitted Uses
10-6A-3: Area And Frontage Requirements
10-6A-4: Location Requirements
10-6A-5: Height Of Buildings
10-6A-6: Size Of Dwelling
10-6A-7: Width Of Buildings
10-6A-8: Special Provisions
10-6A-1: INTENT:
The RA-1 residential-agricultural zone covers certain fringe areas of the city
where residential areas may be integrated with the raising of livestock for
family food production and for the pleasure of the people who reside on the
premises. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with requirements set forth in this title:
Accessory signs and nameplates which do not exceed two hundred twenty six (226)
square inches in area.
Churches, not including temporary revival tents or buildings.
Foster care homes.
Greenhouses and the selling of fruits, vegetables, plants, chemicals,
insecticides, fertilizers, soils and planters; provided, that the sale thereof
may occur only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. No more than one sign, nonelectrical, with
a maximum size of two hundred twenty six (226) square inches. At least five (5)
parking spaces must be available on the premises or its frontage and all
buildings must comply with all setbacks and other requirements for accessory
buildings. Storage of all materials must be within the greenhouse or other
accessory buildings.
Growing of field crops and fruit.
Home occupations subject to the provisions of section
10-8-2 of this title.
Household pets and kennels.
Low impact businesses.
Machinery and equipment sheds used for storage of equipment in connection with
agricultural activities performed on the premises.
One-family dwellings, conventional construction.
Public agency parks and playgrounds.
Public and parochial schools and grounds.
Public buildings and grounds, not including storage yards or repair shops.
Public utility lines and buildings.
Residential accessory uses and structures.
Rest homes and daycare centers when approved by the city council. In approving
such uses, the city council may attach reasonable conditions in excess of those
required within the zone, including, but not limited to, an increase in minimum
lot size, additional setbacks, increased parking.
Temporary uses subject to the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986; amd. Res. 2-25-97-2, 2-25-1997; Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004; Ord.
2019-2, 10-10-2019)
10-6A-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Area and frontage requirements shall be as follows:
         Minimum Frontage
 
Main Use            Minimum Area (At Setback Line)
One-family dwelling 1 acre       125 feet
Churches            2 acres      250 feet
Other uses          None         None
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6A-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front Setback:
      1.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and
structures shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the front lot
line.
      2.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be set back not
less than twelve feet (12') from the rear of the closest rear wall line of the
main building and not less than twelve feet (12') from any side wall of the
main building. Accessory buildings which are located twelve feet (12') or
closer to a main building shall be considered as part of the main building.
Where no main building exists on a lot, a detached accessory building shall be
set back not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line.
   B.   Side Setback; Interior Lots:
      1.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty feet (20') from the side lot line.
      2.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be set back not
less than five feet (5') from the lot line, except that no minimum side setback
shall be required when all the following conditions are met:
         a.   The accessory building is located more than twelve feet (12')
from any existing dwelling on the same or an adjacent lot;
         b.   The accessory building contains no openings on the side
contiguous to the lot line;
         c.   No drainage from the roof will be discharged onto an adjacent
lot.
   C.   Side Setback; Corner Lots:
      1.   Side Abutting Street: All dwellings and other main and accessory
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line which abuts on a street.
      2.   Interior Side: Same as required for interior lots.
   D.   Rear Setback; Interior Lots:
      1.   Main Buildings: All dwellings or other main buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear lot line.
      2.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be set back not
less than five feet (5') from the lot line, except that no minimum rear setback
shall be required when all the following conditions are met:
         a.   The accessory building is located more than twelve feet (12')
from any existing dwelling on the same or an adjacent lot;
         b.   The accessory building contains no openings on the side
contiguous to the lot line;
         c.   No drainage from the roof will be discharged onto an adjacent
lot.
   E.   Rear Setback; Corner Lots:
      1.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear lot line, except that where
a carport or garage is attached to the rear of the dwelling, the required rear
setback for said carport or garage may be reduced to not less than twenty feet
(20') as measured from the rear lot line to the closest part of the building.
      2.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be set back not
less than five feet (5') from the rear lot line, except that no minimum rear
setback shall be required when all the following conditions are met:
         a.   The accessory building is located more than twelve feet (12')
from any existing dwelling on the same or an adjacent lot;
         b.   The accessory building contains no openings on the side
contiguous to the lot line;
         c.   No drainage from the roof will be discharged onto an adjacent
lot;
         d.   The accessory building will be set back not less than fifty feet
(50') from the side lot line abutting the street. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6A-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The maximum height of any building (measured from finished grade to the square
of the building) shall be twenty feet (20') or two (2) stories. Twenty foot
(20') high buildings will be considered as a two-story building. Where the
ground or the square of the building is uneven in height, the average elevation
thereof shall apply. Roofs above the square, chimneys, flagpoles, television
antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human occupancy are
excluded in determining height. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6A-6: SIZE OF DWELLING:
The ground floor area of any one-family dwelling shall not be less than eight
hundred forty (840) square feet of living area exclusive of open porches,
carports, garages and similar add ons. (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-6A-7: WIDTH OF BUILDINGS:
The total length or total width of any dwelling or church shall be not less
than twenty four feet (24') as measured from outside wall to outside wall
exclusive of any carport, garage, shed or similar add on. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-
1986)
10-6A-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Special provisions shall apply in this zone in order to protect its essential
characteristics.
   A.   Free From Refuse And Debris: The space required around buildings and
structures shall be kept free from refuse and debris.
   B.   Public Water Supply; Code Compliance: All buildings used for human
occupancy shall be furnished with a public water supply and shall be
constructed in accordance with the adopted building, plumbing, electrical, fire
prevention and similar codes.
   C.   Supplementary Development Standards: All buildings and uses within this
zone shall comply with all applicable supplementary development standards as
set forth in this title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   D.   Landscaping: At least seventy five percent (75%) of the area contained
within a required front yard or side yard or side yard adjacent to a street
shall be landscaped. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
ARTICLE A1. RA-2 RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6A1-1: Intent
10-6A1-2: Permitted Uses
10-6A1-3: Area And Frontage Requirements
10-6A1-4: Location Requirements
10-6A1-1: INTENT:
The RA-2 residential-agricultural zone will be a subzone of the RA-
1 residential-agricultural zone. (Ord. 2008-2, 3-27-2008)
10-6A1-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be the same as within the RA-1 residential- agricultural
zone with the exception of kennels. Kennels will be considered a nonpermitted
use in the RA-2 residential- agricultural zone. (Ord. 2008-2, 3-27-2008)
10-6A1-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
 
Main Use            Minimum Area       Minimum Frontage (At Front Setback Line)
                                      
One-family dwelling 10,000 square feet 90 feet
Churches            2 acres            250 feet
Other uses          None               None
 
(Ord. 2008-2, 3-27-2008)
10-6A1-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
Same as required in R-1-10,000 zone. (Ord. 2008-2, 3-27-2008)
ARTICLE B. R-1-10,000 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6B-1: Intent
10-6B-2: Permitted Uses
10-6B-3: Area And Frontage Requirements
10-6B-4: Location Requirements
10-6B-5: Height Of Buildings
10-6B-6: Size Of Dwelling
10-6B-7: Width Of Buildings
10-6B-8: Special Provisions
10-6B-1: INTENT:
The R-1-10,000 Residential Zone has been established for the purpose of
providing a place where one-family detached dwellings on spacious individual
lots can be constructed, having attractively landscaped yards and a favorable
environment for family life. Uses such as multiple-family dwellings, apartment
houses and commercial and industrial uses are not permitted in this Zone. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the requirements set forth in this Title:
   A.   One-family dwellings, conventional construction and "manufactured
homes", as defined by this Title.
   B.   Residential accessory uses and structures.
   C.   The growing of field crops and fruit.
   D.   Greenhouses and the selling of fruits, vegetables, plants, chemicals,
insecticides, fertilizers, soils and planters; provided, that the sale thereof
may occur only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. No more than one sign, nonelectrical, with
a maximum size of two hundred twenty six (226) square inches. At least five (5)
parking spaces must be available on the premises or its frontage and all
buildings must comply with all setbacks and other requirements for accessory
buildings. Storage of all materials must be within the greenhouse or other
accessory buildings.
   E.   Machinery sheds used for storage equipment used in connection with
agricultural activities performed on the premises.
   F.   Utility lines.
   G.   Home occupation subject to the provision of Section
10-8-2 of this Title.
   H.   Accessory signs and name plates which do not exceed two hundred twenty
six (226) square inches in area and temporary signs advertising the sales of
the premises which shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
   I.   Public and parochial schools and grounds.
   J.   Public agency parks and playgrounds.
   K.   Public buildings and grounds.
   L.   Churches, not including temporary revival tents or buildings.
   M.   Household pets, however, kennels are not allowed.
   N.   Foster care and family care homes.
   O.   Fences, walls and hedges.
   P.   Temporary uses subject to the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Title.
   Q.   Low impact businesses. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Res. 2-25-97-2, 2-
25-1997 Ord. 2019-2, 10-10-2019)
10-6B-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Area and frontage requirements shall be as follows:
 
Main Use            Minimum Area       Minimum Frontage (at front setback line)
One-family dwelling 10,000 square feet 90 feet
Churches            2 acres            250 feet
Other uses          None               None
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6B-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front Setback: Same as required in RA-1 Zone.
   B.   Side Setback; Interior Lots:
      1.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than eight feet (8') from either side lot line and the combined
total distance of the two (2) side setbacks shall be not less than twenty feet
(20'), except that where a carport or garage is attached to a side of a
dwelling, the required side setback for said carport or garage may be reduced
to not less than six feet (6'), as measured from the side lot line to the
closest part of the building, and the combined required distance of both side
yards shall be reduced to not less than fourteen feet (14').
      2.   Accessory Buildings: Same as required in RA-1 Zone.
   C.   Side Setback; Corner Lots: Same as required in RA-1 Zone.
   D.   Rear Setback, Interior Lots: Same as required in the RA-1 Zone.
   E.   Rear Setback; Corner Lots: Same as required in RA-1 Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-6B-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
Same as required in RA-1 Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6B-6: SIZE OF DWELLING:
Same as required in RA-1 Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6B-7: WIDTH OF BUILDINGS:
Same as required in RA-1 Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6B-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Same as required in RA-1 Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE C. R-1-7500 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6C-1: Intent
10-6C-2: Permitted Uses
10-6C-3: Area And Frontage Requirements
10-6C-4: Location Requirements
10-6C-5: Height Of Building
10-6C-6: Size Of Dwelling
10-6C-7: Width Of Building
10-6C-8: Special Provisions
10-6C-1: INTENT:
The R-1-7500 residential zone has been established for the purpose of providing
a place where one-family detached dwellings on spacious individual lots can be
constructed, having attractively landscaped yards and a favorable environment
for family life. Somewhat smaller lots and dwellings are characteristic of this
zone than are characteristics of the R-1-10,000 zone. Uses such as high density
apartment houses and commercial and industrial uses are not permitted in this
zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the requirements set forth in this title:
   A.   Same as permitted in the R-1-10,000 zone.
   B.   One-family dwellings, including double wide mobile homes with a minimum
width of twenty four feet (24'), manufactured as one unit; provided, that said
mobile home meets all HUD requirements in effect from and after June 1976, as
amended from time to time and further provided, that the provisions of section
10-4-21 of this title are fully complied with. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6C-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Area and frontage requirements shall be as follows:
 
Main Use            Minimum Area      Minimum Frontage (at front setback line)
One-family dwelling 7,500 square feet 75 feet
Churches            2 acres           250 feet
Other uses          None              None
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6C-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front setback: Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   B.   Side setback; interior lots:
      1.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than eight feet (8') from either side lot line and the combined
total distance of the two (2) side setbacks shall be not less than twenty feet
(20'), except that where a carport or garage is attached to a side of a
dwelling, the required side setback for said carport or garage may be reduced
to not less than six feet (6') as measured from the side lot line to the
closest part of the building, and the combined required distance of both side
yards shall be reduced to not less than fourteen feet (14'). (Ord. 2003-8, 10-
23-2003)
   C.   Side setback; corner lots: Same as required in the RA-1 zone.
   D.   Rear setback; interior lots: Same as required in the RA-1 zone.
   E.   Rear setback; corner lots: Same as required in the RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-
8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6C-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDING:
Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6C-6: SIZE OF DWELLING:
The ground floor area of a dwelling shall be not less than eight hundred forty
(840) square feet of living area, exclusive of open porches, carports, garages
and similar add-ons. (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-6C-7: WIDTH OF BUILDING:
The total width or total length of any dwelling or other main building shall be
not less than twenty feet (20') as measured from outside wall to outside wall,
exclusive of any carport, garage, shed, patio or similar add-on. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-6C-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE D. R-2-7500 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6D-1: Intent
10-6D-2: Permitted Uses
10-6D-3: Area And Frontage Requirements
10-6D-4: Location Requirements
10-6D-5: Height Of Building
10-6D-6: Size Of Dwelling
10-6D-7: Width Of Building
10-6D-8: Special Provisions
10-6D-1: INTENT:
The R-2-7500 residential zone has been established for the purpose of providing
a place where one- and two-family detached dwellings on spacious individual
lots can be constructed, having attractively landscaped yards and a favorable
environment for family life. Somewhat smaller lots and dwellings are
characteristics of this zone than are characteristic of the R-1-10,000 zone.
Uses such as multiple- family dwellings are not permitted in this zone. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6D-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the requirements set forth in this title:
   A.   Same as permitted in R-1-7500 zone.
   B.   Manufactured home parks when connected to a central sewage system and
subject to the requirements relating to manufactured home parks as set forth
under chapter 7, article C of this title.
   C.   Recreation vehicle courts, subject to the requirement set forth under
chapter 7, article D of this title.
   D.   Two-family dwellings, conventional construction.
   E.   Two-family dwellings, manufactured and mobile homes subject to the
provisions of section
10-4-21 and chapter 7, article C of this title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd.
Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004; Ord. 2020-3, 6-10-2020)
10-6D-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Area and frontage requirements shall be as follows:
 
Main Use            Minimum Area       Minimum Frontage (At Front Setback Line)
One-family dwelling 7,500 square feet  75 feet
Two-family dwelling 10,000 square feet 85 feet
Churches            2 acres            250 feet
Other uses          None               None
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6D-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front setback: Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   B.   Side setback; interior lots: Same as required in R-1-10,000 zone.
   C.   Side setback; corner lots: Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   D.   Rear setback; interior lots: Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   E.   Rear setback; corner lots: Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-6D-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDING:
Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6D-6: SIZE OF DWELLING:
The ground floor area of a one-family dwelling shall be not less than eight
hundred forty (840) square feet. A two-family dwelling shall contain a ground
floor area of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
Ground floor area shall be exclusive of open porches, carports, garages, sheds
and similar add-ons. This requirement shall not apply to mobile homes located
within an approved manufactured home park. (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-6D-7: WIDTH OF BUILDING:
Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE E. R-3-7500 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6E-1: Intent
10-6E-2: Permitted Uses
10-6E-3: Area And Frontage Requirements
10-6E-4: Location Requirements
10-6E-5: Height Of Building
10-6E-6: Size Of Dwelling
10-6E-7: Width Of Building
10-6E-8: Special Provisions
10-6E-1: INTENT:
The R-3-7500 zone has been established for the purpose of providing a place
where one-, two- and multiple-family dwellings can be constructed. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986)
10-6E-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the requirements set forth in this title:
Same as permitted in R-2-7500 zone.
Multiple-family dwellings. Not to exceed eight (8) units per structure. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6E-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Area and frontage requirements shall be as follows:
 
Main Use                  Minimum Area       Minimum Frontage
One-family dwelling       7,500 square feet  75 feet
Two-family dwellings      10,000 square feet 85 feet
                          10,000 square feet
                          for first 2 units,
Multiple-family dwellings plus 2,500 square  85 feet
                          feet for each
                          additional unit
Churches                  2 acres            150 feet
Other uses                None               None
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6E-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front setback: Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   B.   Side setback; interior lots: Same as required in R-1-10,000 zone.
   C.   Side setback; corner lots: Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   D.   Rear setback; interior lots: Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   E.   Rear setback; corner lots: Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-6E-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDING:
Same as required in RA-1 zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6E-6: SIZE OF DWELLING:
The ground floor area of a one-family dwelling shall be not less than eight
hundred forty (840) square feet. A two-family dwelling shall contain a ground
floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. A multiple-family
dwelling shall contain a ground floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet for the first two (2) units, plus six hundred (600) square feet of
living area for each unit over two (2). All area shall be exclusive of open
porches, carports, garages, sheds and similar add-ons. This requirement shall
not apply to manufactured/mobile homes located within an approved manufactured
home park. (Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-6E-7: WIDTH OF BUILDING:
The total width or total length of any dwelling or other main building shall be
not less than twenty feet (20') as measured from outside wall to outside wall,
exclusive of any carport, garage, shed, patio or similar add-ons. This
requirement shall not apply to manufactured/mobile homes located within an
approved manufactured home park. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-
16-2004)
10-6E-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Same as required in RA-1 zone.
   B.   Landscape plans shall be required in connection with all multiple-
family dwellings. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE F. CC-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6F-1: Intent
10-6F-2: Permitted Uses
10-6F-3: Area, Width And Location Requirements
10-6F-4: Special Provisions
10-6F-1: INTENT:
The intent in establishing the CC-1 Central Commercial Zone is to provide a
place where retail and service uses can be constructed and maintained which
will serve the needs of the citizens of the City and surrounding areas. It is
the further intent in establishing this Zone to maintain the central business
district as the "heart of the City" and to these ends, to promote its
development in step with the increase in population within the trading area.
The uses characteristic of this Zone are retail stores, banks, office
buildings, theaters, motels and a wide variety of specialty shops. Conversely,
uses which tend to create business dead spots, cause undue scattering of
business and generally tend to thwart the use of the land for its primary
purpose, have been excluded from the Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6F-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the requirements set forth in this Title:
   A.   General retail stores and shops providing goods and services for sale
at retail in the customary manner; provided, that all storage and sales
activities shall be contained within a building. Also, manufacturing and
processing activities which are an integral part of and incidental to the
retail establishment.
   B.   Accessory signs.
   C.   Hotels and motels.
   D.   Office buildings, medical clinics, hospitals.
   E.   Restaurants and food drive-ins.
   F.   Personal service establishments, such as barber shops and beauty shops,
photographic studios, shoe repair, laundries (commercial and self-service),
reception centers and similar establishments.
   G.   Automotive service establishments, including gasoline stations, car
washes, parking lots and storage garages, and minor automotive repair
establishments.
   H.   Public parks and buildings.
   I.   Establishments for the sale of hardware, lumber, plumbing and heating
equipment and similar building products. All storage activities shall be within
a building or within an enclosure surrounded by a fence not less than six feet
(6') in height.
   J.   Automobile, motorcycle, snowmobile sales structures and lots (for both
new and used units). Also the related repair facilities when such facilities
are included as an integral part of the sales structure.
   K.   Recreational enterprises, including bowling alleys, recreation centers,
motion picture theaters (indoor only), athletic clubs, private clubs and
fraternal lodges.
   L.   Funeral homes.
   M.   Other uses similar to the foregoing uses which are interpreted by the
Planning Commission to be in harmony with the intent of the Zone.
   N.   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures shall be
permitted in the CC-1 Zone, provided they are incidental to and do not
substantially alter the character of the permitted principle use or structure.
Such permitted accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to,
buildings, such as garages, carports and equipment storage buildings, which are
customarily used in conjunction with and incidental to a principle use or
structure permitted in the CC-1 Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   O.   Kennels. (Res. 2-25-97-2, 2-25-1997)
10-6F-3: AREA, WIDTH AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no area, width and location requirements for commercial
buildings and structures constructed in accordance with the Building Code,
except that an area sufficient to accommodate parking, unloading and access
shall be provided and maintained. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6F-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Storage Of Materials: All materials, merchandise and equipment (except
vehicles in running order) shall be stored within an enclosed building or
within an enclosure surrounded by a fence not less than six feet (6') in
height.
   B.   Activities Within Enclosed Building: All display, sales and repair
activities shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building, except those
activities that are customarily and appropriately conducted in the open,
including, but not limited to, automobile service stations, temporary sales of
Christmas trees and nursery stock shall be permitted outside a building unless
otherwise prohibited under the terms of this Title.
   C.   Odor, Dust, Noise: No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent
light, glare or noise shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises
except for normal traffic movements.
   D.   Parking Surface: All off-street parking shall be hard surface.
   E.   Entrances: All buildings located adjacent to a major street shall have
at least one entrance way facing onto said street.
   F.   Supplementary Development Standards: All buildings and uses within this
Zone shall comply with all applicable supplementary development standards as
set forth in this Title.
   G.   Gasoline Pumps: All gasoline service station pumps shall be set back at
least twenty feet (20') from all property lines. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE G. H-1 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6G-1: Intent
10-6G-2: Permitted Uses
10-6G-3: Area, Height And Special Provisions
10-6G-4: Special Provisions For Commercial Uses
10-6G-1: INTENT:
The H-1 Highway Commercial Zone has been established for the primary purpose of
providing a location where certain types of retail and service commercial
activities which are inconsistent with and detrimental to the operation of the
Central Commercial Zone. The Zone is characterized by a mixture of commercial
and residential uses. However, as assurance that the commercial activities will
not pose undue detrimental effect on surrounding dwellings, certain
requirements and approvals relating to the design and operation of commercial
uses have been imposed within the Zone. In order to accomplish the objectives
and purposes of this Title and to stabilize and protect the essential
characteristics of this Zone, the following regulations shall apply in the H-
1 Highway Commercial Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6G-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the requirements as set forth in this Title:
   A.   Any use permitted in the RA-1 Zone.
   B.   Automobile service stations.
   C.   Establishments for the sale of automobiles, motorcycles, snowmobiles
and similar types of vehicles.
   D.   Automobile repair establishments, provided all repair activities will
be conducted within an enclosed structure and that there will be no outside
storage of parts of nonoperative vehicles.
   E.   Recreation vehicle courts, subject to the requirements set forth under
Article 7D of this Title.
   F.   Lumber and building materials sales establishments.
   G.   Convenience goods store (mini markets) for the sale of food and variety
products; provided, that the total floor area devoted to such use shall not
exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
   H.   Hotels and motels.
   I.   Office buildings, medical clinics.
   J.   Restaurants and food drive-ins.
   K.   Personal service establishments, such as barber and beauty (commercial
and self-service), reception centers and similar establishments.
   L.   Funeral homes.
   M.   Other uses similar to the foregoing uses which are interpreted by the
Planning Commission to be in harmony with the intent of the Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-6G-3: AREA, HEIGHT AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Dwellings: The area, width, location, height, size of dwelling, width
of building and special provisions relating to dwellings and individual mobile
homes shall be the same as required in the RA-1 Residential-Agricultural Zone.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   B.   Commercial Uses: The area, width, location and other requirements for
commercial and other uses shall be the same as set forth in the location plan
as approved by the Planning Commission; provided, that all buildings, except
agricultural sheds, shall be set back from the right-of-way line of any public
street a distance of not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986;
amd. 1998 Code)
10-6G-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL USES:
   A.   Site Plan: Prior to commencing the use of land or construction of a
structure, which land or structure is to be used for commercial purposes, a
site plan showing the lot boundaries and the location of all buildings,
structures, driveways, parking areas, loading areas, fences, walls and
landscaped areas and indicating the type of commercial uses proposed shall be
submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. In reviewing the site
plan, the Planning Commission shall, in addition to any other issue, consider
the following:
      1.   Is the proposed use permitted within the Zone?
      2.   Will the use and layout conform to all applicable regulations,
including, but not limited to, off-street parking and vehicle access, and other
special provisions?
      3.   Is the proposed use and layout consistent with existing adjacent
uses and will the proposed commercial use be of a type and be conducted in a
manner which will be compatible with other uses within the Zone?
      4.   Will the proposed use have adequate and safe access; provide
adequate off-street parking; and be served by adequate water supply (fire and
culinary); and wastewater disposal system? (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
The Planning Commission may deny a nonauthorized use and/or require changes in
the proposed plan when in its opinion, such changes are necessary for the
protection of health or safety or the maintenance of property values and the
preservation of the living environment. If a building use is going to be
changed from one business to another or changed to residential, it must be
presented to the City Council for approval. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Operations: All establishments shall be operated in a manner that no
noise, vibration, smoke, odor, dust or fumes are emitted which is discernible
beyond the boundary of the property except for customary vehicular noise.
   C.   Water And Sewer System: All buildings used for human occupancy shall be
furnished with an approved water and sewer system. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE H. SC-1 PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
SECTION:
10-6H-1: Intent
10-6H-2: Permitted Uses
10-6H-3: Special Provisions
10-6H-1: INTENT:
The intent in establishing the SC-1 Planned Shopping Center Zone is to provide
a way for the development of retail commercial centers within the City. The
Zone shall be characterized by a harmonious grouping of retail and service
stores and shops which are architecturally designed as an integrated unit.
Lighting shall be of a relatively low intensity and should be shielded to
protect surrounding residential areas. Developers and owners of the stores and
shops within the center should bear in mind that the privilege of providing the
goods and services carries with it a corresponding responsibility to develop
and maintain the facilities in harmony with the aesthetic qualities of the
surrounding area. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6H-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses within this Zone shall be limited to planned shopping center developments
which are constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 7 of this Title and the Articles contained therein. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6H-3: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Special provisions shall apply in this Zone in order to protect its essential
characteristics.
   A.   Free From Refuse And Debris: The space required around buildings and
structures shall be kept free from refuse and debris.
   B.   Public Water Supply; Code Compliance: All buildings used for human
occupancy shall be furnished with a public water supply and shall be
constructed in accordance with the adopted building, plumbing, electrical, fire
prevention and similar codes.
   C.   Supplementary Development Standards: All buildings and uses within this
Zone shall comply with all applicable supplementary development standards as
set forth in this Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE I. I-1 INDUSTRIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6I-1: Intent
10-6I-2: Permitted Uses
10-6I-3: Area Requirements
10-6I-4: Width Requirements
10-6I-5: Location Requirements
10-6I-6: Height Of Buildings
10-6I-7: Special Requirements
10-6I-1: INTENT:
The intent in establishing the I-1 Industrial Zone is to provide a place where
manufacturing, processing, warehousing and fabrication of goods and materials
can be carried on most appropriately and with minimum conflict or deleterious
effects upon surrounding properties. The further intent in establishing the
Zone is to promote the economic well-being of the people and to broaden the tax
base. In an effort to give protection to adjoining residential zones, certain
types of industrial uses are excluded, such as industries which are hazardous
or are offensive due to the unusual emission of odors, vibration, dust, glare,
noise or fumes. Because of the adverse effects which occur when permitted to
commingle, dwellings, schools, churches and most general retail and service
commercial establishments have been excluded from the I-1 Industrial Zone.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6I-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in
this Zone upon compliance with the requirements set forth herein:
   A.   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, fabrication and
warehousing of goods and materials, except for the processing of animal by-
products and for livestock feed yards, and except for steel manufacturing, oil
refineries, wall board manufacturing and similar establishments which emit
offensive fumes, smoke, noise, odor, etc.
   B.   Asphalt and concrete mixing plants, coal yards, earth moving equipment
and equipment storage, gas and oil wells, gas and oil storage facilities,
public buildings and public utility buildings, craft shops, tire recapping
establishments, billboards, accessory signs.
   C.   Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, when surrounded by a well
maintained sight obscuring fence constructed to a height of at least eight feet
(8') so that the material stored in the enclosure cannot be observed from any
street adjacent to the yard.
   D.   Mines, gravel pits, sand pits, clay pits, rock quarries, rock crushers
and buildings and structures in connection therewith; also railroads and
railroad maintenance yards.
   E.   Agriculture, farm machinery storage sheds, vegetable and fruit packing
and processing plants, and livestock raising.
   F.   Utility transmission lines and substations, water treatment plants,
pumping plants, power plants.
   G.   Office buildings and research parks.
   H.   Accessory buildings and parking lots incidental and accessory to other
permitted uses, fences and walls.
   I.   Other uses ruled by the City Council to be similar to uses specifically
permitted in the Zone and which will harmonize with the objectives and
characteristics of the I-1 Industrial Zone. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6I-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no area requirements, except that an area sufficient to
accommodate setback requirements, off-street parking, loading and unloading and
vehicular access shall be provided and maintained. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6I-4: WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
No requirements. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6I-5: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front Setback: No requirements, except that all buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the right-of-way line.
   B.   Side Setbacks; Interior Lots: No requirements, except that when located
adjacent to a residential zone, all buildings shall be set back not less than
ten feet (10').
   C.   Side Setbacks; Corner Lots: For the interior side, the setback shall be
the same as for interior lots (see subsection B of this Section). For the side
abutting on a street, all buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet
(30').
   D.   Rear Setbacks: Same as required for rear setback; interior lots. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6I-6: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No requirements. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-6I-7: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sight Restriction: No wall, fence, opaque hedge or screening material
shall be placed in such a manner which would restrict the sight distance for
vehicular traffic in the public right of way.
   B.   Parking And Loading Space: Adequate off-street parking and loading
space to accommodate employees and customers shall be provided on the same lot
or parcel as the principal use.
   C.   Site Plan: Prior to the construction of any building, structure, fence
or wall, a site plan must be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Commission. Said site plan shall show the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas and landscape areas.
   D.   Public Water Supply; Code Conformance: All buildings used for human
occupancy shall be furnished with a public water supply and shall be
constructed in accordance with the adopted building, plumbing, electrical, and
fire prevention and similar codes.
   E.   Supplementary Development Standards: All buildings and uses within this
Zone shall comply with all applicable supplementary development standards as
set forth in this Title.
   F.   Landscaping: At least fifty percent (50%) of the front yard area shall
be landscaped. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
CHAPTER 7
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Declaration Of Legislative Intent
10-7-2: Minimum Requirements
10-7-3: Permitted Types And Location
10-7-4: Procedure For Approval
10-7-5: Planning, Design And Documentation Requirements
10-7-6: Construction Requirements
10-7-7: Guarantee Of Performance
10-7-8: Continuing Obligation
10-7-9: Regulations Essential
10-7-10: Standards May Be Increased
10-7-11: Sale Of Property Under Condominium Ownership Act
10-7-12: Recording Unapproved Plan, Plat Or Documents
10-7-13: Standards And Specifications Prepared
10-7-14: Water Rights Conveyed To City; Exceptions
10-7-15: As-Constructed Plans Required
10-7-1: DECLARATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The intent and purpose of the large scale development regulations shall be:
   A.   To provide a means for encouraging the orderly development of the City.
   B.   To permit maximum use of water, soil and other natural resources,
consistent with the need to conserve and protect such resources.
   C.   To promote the efficient use of land.
   D.   To facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation
systems, land use, drainage and utilities.
   E.   To provide greater variety in building sites and living accommodations
in a more wholesome environment than would otherwise be possible under
conventional land development procedures.
   F.   To ensure high quality construction within the development.
   G.   To establish the rights, duties and responsibilities of land developers
with respect to the development of land. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-2: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The requirements and conditions set forth in this Title pertaining to each type
of large scale development are the minimum requirements which must be imposed
in order to achieve the intent and purposes as herein set forth. In the event
that a developer does not desire to comply with the requirements and conditions
relating to a large scale development, he may develop his land in accordance
with regulations which apply to land within the zone that surrounds his large
scale development. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-3: PERMITTED TYPES AND LOCATION:
The following types of large scale developments may be constructed, but may be
located only in the zone(s) in which such development is listed as a permitted
use:
   A.   Planned unit developments.
   B.   Condominium projects.
   C.   Mobile home parks.
   D.   Recreation vehicle court.
   E.   Planned shopping center development. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
Any person wishing to obtain approval to construct a large scale development
shall comply with the following procedure:
   A.   Initial Conference With Zoning Administrator: The developer shall
obtain from the Zoning Administrator, information concerning the procedures,
requirements and documents relating to the approval of a large scale
development.
   B.   Application For Preliminary Plan Approval: The developer shall complete
an application for preliminary plan approval on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall prepare a preliminary plan. Said preliminary plan shall
include all of the maps, statements, documents and other information required
under the preliminary plan requirements of the applicable type of large scale
development.
   C.   Submit Application And Preliminary Plan: The developer shall submit
four (4) copies of the application for approval and all maps, charts,
statements, documents and other information required under the applicable
preliminary plan requirements, together with a review fee. In order for the
development to be placed on the agenda, the application must be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the regularly
scheduled meeting at which the application is to be considered.
   D.   Planning Commission Review And Action:
      1.   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plans,
documents and statements and shall act to approve or disapprove the proposal or
approve it subject to modification. The action of the Planning Commission shall
be communicated to the City Council within thirty (30) days following receipt
of the application.
      2.   Approval by the Planning Commission shall not constitute final
approval of the project but shall be deemed as a positive recommendation to the
City Council that a public hearing on the proposed project be advertised and
held.
   E.   Planning Commission Submits To City Council: Upon approval of the
preliminary plan, documents and statements by the Planning Commission, two (2)
copies shall be submitted for review by the City Council.
   F.   City Council Review; Public Hearing: The City Council shall review the
preliminary plans, documents and statements and shall advertise and hold a
public hearing on the proposed project. Said hearing shall be called in the
same manner as an amendment to this Title.
   G.   City Council Action On Preliminary Plans:
      1.   Following the public hearing, the City Council shall act upon the
preliminary plans, documents and statements to approve, disapprove or approve
subject to modification.
      2.   If disapproved, no further action is required. If approved subject
to modification, the plans, documents and statements shall be returned to the
Planning Commission with instructions that the developer should modify the
plans, documents and statements in accordance with changes recommended and
resubmit the modified proposal to the Planning Commission for their review and
recommendation.
      3.   If approved, the preliminary plans, documents and statements shall
be returned to the Planning Commission with instructions to authorize the
developer to proceed to prepare and submit the final plans, documents and
statements.
      4.   Upon passage of a motion to approve the preliminary plans, the City
shall be committed to grant final approval of the final plans, documents and
statements upon compliance with all procedures, standards, requirements and any
conditions attached to said approval relating to the applicable large scale
developments.
      5.   The preliminary plans and documents shall be valid for twelve (12)
months from the date of action by the City Council. The time limit may be
extended for an additional year upon approval by the Planning Commission. Any
extension of time shall be officially requested in writing and submitted to the
Planning Commission office thirty one (31) days prior to the end of the twelve
(12) month preliminary approval period. No construction shall be permitted
until final plans have been approved by the City Council.
   H.   Final Plans, Plats, Documents And Statements Submitted:
      1.   After receiving authorization to proceed, the developer shall
prepare and submit to the Planning Commission:
         a.   Application for final approval.
         b.   Two (2) linen or reproducible tracings and four (4) copies of the
final plat where required. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
         c.   Four (4) copies of the final plans. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd.
1998 Code)
         d.   Three (3) copies of the final documents and statements.
         e.   Three (3) copies of an itemized estimate of the cost of
constructing the required improvements.
         f.   Evidence of payment of review and recording fee.
         g.   Documents conveying water rights to City (see Section
10-7-14 of this Chapter).
      2.   All submissions shall be prepared in accordance with City standards.
In order for the development to be placed on the agenda, the final plans, plat
and documents must be submitted to the Planning Commission office at least
seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which the plans are to be considered.
   I.   Planning Commission Action:
      1.   When the plans, plat, documents, cost estimates and other materials
required for approval have been completed in final form, the developer may make
application to the Planning Commission and the Planning Commission will grant
final approval after reviewing the final plan and ascertaining that:
         a.   The final plans conform substantially with those given
preliminary approval.
         b.   The final plat complies with the requirements and standards
relating to the applicable type of large scale development.
         c.   The final documents comply with the ordinances relating to the
applicable type of large scale development.
         d.   The estimated of cost of constructing the required improvements
are realistic.
         e.   Tax liabilities of the common open space (wherever a large scale
development involves the reservation of common open space) have been
determined.
      2.   Upon a finding of approval, the chairperson shall be authorized to
sign required final plats.
   J.   Required Improvements Or Post Performance Guarantee: Upon approval of
the final plans, plats and documents by the Planning Commission, the developer
shall construct the required improvements or post performance guarantees in
accordance with provisions of Section
10-7-7 of this Chapter.
   K.   City Council Action: After the Planning Commission has approved the
final plans, plats, documents, cost estimates and tax liabilities of the common
open space, where applicable, a copy of the same shall be submitted to the City
Council for its approval. The City Council will review said plans, plats,
documents, cost estimates and tax liabilities and, subject to a properly
presented motion by a member of the City Council, approve said plans; execute
all appropriate documents, agreements and final plats; and accept all public
dedications. Final approval by the City Council shall be by adoption and
publication of an ordinance amending the Official Zone Map to show and identify
the area included within the development. Upon adoption and publication of the
ordinance, the specific requirements of the underlying zone shall be considered
modified in conformance with the said plans, plats, documents and agreements as
approved by the City Council.
   L.   Amendments: The plans, plats, documents and statements may be amended
by following the same procedure required for initial approval. No change shall
be made which is contrary to the intent of the City's Land Use Plan or the
standards and requirements of this Title. Any amendment of a recorded final
plat which also qualifies as a subdivision shall not be approved or recorded
until the existing recorded plat has been vacated. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-5: PLANNING, DESIGN AND DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS:
The layout and design of all large scale developments and all plans, plats,
documents, agreements, statements and other required submissions shall be
prepared in accordance with City standards as directed by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-6: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   According With Plans: All individual large scale developments shall be
constructed in accordance with the approved final plans and all final plans,
plats, documents and agreements shall be binding on the developer, his
successors, grantees and assignee and shall limit the use of the land in the
development as set forth in the approved plans, documents and agreements. In
the event that the developer performs construction work which is not in
accordance with approved final plans, the City Engineer or other authorized
representative shall cause further work to be discontinued and the City Council
shall obtain compliance or shall revoke all permits relating thereto.
   B.   Construct Within Permitted Time Period: All improvements required under
the terms of the applicable type of large scale development shall be
constructed within the time period specified for the duration of the guarantee
of performance, except that the City Council, upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may require the developer to install the landscaping on
all or part of the common open space or to construct other specific required
improvements on all or part of an approved large scale development within a
time period which is less than the maximum time period specified but which
shall not be less than six (6) months from the date of said approval. If no
development has occurred pursuant to the adopted plan within twelve (12) months
after the date of final approval, the City Council may revoke any building
permits issued and initiate proceedings to repeal all approvals for the
project.
   C.   Stage Construction Permitted: Development may be carried out in
progressive stages, provided assurance is given to the City Council that the
requirements and intent of this Title with respect to each stage, shall be
fully complied with. Each stage shall be considered as a separate application.
   D.   Quality Of Construction: The developer shall be responsible for the
quality of all materials and workmanship. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-7: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Bonds Or Other Financial Guarantees:
      1.   Type And Amount: The performance guarantee shall be acceptable to
the City Council. Said guarantee may be in the form of:
         a.   Cash deposit.
         b.   Performance bond.
         c.   First mortgage on real property which is unrelated to the
project.
         d.   Letter of credit from a recognized financial institution.
         e.   Other type as approved by the City Council.
      2.   Amount: The amount of the guarantee shall be in an amount or value
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the required improvements as
determined by the City Engineer.
      3.   Duration: The duration of the bond or other assurance shall be for
two (2) years from the effective date of ordinance approving the large scale
development.
      4.   Extension:
         a.   An extension of time may be granted by the City Council upon
application by the developer, provided such application is submitted at least
sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the bond, and provided the issuer of
the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
         b.   The City Council may, upon appeal of the developer, grant a
limited extension of the time limit, not to exceed ninety (90) days, without
the necessity of filing the sixty (60) days' notice as required above, when it
is determined by the City Council that failure to perform is due to conditions
beyond the control of the developer.
      5.   Default: In the event the developer is in default or fails or
neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within two (2)
years from the date of approval of the ordinance by the City Council, or to
obtain an extension of the time limit, or to pay all liens in connection with
the development, the City Council may declare the bond or other assurance
forfeited and the City may install or cause the required improvements to be
installed using the proceeds from the collection of bonds or other assurance to
defray the expense thereof.
      6.   Final Disposition And Release: The subdivider shall be responsible
for the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the
work, or not less than ten (10) days prior to the release date of the bond or
other assurance, whichever is first, the City Engineer shall make a preliminary
inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the City Council
setting forth the condition of such facilities. If all liens are paid and other
conditions thereof are found to be satisfactory, the City Council shall
authorize release of the bond or other assurance. If the condition of material
or workmanship shows unusual depreciation or does not comply with the
acceptable standards of durability or if any outstanding liens are not paid,
the City Council may declare the subdivider in default.
   B.   Final Approval Withheld Pending Construction:
      1.   Duration Of Period: The period of time for which final approval may
be withheld from a large scale development plan shall be not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days. An extension of the time, not to exceed ninety (90)
days, may be granted upon application of the developer to the approving
authority submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled action
date.
      2.   Inspection Of Improvements:
         a.   Upon notification of completion of required improvements or not
less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled date for action on a withheld
large scale development plan, whichever is first, the City Engineer shall make
a preliminary inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the
City Council setting forth the condition of such facilities. If all liens are
paid and the condition of said improvements are found to be satisfactory, the
City Council shall authorize the Mayor to grant final approval for said large
scale development, to execute all required signatures and to publish the
amending ordinance as required by law.
         b.   If the developer fails to construct the required improvements
within the specified time, or fails to obtain an extension of said time limit,
or if the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual depreciation or
does not comply with acceptable standards of durability or if any outstanding
liens are not paid, the City Council may:
            (1)   Require that said improvements be constructed or
reconstructed prior to authorizing the recording of any ordinance or issuance
of any building permits; or
            (2)   Refuse to authorize the publishing and/or recording of any
ordinances or documents and to withhold all occupancy and building permits.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-8: CONTINUING OBLIGATION:
It shall be the obligation and duty of the developer or his successors or
assignees to carry out the conditions made applicable to the development plans,
documents and agreements. In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and
all of the conditions and regulations as herein established and as specifically
made applicable to a large scale development, neither the City Engineer,
Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, nor the Planning Commission shall
issue a certificate of zoning compliance therefor. Such failure or neglect to
comply with the construction and ongoing requirements as herein set forth or to
maintain the buildings and premises in accordance with conditions of approval
or the plans, documents and agreements, or to maintain the impound account as
required shall also be deemed to be a violation of this Code and a breach of
agreement between the developer, his successors or assignees and the City.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-9: REGULATIONS ESSENTIAL:
All of the regulations relating to large scale developments are the minimum
regulations that are needed to carry out the purpose and intent of this
Chapter. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-10: STANDARDS MAY BE INCREASED:
The Planning Commission may increase standards where it is determined that such
increased standards are necessary in order to ensure that the development will
mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses of property and are necessary
to carry out the intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-11: SALE OF PROPERTY UNDER CONDOMINIUM OWNERSHIP ACT:
Where all or part of a large scale development is to be sold under the
provisions of the Condominium Ownership Act as set forth in title 57, chapter
8, Utah Code Annotated, as amended, said development shall be submitted and
approved in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. This requirement
shall be in addition to all other requirements. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-12: RECORDING UNAPPROVED PLAN, PLAT OR DOCUMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to record any plan, plat, documents or statements for a
large scale development or any amendment thereto in the office of the County
Recorder unless the same shall bear thereon final approval of the Planning
Commission and the City Council as required by the terms of this Code. Any
owner or agent of any owner of land which is located within a purported large
scale development who transfers or sells any land or structure in such
purported large scale development before the plan is given final approval by
the Planning Commission and City Council and recorded in the office of the
County Recorder shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each lot or parcel of land or structure so transferred
or sold. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-7-13: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS PREPARED:
The planning commission shall have the responsibility for preparing standards,
specifications and typical examples for the design, quality and content of all
required plans, plats, improvements and legal documents. Said standards and
specifications shall be adopted by resolution by the city council. Said
requirements shall be considered minimum and shall apply to all large scale
developments under all ordinary circumstances; provided however, that where the
developer can show that a provision of these standards and specifications would
cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of
topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the
planning commission, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of
such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance
so authorized shall be stated on the final plat and the reasons for such
departure shall be entered in writing in the minutes of the planning
commission. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7-14: WATER RIGHTS CONVEYED TO CITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Shares Required: The city council shall require all developers of all
large scale developments to convey to the city the rights to not less than one
share of irrigation water for each two (2) dwelling units within a planned unit
development or condominium project; or each two (2) mobile home spaces within a
mobile home park; or each five (5) sites within a recreation vehicle court or
each one-half (1/2) acre within a planned shopping development. (Ord. 2011-2,
4-28-2011)
   B.   Use: All water which is represented by water rights acquired by the
city pursuant to this provision may continue to be used upon the land until
said land shall be developed or used for nonagricultural purposes or until the
use of said water on said land shall be abandoned. Upon a change in use or
abandonment, the city may use said water for municipal purposes any place
within the city's water system.
   C.   Exceptions: Where the large scale development covers land for which
water rights have previously been conveyed to the city through annexation, no
further conveyance of water rights shall be required. (Ord. 2006-1, 4-13-2006)
10-7-15: AS CONSTRUCTED PLANS REQUIRED:
As constructed plans showing the location, size, grade and depth of all water
and sewer mains, valves, manholes and other subsurface utility and service
lines and facilities shall be required prior to the release of performance
guarantees. Also, the location of required survey monuments shall be submitted
and approved by the city engineer before required performance guarantees are
released. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE A. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-7A-1: Intent
10-7A-2: Permitted Uses
10-7A-3: Area, Density And Dwelling Units Per Building
10-7A-4: Approval Procedure
10-7A-5: Required Improvements
10-7A-6: Required Documents
10-7A-7: Special Provisions
10-7A-8: Location Within Center Of Block
10-7A-1: INTENT:
The intent of this Article is to establish guidelines dealing specifically with
design, construction and operation of planned unit developments. The provisions
shall be supplemental and in addition to the general requirements for large
scale developments contained in Chapter 7 of this Title (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Any use permitted within the underlying zone.
   B.   Common areas and recreational facilities, including golf courses,
swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses, recreational buildings, landscape
parks and similar recreation facilities for the use and enjoyment of all
residents.
   C.   Driveways, streets, fences, walls, utility systems and facilities,
common storage areas, ponds, landscape features and similar uses and structures
incidental to the main use. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-3: AREA, DENSITY AND DWELLING UNITS PER BUILDING:
 
           Minimum Area In         Maximum Number Of   Maximum Number Of
Zone       Development* (in acres) Dwelling Units (per Dwelling Units (per
                                   acre)               building)
RA-1          10                   1                1
R-1-10,000    4                    4                1
R-1-7500      4                    6                1
R-2-7500      4                    8                4
R-3-7500      4                    12               12
*Except in centers of blocks (see Section
10-7A-8 of this Article).
 
The proposed plan shall include all potentially developable property or shall
be designed to permit the extension of the development into those areas not
included within the original plan. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
Any person wishing to obtain approval to construct a planned unit development
shall follow the procedure outlined in Section
10-7-4 of this Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements shall be constructed by the developer in each
planned unit development, in accordance with City standards as directed by the
Planning Commission:
   A.   Streets, driveways and parking areas which shall be graded, graveled
and hard surfaced.
   B.   Curbs, gutters and walkways.
   C.   Drainage and flood control structures and facilities.
   D.   On-site water and sewer mains in accordance with the City's extension
policy.
   E.   Off-site water and sewer mains; in accordance with the City's extension
policy.
   F.   Fire hydrants.
   G.   Permanent survey monuments.
   H.   Gas, electric and telephone lines (which shall be placed underground).
   I.   Landscaping in the common area.
   J.   Sprinkling or other suitable irrigation systems.
   K.   Fences, walls and other common areas, facilities, systems and
structures proposed for the development as shown on the final plans.
   L.   Common storage area required in multiple-family projects only.
   M.   Street lighting.
   N.   Other improvements. Developers may install other improvements, however,
the construction of other improvements shall not be required as a condition of
approval of a planned unit development. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-6: REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:
The following documents shall be prepared and submitted by the developer for
each planned unit development:
   A.   Articles of incorporation for homeowners' association.
   B.   Corporation bylaws.
   C.   Covenants, conditions, restrictions and management policies.
   D.   Management agreement.
   E.   Open space easement.
   F.   Documents conveying water rights to City. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Landscaping Maintenance: Landscaping shall be maintained in a condition
which is commensurate with the quality of maintenance of City parks.
   B.   Height: At least fifty percent (50%) of the dwelling units in large
scale developments in the R-3-7500 Zone shall be limited to one story in
height.
   C.   Water Rights: Water rights shall be conveyed to City as set forth in
Section
10-7-14 of this Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7A-8: LOCATION WITHIN CENTER OF BLOCK:
Where a planned unit development is to be located within the center of an
existing block, the following supplementary requirements shall also apply:
   A.   Area Requirements May Be Reduced: The Planning Commission may authorize
a reduction from the total area included within a planned unit development of
up to fifty percent (50%) of the area required in the zone.
   B.   Access Ways: Vehicular access to the development will be provided by
not less than two (2) entrance roads, wherever feasible, as permitted by the
Planning Commission. All roads shall be not less than forty feet (40') in width
and shall conform to City standards.
   C.   Plan To Involve All Developable Land: Special consideration shall be
given in the preparation of plans for planned unit developments that are
constructed within the center of blocks to provide for access to all
developable land rather than merely the land within the project. The Planning
Commission shall refrain from approving plans which preclude full development
of the land within the centers of such blocks. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
ARTICLE B. CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
SECTION:
10-7B-1: Declaration Of Intent
10-7B-2: Permitted Uses
10-7B-3: Density
10-7B-4: Approval Procedure
10-7B-5: Special Provisions
10-7B-1: DECLARATION OF INTENT:
The intent of this Article is to establish guidelines dealing specifically with
design, construction and operation of condominium projects. These provisions
shall be supplemental and in addition to the general requirements for large
scale developments contained in Chapter 7 of this Title and also the
requirements of Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8, as amended. (Ord. 4-8-
86, 4-8-1986)
10-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted within a condominium project shall be limited to those uses
specifically permitted within the zone in which the project is located. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7B-3: DENSITY:
The density of dwelling units per building shall be the same as permitted in
the zone and/or for planned unit developments within the zone, where
authorized. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7B-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Planned Development: Where a condominium project is in the form of a
planned unit development subdivision or planned shopping center, approval of
said project shall follow the procedure outlined for said developments.
   B.   Other Type: Where a condominium project is of a type other than the
above, all required documentation shall be referred to and approved by the
Planning Commission and City Council and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder. The procedure to be followed shall be similar to that for large scale
developments, except that public hearings shall not be required. (Ord. 4-8-86,
4-8-1986)
10-7B-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful to record any record of survey map or declaration of a
condominium project in the office of the County Recorder unless the same shall
bear thereon final approval of the Planning Commission and City Council as
required by the terms of this Title, and any record of survey map or
declaration so recorded without such approval shall be null and void. Any owner
or agent of any owner of land which is located within a purported condominium
project who transfers or sells any land, structure or condominium unit in such
purported condominium project before obtaining the final approval by the
Planning Commission and City Council on the record of survey map or declaration
recording the same in the office of the County Recorder, shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each lot, parcel of land structure or condominium unit
so transferred or sold. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
ARTICLE C. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
SECTION:
10-7C-1: Intent
10-7C-2: Permitted Uses
10-7C-3: Area And Density
10-7C-4: Approval Procedure
10-7C-5: Required Improvements
10-7C-6: Special Provisions
10-7C-1: INTENT:
The intent of these regulations is to establish guidelines dealing specifically
with design, construction and operation of manufactured home parks.
Developments formerly designated and licensed as mobile home parks shall be
redesignated manufactured home parks pursuant to the passage of ordinance 2004-
4 and shall be required to comply with this article. These provisions shall be
supplemental and in addition to the general requirements for large scale
developments. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses within a manufactured home park shall be limited to the
following:
Accessory uses, including swimming pools, carports, storage buildings for
personal and household items, convenience establishments, childcare centers,
clubhouses, recreation buildings and private golf courses.
Manufactured homes.
Mobile homes. It shall be unlawful to place any mobile home on any lot or
parcel of land in the area covered by the zoning map except as a direct
replacement for a mobile home previously occupying that same lot or parcel
which:
   A.   Was destroyed or rendered uninhabitable by accident or act of nature,
and
   B.   Which had been used for human habitation continually for a period of
one year immediately prior to destruction or rendering uninhabitable of the
original mobile home, and
   C.   Such replacement mobile home occupies the same, or essentially the
same, footprint as the original mobile home.
Modular housing units. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004;
Ord. 2010-5, 3-25-2010)
10-7C-3: AREA AND DENSITY:
Minimum area and maximum density requirements within manufactured home parks
shall be as follows: (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
 
Zone     Minimum Area In Development (In Maximum Number Of Dwelling Units (Per
         Acres)                          Acre)
R-2-7500 5                               6
R-3-7500 3                               6
 
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7C-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The procedure leading to approval of a manufactured home park shall be the same
as set forth in section
10-7-4 of this chapter, except that no final plat, documents or statements
shall be required. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
10-7C-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements shall be constructed by the developer in each
manufactured home park, in accordance with city standards as directed by the
city engineer: (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-16-2004)
   A.   Streets, driveways and parking areas which shall be graded, graveled
and hard surfaced.
   B.   Curbs, gutters and walkways.
   C.   Drainage and flood control structures and facilities.
   D.   On site water and sewer mains, in accordance with the city's extension
policy.
   E.   Off site water and sewer mains, in accordance with the city's extension
policy.
   F.   Fire hydrants.
   G.   Permanent survey monuments.
   H.   Gas, electric and telephone lines (which shall be placed underground).
   I.   Landscaping.
   J.   Sprinkling or other suitable irrigation systems.
   K.   Fences, walls and all other common areas, facilities, systems and
structures proposed for the development as shown on the final plans.
   L.   Common storage area.
   M.   Street lighting.
   N.   All facilities required under the provisions of the code of camp,
trailer court, hotel, motel and resort sanitation regulations as adopted by the
Utah state board of health, which code is hereby adopted by reference and made
part of this title as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7C-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Planning Commission Review: The planning commission shall review the
plan to determine compliance with any portion of the comprehensive plan that
shall have been adopted by the planning commission. In considering approval of
the development, the planning commission shall, among other things, make sure
that such development will constitute a living environment of sustained
desirability and stability and that all unoccupied, as well as occupied, lots
will be landscaped and be maintained in a condition which is commensurate with
the condition of the landscaping in public parks. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   B.   Business License: Prerequisite to the operation of any manufactured
home park shall be the obtaining of a city business license which shall be
issued only after the approvals and inspections by the health department and
building inspector. It shall be unlawful to operate a manufactured home park
without the proper license and said license shall be refused or revoked upon
failure to annually renew the license or upon failure of the owner and/or
operator to maintain the park in accordance with the standards and requirements
as herein set forth.
   C.   Use Of Space; Lease Or Rent: Each space within a manufactured home park
shall be used for only one manufactured or mobile home at the same time. It
shall be the duty of the owner of the park to report to the city on a monthly
basis, the count or number of manufactured or mobile homes including
recreational vehicles that are occupied during that month. (Ord. 2010-5, 3-25-
2010)
   D.   Water Rights: Water rights shall be conveyed to city as set forth in
section
10-7-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   E.   Parks, Playgrounds And Open Space: No less than ten percent (10%) of
the gross area of the project shall be designated for parks and playgrounds for
the use of occupants. The land covered by vehicular roads and off street
parking and the yards surrounding manufactured or mobile homes which constitute
open space pertinent to individual manufactured or mobile homes and areas
devoted to service buildings, shall not be included in computing the required
area for parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 12-
16-2004)
ARTICLE D. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COURT
SECTION:
10-7D-1: Intent
10-7D-2: Permitted Uses
10-7D-3: Area And Density
10-7D-4: Approval Procedure
10-7D-5: Required Improvements
10-7D-6: Special Provisions
10-7D-1: INTENT:
The intent of these regulations is to establish guidelines dealing specifically
with design, construction, and operation of a recreation vehicle court. These
provisions shall be supplemental and in addition to the general requirements
for large scale developments. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 10-12-
2022)
10-7D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses within a recreation vehicle court shall be limited to the
following:
   A.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreation vehicles located on designated and
developed parking sites.
   B.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures for the use and enjoyment of
court occupants, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, showers,
laundry and restroom facilities, recreation buildings and areas and structures
used as an office or for the storage of maintenance equipment.
   C.   Caretaker: A single-family dwelling as a court caretaker dwelling.
   D.   Length of Rental Contract for space for Recreation vehicles will be
determined by the owner of the Recreational Vehicle Court. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-
1986; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 10-12-2022)
10-7D-3: AREA AND DENSITY:
Each recreation vehicle court shall have a land area of not less than one acre.
The maximum number of vehicle sites shall be not great than fifteen (15) per
acre. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 10-12-2022)
10-7D-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The procedure leading to approval of a recreation vehicle court shall be the
same as set forth in Section
10-7-4 of this Title, except that no final plat, documents, or statements shall
be required. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 10-12-2022)
10-7D-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements shall be constructed by the developer in each
recreation vehicle court, in accordance with City standards as directed by the
City Engineer:
   A.   Streets, driveways and parking areas which shall be graded, graveled or
hard surfaced.
   B.   Walkways will be maintained.
   C.   Drainage and flood control structures and facilities.
   D.   On-site water and sewer mains, in accordance with the City's extension
policy.
   E.   Off-site water and sewer mains, in accordance with the City's extension
policy.
   F.   Fire hydrants.
   G.   Permanent survey monuments.
   H.   Gas, electric and telephone lines (which shall be placed underground).
   I.   Landscaping will be maintained. Garbage will not be allowed to
accumulate on property.
   J.   Sprinkling or other suitable irrigation systems.
   K.   Fences, walls and all other common areas, facilities, systems, and
structures proposed for the development as shown on the final plans.
   L.   Street lighting.
   M.   Shower and restroom facilities.
   N.   All parking must be on R.V. court site. This will include any vehicles
that may be brought with patrons of the R.V. park. No on street parking.
   O.   All facilities required under the provisions of the code of camp,
trailer court, hotel, motel, and resort sanitations regulations as adopted by
the Utah state board of health, which code is hereby adopted by reference and
made part of this title if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd.
Ord. 2022-1, 10-12-2022)
10-7D-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Front on Specific Road: Each recreation vehicle court shall front on
and have direct access to a federal aid primary or secondary highway or upon a
designated arterial or collector road as shown on a the city's major street
plan.
   B.   Planning Commission Review: The planning commission shall review the
plan to determine compliance with any portion of the comprehensive plan that
shall have been adopted by the planning commission. In considering approval of
the development the planning commission shall, among other things, make sure
that such development will constitute a living environment of sustained
desirability and stability and that all unoccupied as well as occupied lots
will be landscaped and will be maintained in a condition which is commensurate
with the condition of the landscaping in the public parks.
   C.   Business License: Prerequisite to the operation of any recreation
vehicle court shall be the obtaining of an annual license which shall be issued
only after inspection by the health department. It shall be unlawful to operate
a recreation vehicle court without first obtaining a license and said license
shall be refused or revoked upon failure of the owner and/or operator to
maintain the park in accordance with the standards and requirements as herein
set forth.
   D.   Water Rights: Water rights shall be conveyed to city as set forth in
section
10-7-14 of this chapter.
   E.   Parks, Playgrounds and Open Space: No less than ten percent (10%) of
the gross area of the project shall be designated for parks and playgrounds for
the use of occupants. The land covered by vehicular roads and off-street
parking and the yards surrounding recreation vehicle court which constitute
open space pertinent to individual recreation vehicle courts and areas devoted
to service buildings, shall not be included in computing the required area for
parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 10-12-2022)
ARTICLE E. PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER
SECTION:
10-7E-1: Intent
10-7E-2: Permitted Uses
10-7E-3: Area, Density And Parking
10-7E-4: Approval Procedure
10-7E-5: Required Improvements
10-7E-6: Required Documents
10-7E-7: Special Provisions; Landscaping
10-7E-1: INTENT:
The intent of this Article is to establish guidelines dealing specifically with
the design, construction and operation of shopping centers. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-
1986)
10-7E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses within the Zone shall be limited to:
   A.   Retail and service outlets, including customary food stores,
supermarkets, drug and variety stores, cosmetic, clothing, fabric and shoe
stores, stationary and office supply stores, confectionery and ice cream
stores, hardware, garden and home supply stores, clinics, medical and dental
and other professional offices. Barber, beauty and hairstyle shops, banks and
lending agencies. Radio, television and electronic equipment sales and service
establishment. Service stations, laundry pickup and similar retail and service
establishments.
   B.   Driveways, off-street parking facilities, walkways, utility systems and
landscaped areas. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   One identification sign. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7E-3: AREA, DENSITY AND PARKING:
Each shopping center shall contain at least two and one-half (21/2) acres of
land. At least ten percent (10%) of the area contained in the site shall be
landscaped, part of which shall include a landscaped strip of land at least ten
feet (10') wide around the outside parameter of the site, except for driveways.
Off-street parking shall be at least fifty (50) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of building floor space. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
10-7E-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The procedure leading to approval shall be the same as set forth in Section
10-7-4 of this Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7E-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
Same as for planned unit developments, except that a common storage area shall
not be required. However, the location and outside dimensions of buildings and
the general nature of the commodities to be sold therein or the services to be
rendered therein, shall be shown on the final plans. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7E-6: REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:
   A.   One Ownership: Where the development is to be retained in one
ownership, required documents shall include:
      1.   Covenants, conditions, restrictions and management policies.
      2.   Management agreement.
   B.   Two Or More Owners: Where the development has two (2) or more owners or
where an existing development is being divided into two (2) or more ownerships,
required documents shall include:
      1.   Articles of incorporation for property owners' association.
      2.   Corporation bylaws.
      3.   Covenants, conditions, restrictions and management policies.
      4.   Management agreement.
   C.   Water Rights: Water rights shall be conveyed to the City as set forth
in
10-7-14 of this Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-7E-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS; LANDSCAPING:
In view of the fact that shopping centers will be surrounded by residential
uses, it shall be incumbent upon developers, lessors and operators to construct
and maintain landscaping and other amenities within the area covered by the
development commensurate with the general conditions of the surrounding area.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
CHAPTER 8
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-8-1: Permitted Uses
10-8-2: Home Occupations (Rep. by Ord. 2021-8, 11-11-2021)
10-8-3: Small Lots
10-8-4: Utility Buildings And Structures Permitted
10-8-5: Frontage On Public Street; Minimum Width Reduction
10-8-6: Uses Prohibited In Zones Unless Expressly Permitted
10-8-7: Moved Buildings
10-8-8: Transitional Uses
10-8-9: Off-Street Parking Adjustment Or Reduction
10-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
The uses specified in this Chapter shall be permitted only after approval as
set forth herein. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-8-2: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-8, 11-11-2021)
10-8-3: SMALL LOTS:
Where a parcel of land at the time of the adoption of the Ordinance codified
herein was at least one and eight-tenths (18/10) times as wide and one and
eight-tenths (18/10) times as large in area as required for a lot in the zone,
the Board of Adjustment may permit the division of a parcel into two (2) lots,
provided:
   A.   Building Concentration: Such division will not cause undue
concentration of buildings.
   B.   Zone Character: The characteristics of the zone in which the lot is
located will be maintained.
   C.   Values Safeguarded: In the opinion of the Board of Adjustment, values
in the area will be safeguarded. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-8-4: UTILITY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
Water, sewer and electric buildings and structures may be constructed in all
residential zones, subject to the approval of the Board of Adjustment. The
Board of Adjustment may require conditions which are reasonably necessary to
protect surrounding property values and residential amenities. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-
8-1986)
10-8-5: FRONTAGE ON PUBLIC STREET; MINIMUM WIDTH REDUCTION:
Except as may be authorized through the approval of a large scale development,
each lot shall abut upon a City-maintained street. The length of said abutting
side as measured at the setback line shall be not less than the minimum
frontage requirement of the zone; provided however, that the Planning
Commission may authorize a reduction of the minimum frontage requirement
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Minimum Distance: That the lot will abut the City- maintained street
for a minimum distance of thirty five feet (35').
   B.   Area, Width And Setback Requirements: That the buildable portion of the
lot shall comply with the minimum area, width and setback requirements of the
zone.
   C.   No Adverse Conditions: That the lot configuration created by the
granting of the reduction will not result in an undue adverse condition for the
property development of adjacent properties.
   D.   Necessary: That in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the
reduction of the frontage requirement is necessary to more fully promote the
effective and proper development of the City.
All lots in an approved subdivision plat which have frontage of less than the
minimum shall be considered as having qualified under the frontage reduction
provisions of this Section. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-8-6: USES PROHIBITED IN ZONES UNLESS EXPRESSLY PERMITTED:
Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within a zone are expressly
prohibited therein, except as may be permitted by action of the Board of
Adjustment pursuant to express authority under terms of this Title. The Board
of Adjustment shall not permit a use within a zone which is not expressly
permitted by the terms of this Title unless it can be shown that the use is
similar to other uses permitted in the zone. Where the Board of Adjustment
determines a use to be similar, such use shall thereafter be deemed to be a
permitted use as if it were listed therein on the effective date hereof. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-8-7: MOVED BUILDINGS:
   A.   Application For Permit: No permit for the moving of any residential,
commercial or industrial building within the City, which has had prior use
shall be issued, as required under Chapter 3 of this Title, without first
filing an application with the Zoning Administrator. Said application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Location and address of the old and new site.
      2.   Plot plan of the new location, also showing adjacent lots on all
sides of the property and indicating all structures and improvements on said
lots.
      3.   Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new
location, including plans for landscaping treatment when required by the Zoning
Administrator.
      4.   Certification by the Zoning Administrator that the structure is
sound enough to be moved and that the condition, location and use of the
building will comply with this Zoning Title and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
   B.   Findings Required: Before approving said application and authorizing
the issuance of a permit, the Zoning Administrator must find:
      1.   That the building will have no appreciable detrimental effect on the
living environment and property values in the area into which the structure is
to be moved.
      2.   That the building is in conformity with the quality of buildings
existing in the area into which it is proposed to be moved.
      3.   That said building and the lot on which the building is to be
located will conform to the requirements of this Zoning Title and other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
      4.   That its location on the lot does not in any substantial way
adversely affect buildings or uses in abutting properties.
      5.   That all required dedications and improvements for streets and
facilities and buildings shall be provided in conformity with the standards of
the City.
      6.   That adequate provision has been made through the posting of a bond
or other assurance that the building and grounds shall be brought up to the
standard of a new building before it is occupied and that the vacated site
shall be restored to a safe and sightly condition.
   C.   Other Applicable Homes: The requirements of this provision shall also
apply to the moving of mobile homes, demountable homes, manufactured homes and
similar movable structures, except when being moved from outside the City into
a mobile home park. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-8-8: TRANSITIONAL USES:
Uses which are permitted on either portion of a lot, which lot is divided by a
zone boundary line or which is contiguous with a zone boundary line, may be
permitted to extend to the entire lot, but not more than one hundred feet
(100') beyond the boundary line of such zone in which such use is permitted.
Before a permit for such a use may be granted, however, the Board of Adjustment
must find that the Comprehensive Plan of zoning will be maintained and that a
more harmonious mixing of uses will be achieved thereby. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-
1986)
10-8-9: OFF-STREET PARKING ADJUSTMENT OR REDUCTION:
The Board of Adjustment may approve substitute parking locations and may reduce
the amount of off-street parking required where sufficient off-street parking
is readily available within the vicinity and/or where acquisition of land for
such use is unnecessary in order to carry out the spirit of this Title. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
CHAPTER 9
TEMPORARY USES
SECTION:
10-9-1: Intent
10-9-2: Permitted Uses
10-9-3: Application
10-9-4: Approval Required
10-9-5: Delegation Of Approval Responsibility; Exceptions
10-9-1: INTENT:
The following regulations are provided to accommodate certain uses which are
temporary or seasonal in nature. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
Certain uses may be permitted on a temporary basis in any zone when approved by
the City Council. Said temporary uses may include, but will not be limited to:
   A.   Carnivals and circuses.
   B.   Christmas tree sales lots.
   C.   Flower stands.
   D.   Rummage sales.
   E.   Promotional displays.
   F.   Tents for religious services.
   G.   Political rallies.
   H.   Music festivals.
   I.   Construction storage yards, when required in connection with a primary
construction project. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-9-3: APPLICATION:
Prior to the establishment of any temporary use, an application for a temporary
use permit shall be submitted to and approved by the City Council. Said
application shall contain the following information:
   A.   A description of the proposed use.
   B.   A description of the property to be used, rented or leased for the
temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately portray the
property.
   C.   Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary
facilities and availability of parking space to service the proposed use. (Ord.
4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-9-4: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
The City Council may approve said application, provided the City Council finds:
   A.   Permitted Use: That the proposed use is listed as a permitted temporary
use or in the opinion of the City Council is similar to those uses permitted.
   B.   Excessive Hazards, Unsafe Conditions: That the proposed use will not
create excessive traffic hazards or other unsafe conditions in the area, and
that if traffic control is required, it will be provided at the expense of the
applicant.
   C.   Occupancy: That the proposed use shall occupy the site for a period not
to exceed ten (10) days, except for Christmas tree lots which shall not exceed
forty (40) days. Construction storage yards shall be removed within thirty (30)
days following completion of the primary construction project for which the
temporary permit was issued.
   D.   Liability Insurance: That the applicant will have sufficient liability
insurance for the requested use or event.
   E.   Restoration Of Site: That the applicant shall provide, at his own
expense, for the restoration of the site to its original condition, including
cleanup and replacement of facilities as may be necessary. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-
1986)
10-9-5: DELEGATION OF APPROVAL RESPONSIBILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Authority: The City Council may authorize the Zoning Administrator to
issue temporary use permits for certain temporary uses without City Council
review. Where the request is for a temporary use which is not listed or where,
in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the characteristics of the proposed
use are not in compliance with the above standards, the Zoning Administrator
shall refer the application to the City Council for their action.
   B.   Conditions: In granting approval, the City Council may attach
additional conditions as they deem appropriate to ensure that the use will not
pose any detriment to persons or property. The City Council may also require a
bond to ensure that necessary cleanup or restoration work will be performed.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Conditions For Allowance
10-10-2: Restoration Of Damaged Building
10-10-3: Discontinuance Or Abandonment
10-10-4: Change To Conforming Use
10-10-5: Change To Another Nonconforming Use Prohibited
10-10-6: Reclassification Of Territory
10-10-7: Permits Granted Prior To Passage
10-10-8: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-10-1: CONDITIONS FOR ALLOWANCE:
In view of the fact that no further development or change in use can be
undertaken contrary to the provisions of this Title, it is the intent of this
Chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be increased nor expanded, except
where a health or safety official, acting in his official capacity, requires
such increase or expansion. Such expansion shall be no greater than that which
is required to comply with the minimum requirements as set forth by the health
or safety official. Nevertheless, a nonconforming building or structure or use
of land may be continued to the same extent and character as that which legally
existed on the effective day of the applicable regulations. Repairs may also be
made to a nonconforming building or to a building housing a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-2: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDING:
A nonconforming building or structure or a building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind,
earthquake or other calamity or act of God or public enemy, may be restored and
the occupancy or use of such buildings, structure or part thereof which legally
existed at the time of such damage or destruction may be continued or resumed;
provided, that such restoration is started within a period of one year from the
date of destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion; and provided,
that such restoration does not increase the floor space devoted to the
nonconforming use over that which existed at the time the building became
nonconforming. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-3: DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT:
A nonconforming building or structure or portion thereof or a lot occupied by a
nonconforming use which is, or hereafter becomes, abandoned or is discontinued
for a continuous period of one year or more shall not thereafter be occupied,
except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it
is located. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-4: CHANGE TO CONFORMING USE:
A nonconforming use or building may be changed to a conforming use or building.
Any nonconforming use or building which has been changed to a conforming use or
building shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 4-
8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-5: CHANGE TO ANOTHER NONCONFORMING USE PROHIBITED:
A nonconforming use of a building or lot shall not be changed to another
nonconforming use whatsoever. Changes in use shall be made only to a conforming
use. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-6: RECLASSIFICATION OF TERRITORY:
The provision pertaining to nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall also
apply to land and buildings which hereafter become nonconforming due to an
amendment in this Zoning Title. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-7: PERMITS GRANTED PRIOR TO PASSAGE:
Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit therefor, no building which becomes
nonconforming upon the passage of the Ordinance codified herein or which
becomes nonconforming due to an amendment to the Ordinance codified herein
shall be built, unless construction has taken place thereon to the extent of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) in replaceable value by the date on which the
Ordinance codified herein or said amendment becomes effective. Replaceable
value shall be construed to mean the expenditure necessary to duplicate the
materials and labor at market prices. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
10-10-8: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, a one- family dwelling may
be permitted on any lot of record in any zone in which dwellings are permitted,
even though such lot fails to meet the area or width requirements for one-
family dwellings within the zone; provided, that where two (2) or more
contiguous lots of record having continuous frontage are owned by the same
person at the time of the passage of the controlling ordinance, the land
included in the lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel and no
portion of said parcel shall be used as a dwelling site or sold which does not
meet the area and width requirements of the zone in which the lot is located.
Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width shall
conform to the regulations of the zone in which the lot is located, except when
granted by a variance by the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
CHAPTER 11
ANNEXATION; AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Annexation
10-11-2: Amendments To Ordinance And Map
10-11-1: ANNEXATION:
   A.   Classification: All land annexed to the city shall be classified into
that zone to which it is contiguous. Where the annexed land is contiguous to
more than one zone, the newly annexed land shall be classified into that zone
having the longest contiguous boundary.
   B.   Effective: The zone designation assigned pursuant to this provision
shall remain in effect until amended in accordance with the procedure for
amending this title. Property shall not be reclassified to another zone
concurrently with or prior to completion of annexation proceedings, nor shall
any officer or official utilize zone reclassification commitments as a medium
of bargaining for annexation of property to the city. (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   C.   Water Shares Required: Water shares shall be required for all
annexations initiated by landowners at a ratio established by the city council
and shall be conveyed to the city as a condition of the annexation. (Ord. 2011-
2, 4-28-2011)
10-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE AND MAP:
The zoning ordinance codified herein, including the map, may be amended as
hereinafter provided: (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
   A.   Intent With Respect To Amendments: It is hereby declared to be public
policy that this title shall not be changed, except to correct manifest errors
or to more fully carry out the intent and purpose of the general plan for the
city and of this title.
   B.   Procedure: Any person seeking an amendment to this zoning title or map
shall submit to the city a written petition designating the change desired and
the reasons therefor and shall pay the required filing fee to the city. Upon
receipt of the petition and the payment of the filing fee, the planning
commission shall consider the request and shall certify its recommendations to
the city council with respect to the request within thirty (30) days from
receipt of this request. Failure on the part of the planning commission to
certify its recommendations to the city council within thirty (30) days shall
be deemed to constitute approval unless a longer period is granted by the city
council. The fee required herein shall not be returned to the applicant. The
planning commission or city council may also initiate amendments to this title.
(Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011)
   C.   Public Hearing Required: Amendments to this title may be adopted only
after a public hearing in relation thereto before the city council at which
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the area at least fifteen (15) days before the
date of hearing, as required by law 1 . (Ord. 4-8-86, 4-8-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-9-403.
CHAPTER 12
CONFINEMENT AND KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK
SECTION:
10-12-1: Purpose
10-12-2: Applicability
10-12-3: Definitions
10-12-4: Creation Of Nuisance Prohibited
10-12-5: Conditions, Limitations, And Restrictions On The Keeping Of Domestic
Livestock
10-12-6: Animal And Area Allowances
10-12-7: Penalty
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and requirements for
the confinement and keeping of livestock on lots within the city so as to
promote the safety, health and well being of people and animals. (Ord. 2004-2,
11-18-2004)
10-12-2: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply only to the confinement and
keeping of domestic livestock established on or after the effective date
hereof. Confinement and keeping of domestic livestock legally established
before the adoption date hereof shall be governed by the provisions of legal
nonconforming uses as prescribed in chapter 10 of this title and the applicable
ordinances in effect at the time such confinement or keeping was established.
Exotic or wild animals and other potentially hazardous animals, as deemed
hazardous by the city council, are not permitted. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004;
amd. Ord. 2010-4, 2-11-2010)
10-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK: Is defined as the following animals and fowl:
   A.   Horses, mules, donkeys, and other domesticated equines;
   B.   Cows, oxen, and other bovines, except bison;
   C.   Sheep, llamas, peacocks, turkeys, ostriches, emus, and similar animals;
   D.   Chickens, ducks, geese, and other small fowl;
   E.   Rabbits; and
   F.   Pigs, hogs, swine, and other porcine. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004; amd.
Ord. 2010-4, 2-11-2010)
10-12-4: CREATION OF NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
Subject to the limitations described in this chapter, and in title 4, chapter 2
of this code, "domestic livestock" or fowl, as defined in section
10-12-3 of this chapter, may be kept within the city; provided, that they are
kept in a manner that does not create a nuisance.
   A.   A "nuisance" is any item, thing, manner, or condition whatsoever which
is dangerous to the public safety, health, or welfare, or which renders soil,
air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, and which is shown to have been
ongoing, rather than an isolated instance.
   B.   Any person, whether owner, agent, or occupant who creates, aids in
creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains
a nuisance shall be subject to the enforcement procedures described in title 4,
chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004)
10-12-5: CONDITIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS ON THE KEEPING OF DOMESTIC
LIVESTOCK:
Any number of such animals in any combination shall be permitted on each lot of
four (4) acres or less; provided, that the minimum area per animal does not
exceed the total allowed per acre, subject to the following provisions and
limitations:
   A.   Buildings: All corrals, stalls, pens, paddocks, barns, stables, coops,
sheds, hutches, or similar buildings used for the housing or confinement of
domestic livestock and fowl, and all water troughs and areas used for feeding
of domestic livestock shall be located no closer than one hundred feet (100')
from any dwelling located on any neighboring lot or parcel and no closer than
fifty feet (50') from any dwelling on the same lot or parcel.
   B.   Distance To Dwellings: Animals or livestock permitted by this section
may not be kept, or be allowed to pass within twenty feet (20') of any dwelling
on a neighboring lot, which existed at the time confinement and keeping such
livestock or animals was legally established. This restriction shall not apply
to the transport of animals or livestock into or out of pasture area which
otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
   C.   Coops And Hutches: At all times, chickens, ducks, geese and other fowl
shall be kept in coops, and rabbits shall be kept in hutches. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-
18-2004)
   D.   Enclosures: Suitable enclosures, substantially constructed, shall be
provided and maintained for the safekeeping of all fowl or animals kept within
the city. All structures and enclosures for the confinement and keeping of
animals permitted by this section shall meet the following minimum area
requirements. See section
10-12-6, table 1 of this chapter. All breeding stock, including, but not
limited to, stallions and bulls, shall be confined in secure enclosures. (Ord.
2010-4, 2-11-2010)
   E.   Drainage: Property owners shall take ordinary care and use reasonable
means to prevent surface water from draining onto any adjoining public or
private property and shall not erect or install any structure, ditch, slope, or
make any modification to any surface or structure that diverts or tends to
divert surface water onto adjoining public or private property. Surface water
from rooftops shall not be allowed to drain onto adjacent lots or streets.
Surface drainage from corrals, pens, or coops shall not be permitted to drain
onto adjacent lots or streets, nor shall it be permitted to enter the sanitary
sewer system. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004)
10-12-6: ANIMAL AND AREA ALLOWANCES:
   A.   Square footage numbers shall apply only to area devoted solely to
livestock, after all other setback restrictions are accounted for.
   B.   For the purpose of determining compliance, said definition shall not
include the unweaned offspring less than six (6) months old of any residing
animal.
   C.   A concentrated amount of animals is permitted during the time from
October 1 to November 15, so long as the nuisance provisions in this chapter
and title 4, chapter 2 of this code are not violated.
   D.   The maximum number of domestic livestock or fowl permitted on any lot
or parcel within the city shall be as follows: (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004)
   TABLE 1
 
Type Of Animal               Required Enclosure       Minimum Area Per Animal
Rabbits                      Hutches                  4 square feet
Chickens, ducks, geese, and  Coops                    6 square feet
other small fowl
Sheep, llamas, peacocks,
turkeys, ostriches, emus,    Pasture or corral        500 square feet
and similar animals
Cows, oxen, and other        Pasture or corral Secure 1,000 square feet 1,000
bovines Bulls                enclosure                square feet
Horses, mules, donkeys, and  Pasture or corral Secure 2,000 square feet 2,000
other domesticated equines   enclosure                square feet
Stallions
Pigs, hogs, swine, and other Pen only Secure pen      50 square feet 50 square
porcine Boar                                          feet
 
   (Ord. 2010-4, 2-11-2010)
10-12-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor as
stated in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2004-2, 11-18-2004)
CHAPTER 13
GROUP HOMES; OTHER FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Definitions
10-13-2: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
10-13-3: Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons
10-13-4: Design Standards
10-13-5: Nonresidential Treatment Facilities
10-13-6: Limitations
10-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to all sections of this title and except
as provided herein, shall supersede any other definition contained in this
title:
ADULT DAYCARE FACILITY: Any building or structure furnishing care, supervision,
and guidance for three (3) or more adults unaccompanied by guardians for
periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A residential facility, licensed by the state of
Utah, with a homelike setting that provides an array of coordinated support
personnel and healthcare services, available twenty four (24) hours per day, to
residents who have been assessed under the Utah department of health or the
Utah department of human services rules to need any of these services. Each
resident shall have a service plan based on the assessment, which may include:
   A.   Specified services of intermediate nursing care;
   B.   Administration of medication; and
   C.   Support services promoting resident's independence and self-
sufficiency. Such a facility does not include adult daycare provided in
conjunction with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such a problem or being regarded as having such an impairment. The following
definitions are incorporated into the definition of disability:
   A.   Disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to,
any federally controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the controlled
substances act, 21 USC 802, or as defined under title 58, chapter 37, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended;
   B.   A physical or mental impairment includes the following:
      1.   Any psychological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological, musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular, reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
      2.   Any mental or physiological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities; or
      3.   Such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy,
multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than
addiction caused by current, illegal use of controlled substances) and
alcoholism.
DOMESTIC STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling or
other residential facility to perform domestic services or to assist residents
in performing major life activities.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years or older, who desires or needs
to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of
living independently.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or
guardianship, and may also include three (3) additional unrelated individuals
living with the family, such as domestic staff, living together as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit. "Family" does not exclude the care of foster
children.
HOSPITAL: An institution licensed by the state of Utah which provides
diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to individuals on both an
inpatient and outpatient basis by or under the supervision of one or more
physicians. A medical clinic or professional office which offers any inpatient
or overnight care, or operates on a twenty four (24) hour basis shall be
considered to be a hospital. A hospital may include necessary support service
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient units and training and central
services, together with staff offices necessary to operate the hospital.
MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES: Functions such as caring for oneself, performing manual
tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility wherein no persons will be housed
on an overnight basis, and provides services including rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to
delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, sexual offenders, sexual abuse,
or mental health. Associated educational services may also be provided to
juvenile occupants.
NURSING HOME: An intermediate care/nursing facility or a skilled nursing
facility licensed by the state of Utah, for the care of individuals who, due to
illness, advanced age, disability, or impairment require assistance and/or
supervision on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis. Such a facility does not
include an adult daycare facility or adult daycare provider in conjunction with
residential facilities for elderly persons or a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY: A facility either: a) operated, licensed, or
contracted by a governmental entity, or b) operated by a charitable, nonprofit
organization, where for no compensation, temporary, protective housing is
provided to: a) abused or neglected children awaiting placement of foster care;
b) pregnant or parenting teens; c) victims of sexual abuse; or d) victims of
domestic abuse.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in any rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. The following words have the following definitions:
   A.   Reasonable: A requested accommodation that will not undermine the
legitimate purpose of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit
that the accommodation will provide to a person with a disability.
   B.   Necessary: The applicant must show that, but for the accommodation one
or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal opportunity to
enjoy the housing of their choice.
   C.   Equal Opportunity: Achieving equal results as between a person with a
disability and a nondisabled person.
RECORD OF IMPAIRMENT: Having a record of impairment means having a history of,
or having been misclassified as having a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
REGARDED AS HAVING IMPAIRMENT: A person is regarded as having an impairment
when:
   A.   The person has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one or more major life activities but is treated by another
person as having such a limitation;
   B.   The person has a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of
others toward such an impairment; or
   C.   The person has none of the impairments defined in this section but is
treated by another person as having such an impairment.
REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility licensed or contracted by the
state of Utah to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of individuals
(adults and/or juveniles) in order to provide rehabilitation, treatment or
counseling services. Without limitation, such services may include
rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services
related to delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, sexual offenders,
sexual abuse, or mental health. Associated educational services may also be
provided to juvenile occupants.
RELATED: Related by blood, marriage or adoption within the definition of
"family" means a father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, sister, brother,
uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in- law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent, or
grandchild, to include the half as well as the whole blood.
RESIDENCE, RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any building or portion thereof where an
individual is actually living at a given point and time and intends to remain,
and not a place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A dwelling unit that is occupied on a
twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8) or fewer elderly persons in a
family type arrangement. A residential facility for elderly persons shall not
include any of the following:
   A.   A facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility
may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
   B.   A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a healthcare
facility as defined by title 26, chapter 21, section 2, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended; or a facility which is a residential facility for persons
with a disability.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in which more
than one person with a disability resides and which is:
   A.   Licensed or certified by the department of human services under title
62A, chapter 2, of the Utah code, licensure of programs and facilities; or
   B.   Licensed or certified by the department of human health under title 26,
chapter 21, health care facilities licensing and inspection act.
RETIREMENT HOME: A residential facility designated, occupied, and intended for
residents fifty (50) years of age or older where common facilities for cooking
and dining are available to all residents and independent facilities are
provided for living, sleeping and sanitation.
SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS: Charitable lodging or sleeping rooms provided on a
temporary basis (usually on a daily basis) to those members of society lacking
other safe, sanitary or affordable shelter. A shelter for the homeless may also
include kitchen and cafeteria facilities. (Ord. 2010-2, 1-28-2010)
10-13-2: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Applicability: This section shall be deemed to govern any facility,
residence, or other circumstance that meets the definition of a residential
facility as set forth in this chapter, and the definition of a disabled person
as set forth in this chapter; the requirements of this section shall govern the
same notwithstanding any other provisions of this code.
   B.   Purpose: The purposes of this section are:
      1.   To comply with title 10, chapter 9a, section 520, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended; and
      2.   To avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities
as provided in the Utah fair housing act and the federal fair housing
amendments act as interpreted by the courts having jurisdiction over the city
of Ferron.
   C.   Permitted Use: A residential facility for persons with a disability
shall be a permitted use in any zoning district where a dwelling is allowed.
Each such facility shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall comply with all applicable building, safety and
health regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, fire regulations, and
all applicable state core standards and licensing requirements, and any
standards set forth in any contract with a state agency. The facility shall
also comply with the city's land use zoning provisions applicable to single-
family dwellings for the zone in which it is to be located, except as may be
modified by the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The following site development standards and parking standards shall
be applicable:
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development
standards applicable to a dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is
located; and
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same
as the number required for a dwelling with similar occupancy density in the
same zone.
      3.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a direct threat or
substantial risk to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
      4.   Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or
certified by the department of human services or the department of health to
establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a certified copy of such license to the city recorder;
         b.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for
a business license, compliance with the Americans with disabilities act;
         c.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for
a business license, that no person will be placed or remain in the facility
whose prior or current behavior, actions and/or criminal incidents or
convictions, have demonstrated that such person is or may be a substantial risk
or direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, or whose said
behavior, actions and/or incidents or convictions have resulted in or may
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. Such affidavit
shall be supplemented and updated not less than one hundred fifty (150) days,
nor more than one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of issuance of the
business license and at the time of the application for renewal of the business
license.
      5.   The use permitted by this section is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
         a.   A facility is devoted to or used as other than a residential
facility for persons with a disability; or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the department of human
services, department of health or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked; or
         c.   The facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in
this section.
      6.   Residential facilities for persons with disabilities that are
substance abuse facilities and are located within five hundred feet (500') of a
school, shall provide, in accordance with rules established by the department
of human services under title 62A, chapter 2, licensure of program and
facilities:
         a.   A security plan satisfactory to local law enforcement
authorities;
         b.   Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents; and
         c.   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures.
      7.   No residential facility for persons with disabilities shall be
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such facility as measured
from nearest property line of the existing facility to nearest property line of
the proposed facility.
   D.   Reasonable Accommodations: None of the foregoing conditions shall be
interpreted to limit reasonable accommodations necessary to allow the
establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for person(s) with a
disability.
      1.   Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable
accommodation shall make application to the planning commission. Said
applications shall specifically articulate, in writing, the following:
         a.   The name, mailing address, and phone number of the applicant;
         b.   The nature and extent of the disability;
         c.   An exact statement of the ordinance or policy from which the
applicant needs a reasonable accommodation;
         d.   The applicant's proposed reasonable accommodations;
         e.   A statement detailing why a reasonable accommodation is
necessary; and
         f.   The physical address of the property where the applicant intends
on living;
      2.   When considering whether or not to grant a reasonable accommodation,
the planning commission shall consider the following factors, among others
deemed appropriate and applicable:
         a.   The zoning ordinance applicable to the property;
         b.   The parking, traffic, and noise impact on the neighborhood if the
reasonable accommodation is granted;
         c.   Whether or not the accommodation will be an undue burden or
expense to the city;
         d.   The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit
the applicant;
         e.   The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit
the community;
         f.   Whether or not the accommodation fundamentally alters the
citywide zoning ordinance and whether or not the accommodation would likely
create a fundamental change in the character of a residential neighborhood;
         g.   Whether or not the applicant has demonstrated that the
accommodation will affirmatively enhance the applicant's life, or ameliorate
the effects of the applicant's disability, or the lives or disabilities on
whose behalf the entity is applying;
         h.   Whether or not, without the accommodation, similar housing is
available in the city of Ferron for the applicant or group of applicants;
         i.   Given the scope of the accommodation requested, what is the
impact on the immediate neighborhood; and
         j.   The requirements of applicable federal and state laws and
regulations;
      3.   Written findings and conclusions of the planning commission shall be
sent to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the decision by the city
council; and
      4.   If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, such decision
may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 2010-2, 1-28-2010)
10-13-3: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with title 10,
chapter 9a, sections 516 through 519, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
   B.   Compliance: "Residential facilities for elderly persons" shall comply
with all requirements of sections 10-9a-516 through 519, Utah Code Annotated,
and also the following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall meet all applicable building codes, safety codes,
zoning regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, and health ordinance
applicable to single-family or similar dwellings; except as may be modified by
the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a substantial risk or
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others;
      3.   Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a
dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is located;
      4.   The facility shall be capable of being used as a residential
facility for elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations that
would change the structure's residential character;
      5.   The use granted and permitted by this section is nontransferable and
terminates if the structure is devoted to any use other than as a residential
facility for the elderly or if the structure fails to comply with the
applicable health, safety, zoning and building codes;
      6.   No residential facility for elderly persons which facility has more
than five (5) elderly persons in residence shall be established or maintained
within three-fourths (3/4) of a mile measured in a straight line between the
closest property lines of the lots or parcels of similar facilities,
residential facilities for persons with disabilities, protective housing
facilities, transitional housing facilities, assisted living facilities,
rehabilitation/treatment facilities, or a nonresidential treatment facility.
(Ord. 2010-2, 1-28-2010)
10-13-4: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Any newly constructed or remodeled facility in a residential zone or
immediately abutting a residential zone shall comply with the following design
standards:
      1.   All setbacks shall be according to the requirements of the
residential zone in which the facility sits, or if the facility is in a
commercial zone abutting a residential zone the setbacks shall be those of the
abutting residential zone;
      2.   All required or accessory parking areas shall be located either in
the rear yard area of the lot, or behind the main building or garage;
      3.   In addition to the maximum height restrictions of the individual
residential zone, new building or additional buildings shall not exceed one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the average height of the closest dwellings on
both sides of the proposed structure;
      4.   In order for new construction to reflect the design and character of
the existing neighborhood the following standards shall be met:
         a.   The roof design of the proposed structure or remodel shall be a
pitched roof of the same slope as the most common roof slope of the homes on
the side of the block on which the building is proposed; and
         b.   The type of exterior materials shall be of traditional home
finished materials of brick, siding, or stucco. The use of these materials
shall be applied in such a manner as to blend in with the neighborhood where
the building is located and not draw undue attention to the building because of
the materials, their color and combination being uncharacteristic of the other
buildings in the neighborhood;
      5.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a substantial risk or
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others;
      6.   To the extent similar requirements to any contained in this section
are contained in the specific zone in which any facility referred to herein may
be located, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, and the requirements
stated herein shall be considered to be in addition to presently existing
zoning regulations. (Ord. 2010-2, 1-28-2010)
10-13-5: NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES:
   A.   Nonresidential treatment facilities shall not be built within the city
of Ferron except as specifically allowed as a permitted or conditional use by
proper designation in a zone or zones in this title. Each permitted facility,
or facility allowed as a conditional use, shall conform to the following
requirements:
      1.   The facility shall comply with all building, safety, zoning and
health regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, fire regulations, and
all applicable state core standards and licensing requirements, and any
standards set forth in any contract with a state agency.
      2.   The following site development standards and parking standards shall
be applicable:
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development
standards applicable to a business in the zone in which the facility may be
located; and
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same
as the number required for an office building with similar size, occupancy, and
density in the same zone.
      3.   Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or
certified by the department of human services or the department of health to
establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a certified copy of such license with the city recorder;
         b.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with application for a
business license, compliance with the Americans with disabilities act.
      4.   The use permitted by this section is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
         a.   A facility is devoted to or used as other than a nonresidential
facility; or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the department of human
services, department of health or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked, or the facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in this
section.
      5.   No nonresidential treatment facility shall be established or
maintained within seven hundred feet (700') measured in a straight line between
the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of the following facilities:
         a.   A residential facility for persons with a disability;
         b.   A residential facility for elderly with more than five (5)
elderly persons in a residence; or
         c.   Any of the following facilities: protective housing facility,
transitional housing facility, assisted living facility or rehabilitation/
treatment facility, a nonresidential treatment facility, and elementary
schools.
      6.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a direct threat or
substantial risk to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
      7.   To the extent similar requirements to any contained in this section
are contained in the specific zone in which any facility referred to herein may
be located, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, and the requirements
stated herein shall be considered to be in addition to presently existing
zoning regulations. (Ord. 2010-2, 1-28-2010)
10-13-6: LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Only such uses and facilities as are specifically authorized in this
chapter and in this title as permitted or conditional uses shall be allowed.
All other uses and facilities are prohibited. (Ord. 2010-2, 1-28-2010)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Scope Of Applicability
11-1-3: Interpretation And Conflict Of Laws
11-1-4: Penalty For Non Compliance
11-1-5: Definitions
11-1-6: Approved and Recorded Documents Required
11-1-7: Subdivision Land Use Authority
11-1-8: Subdivision Appeal Authority
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Title is to comply with Utah Code §10-9a-604-604.9, and
increase administrative efficiency in reviewing subdivision applications to
promote an adequate and efficient street and road system, to prevent congestion
on streets and promote traffic safety, to secure desirable public space, to
ensure proper distribution of population, to provide for adequate utilities and
public improvements, to provide for orderly growth, and to improve the health,
safety and general welfare of the people. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-1-2: SCOPE OF APPLICABILITY:
This Title applies to all applications or petitions to subdivide land in the
City, regardless of the intended use (commercial, residential, etc.). The
requirements of this Title do not apply retroactively to subdivision
applications or petitions that were approved by the City prior to the enactment
of this ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT OF LAWS:
Where any provision in this Subdivision Title conflicts with state law, state
law shall prevail. Where any provision in this Subdivision Title conflicts with
other ordinances enacted by the City, the provisions in this Subdivision Title
shall prevail unless the City intended such conflicting ordinances not in this
Title to amend this Title. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-1-4: PENALTY FOR NON COMPLIANCE:
It is unlawful to transfer ownership of any parcel of land pursuant to a
subdividing document that has not been approved by the City under this Title,
The City may, in its discretion, void such transfers. Additionally, any person
who violates this Title by subdividing or attempting to subdivide without City
approval shall be criminally liable for a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-
8-2025)
11-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, as used in this Title, shall have the
following meanings. Words and phrases not defined here have the meaning defined
in state law:
ALLEY: A narrow public or private way which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property. An alley is not intended for general travel and must be
less than twenty six feet (26') in width.
BENCH MARK: A mark affixed to a permanent or semipermanent object along a line
of survey to furnish a datum level.
BLOCK: A piece of land surrounded by streets or other rights of way other than
an alley; or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision
plat.
CITY: Ferron City, county of Emery, state of Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected ruling body of Ferron City, Emery County, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: Any professional civil engineer licensed by the state of Utah
and appointed by the City council to accomplish the objectives of this title;
provided, that no such person may serve the City and a subdivider
simultaneously where he would have to check his own work or the work of a
member of his firm in connection with any subdivision in the City.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic to the major street system,
and shall have a designated right of way of sixty feet (60').
CROSSWALK OR WALKWAY: A right of way designated for use by pedestrians and not
intended for use by motor vehicles of any kind when in use by a pedestrian.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being terminated at the
other end by a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER: Any legal entity who subdivides a parcel of land. Developer may also
be referred to as a subdivider,
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons residing,
employed at or otherwise using or visiting the lot on which the roadway is
located.
EASEMENT: A quantity of land, existing distinct from the ownership of the land,
over which a liberty, privilege or advantage in land without profit is granted
to the public or some particular person or part of the public.
FACILITY OWNER: Means the same as that term is defined in state law and
includes a canal owner or associated canal operator contact described in
different sections of state law,
FEEDER STREET: A street which carries traffic to a collector or major street
system and shall have a designated right of way of fifty feet (50').
FINAL PLAT: A subdivision map prepared in accordance with the provisions of
this title that is accurately surveyed and with such survey results marked on
the ground so that the streets, alleys, lanes, blocks, lots and other divisions
thereof can be identified. The final plat is designated to be placed on record
in the office of the county recorder.
IMPROVEMENTS: Devices, facilities or utilities required to be constructed or
installed in a subdivision. Such improvements may include, but arc not limited
to, water facilities, sewer facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, drainage
facilities, streets, trees, street signs, streetlights, traffic control or
safety devices, fire hydrants and such other facilities or construction
required by this subdivision title.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A plan to complete permanent infrastructure on the
subdivision that is essential for the public health and safety, that is
required for human occupation, or that is required by applicable law and that
an applicant must install in accordance with public installation and inspection
specifications for public improvements and as a condition of recording a
subdivision plat.
IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY: An applicant’s unconditional warranty that the
applicant’s installed and accepted landscaping or infrastructure improvement:
   1.   Complies with the City’s written standards for design, materials, and
workmanship; and
   2.   Will not fail in any material respect, as a result of poor workmanship
or materials, within the improvement warranty period.
IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY PERIOD: A period:
   1.   No later than one year after a City’s acceptance of required
landscaping; or
   2.   No later than one year after a City’s acceptance of required
infrastructure, unless the City:
      a.   Determines for good cause that a one-year period would be inadequate
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and
      b.   Has substantia! evidence, on record:
         i.   Of prior poor performance by the applicant; or
         ii.   That the area upon which the infrastructure will be constructed
contains suspect soil and the City has not otherwise required the applicant to
mitigate the suspect soil,
LANE: A public or private way which affords primary access to abutting
property.
LAND USE APPLICATION: An application required by the City and submitted by a
land use applicant to obtain a land use approval; this does not mean an
application to enact, amend, or repeal a land use regulation.
LAN D USE AUTHORITY: An individual, board, or commission appointed or employed
by a City to make land use decisions. “Land Use Authority” includes any
appropriately authorized designees.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or land, intended as a unit for building
development or transfer of ownership.
MAJOR STREET: A street which serves as a major trafficway. a controlled access
highway, major street parkway or other equivalent term to identify those
streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan, and shall have a
designated right of way of eighty feet (80').
MASTER PLAN: A plan, including maps or reports or both, which has been approved
by the City council and the planning commission, which helps to establish lines
of current and future planned streets, roads, highways, etc., as provided in
Utah Code Annotated, as amended.?
OFFICIAL MAP: Any map adopted by the planning commission and/or the City
council under the provisions of Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
OWNER: The person, partnership, corporation, or other entity in which is vested
the fee simple, unencumbered title of the property to be subdivided, unless
otherwise clearly indicated.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Ferron City planning commission, unless another
planning commission is specifically named.
PLAT: An instrument subdividing property into lots as depicted on a map or
other graphic representation of land that a licensed professional land surveyor
makes and prepares in accordance with § 10-9a-603 or §57-8-13 of Utah State
Code (as amended).
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A map or plan of a proposed land division or subdivision
prepared in accordance with the requirements of this title.
PUBLIC LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENT: landscaping that an applicant is required to
install to comply with published installation and inspection specifications for
public improvements that:
   1.   Will be dedicated to and maintained by the City; or
   2.   Are associated with and proximate to trail improvements that connect to
planned or existing public infrastructure.
REVIEW CYCLE: The occurrence of the applicant’s submittal of a complete
subdivision application; the City’s review of that subdivision application; the
City’s response to that subdivision application; and the applicant’s reply to
the City’s response that addresses each of the City’s required modifications or
requests for additional information.
SKETCH PLAN: A conceptual drawing of the proposed development prepared in
accordance with the requirements of this title.
SUBDIVIDE (And Any Derivative Thereof): Shall have reference to the term
“subdivision” as defined herein.
SUBDIVIDER: Any legal entity who subdivides a parcel of land. Subdivider may
also be referred to as a developer.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, subdivided, or proposed to be divided
into two or more lots or other division of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either on the
installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions.
   1.   Subdivision includes:
      a.   The division or development of land, whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument, regardless of whether the division includes all or a portion of a
parcel or lot; and
      b.   Except as provided below, divisions of land for residential and
nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for commercial,
agricultural, and industrial purposes.
   2.   Subdivision does not include:
      a.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land
use ordinance;
      b.   A boundary line agreement recorded with the Office of the County
Recorder between owners of adjoining parcels adjusting the mutual boundary in
accordance with §10-9a-524 of Utah State Code (as amended) if no new parcel is
created;
      c.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record revising the
legal descriptions of multiple parcels into one legal description encompassing
all such parcels or joining a lot to parcel;
      d.   A joining of one or more lots to a parcel;
      e.   A road, street, or highway dedication plat; or
      f.   A deed or easement for a road, street, or highway purpose.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE REVIEW: Review by the City to verily that a subdivision
application meets the criteria of the City’s ordinances.
SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW: A review of the applicant’s subdivision improvement
plans and other aspects of the subdivision application to verify that the
application complies with municipal ordinances and applicable installation
standards and inspection specifications for infrastructure improvements.
SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS: Those requirements that are adopted by the various
governing bodies in the City for the necessary proper development of the
proposed subdivision.
STATE ENGINEER’S INVENTORY OE CANALS: The state engineer’s inventory of water
conveyance systems established in state law.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Means the same as that term is defined in state law.
VARIANCE. COMMITTEE: The board of adjustment.
WATER CONVEYANCE FACILITY: Means a ditch, canal, flume, pipeline, or other
watercourse used to convey water used for irrigation or storm water drainage
and any related easement for the ditch, canal, flume, pipeline, or other
watercourse. “Water conveyance facility” docs not mean a ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse used to convey water used for culinary or
industrial water, or any federal water project facility. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-
2025)
11-1-6: APPROVED AND RECORDED DOCUMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   No land shall be subdivided which is located wholly or in part in the
City, except in compliance with this Title and Utah Code as adopted and
amended.
   B.   A subdivision of land is not valid unless its governing document is
approved by the Land Use Authority and properly recorded in the County
Recorder’s Office. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-1-7: SUBDIVISION LAND USE AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Land Use Authority for preliminary applications under this Title is
the Planning Commission, except where otherwise noted. For purposes of
subdivision applications, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for the
following, but may delegate any responsibility to City staff:
      1.   Rendering land use decisions related to preliminary applications.
      2.   Complete the initial review of the preliminary subdivision land use
application, including review of the subdivision improvement plans, within 30
business days after the day that the application is submitted.
      3.   Reviewing preliminary applications in an impartial manner and
according to the standards and deadlines described in this Title.
      4.   Holding one public hearing for preliminary applications (when
needed).
      5.   Providing feedback to applicants on their preliminary applications.
      6.   Scheduling and holding a pre-application meeting with potential
applicants (when requested).
      7.   Keeping application forms (both preliminary and final) and related
informational material up to date and publicly accessible and distributing such
forms and materials to potential applicants. This task is delegated to City
staff by default.
      8.   Providing notice to entities and parties as required by this Title.
This task is delegated to City staff by default.
      9.   Ensuring that documents are properly recorded with the County after
final approval as required by this Title. This task is delegated to City staff
by default.
   B.   The Land Use Authority for final applications under this Title is the
Development Review Committee (DRC). This Committee will consist of the Mayor
(or Mayor’s designee). Chair of the Planning Commission (or designee), and the
Town Engineer. This Committee will meet on an as- needed basis and will make
final approval decisions with a majority vote. For purposes of subdivision
applications, the Development Review Committee shall be responsible for the
following:
      1.   Rendering land use decisions related to final applications.
      2.   Reviewing final applications in an impartial manner and according to
the standards and deadlines described in this Title.
      3.   Signing final application approvals as required by this Title.
   C.   As Subdivision application decisions are administrative, not
legislative, decisions, the Land Use Authority is authorized to make any land
use decision described by this Title without City Council approval.
   D.   Except when operating as the Appeal Authority, the City Council shall
not require the Land Use Authority to approve or deny an application. (Ord.
2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-1-8: SUBDIVISION APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Appeal Authority for City decisions relating to this Title, except
where otherwise noted, is the City Council.
   B.   The Appeal Authority shall hear appeals on final decisions made by the
Land Use Authority and shall hear- complaints about the conduct of the Land Use
Authority in administering the provisions of this Title.
   C.   A party appealing or complaining of a Land Use Authority decision under
this Title must exhaust its remedies under this section (by appealing or
complaining to the Appeal Authority) before bringing an action against the City
in a court of law.
   D.   A party who has submitted a subdivision application or petition may
appeal or complain to the Appeal Authority under this Title. In such an appeal
or complaint, the party may appeal or complain only regarding the Land Use
Authority’s treatment of that party’s own application; a third party may not
appeal or complain of Land Use Authority decisions or conduct.
   E.   A party desiring to appeal or complain of a Land Use Authority decision
shall submit to the Appeal Authority the following in writing:
      1.   A brief explanation of the relief the party is seeking, the reason
the party submitted its application or petition, the Land Use Authority’s
decision and treatment of the application or petition, and why the applicant
believes the Land Use Authority misapplied the provisions of this Title or
abused the discretion given it by this Title.
      2.   The most recent version of the application or petition the party
submitted.
      3.   Any supplemental documentation or information that the Appeal
Authority requests.
      4.   All appeals and complaints must be emailed or mailed to a member of
the Appeal Authority using that member’s official City address and/or email
account listed on the City website, or given to the City Recorder at the City
Office.
   F.   After receiving a complete appeal or complaint in accordance with this
Section, the Appeal Authority shall deliver a decision to the applicant, in
writing, no later than 30 days after the Appeal Authority receives the appeal
or complaint. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Pre-Application Meeting
11-2-2: Application Requirements
11-2-3: Notice to Affected Entities
11-2-4: Review
11-2-5: Approval
11-2-6: Post-Approval Actions
11-2-7: Exceptions to Specific Application Requirements
11-2-8: Amending A Subdivision
11-2-9: Lot Line Adjustments
11-2-1: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING:
   A.   A party intending to submit a subdivision application under this Title
may request a pro-application meeting with the Land Use Authority for the
purpose of reviewing any element of the party’s proposed subdivision
application. The proposed application need not be complete for purposes of this
meeting and may-if the party desires-be limited to a concept plan.
      1.   To request a pre-application meeting, the party must contact a City
staff member.
      2.   If a party requests a pre-application meeting, the Land Use
Authority shall schedule the meeting within 15 business days after the request.
The meeting shall be scheduled at the earliest available opportunity, and. at
the option of the party requesting the meeting, shall at the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting for which appropriate public notice can
be achieved.
      3.   The Land Use Authority (or a member of the body that makes up the
Land Use Authority) shall conduct the meeting, provide feedback on materials as
requested by the party, and shall provide or have available on the municipal
website the following at the time of the meeting:
         a.   Copies of applicable land use regulations,
         b.   A complete list of standards required for the project, and
         c.   Relevant application checklists. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-2-2: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The City shall not approve, nor shall a party record, any plat or other
creating instrument for a new subdivision unless the party has properly applied
under this Chapter and received both a preliminary approval and a final
approval from the respective Land Use Authorities.
   B.   To considered complete, a preliminary subdivision application must
include at least the following elements:
      1.   An approved land use application that describes how the property
will be used after it is subdivided.
         a.   If the intended use is permitted by right under City ordinances,
the land use application must include citations to the specific ordinance(s)
that the applicant believes authorizes the intended use.
         b.   If the intended use requires a conditional use permit or is
otherwise conditioned on City approval, the land use application must include
an approved, City-issued permit authorizing the intended use. Should an
applicant seek a use permit concurrently with a related subdivision
application, the subdivision application shall be considered incomplete until
the use permit is issued.
         c.   If the intended use is prohibited under City ordinances and
requires a rezoning or variance, the land use application must include an
approved, City-issued decision authorizing the intended use. Should an
applicant seek a rezoning or variance concurrently with a related subdivision
application, the subdivision application shall be considered incomplete until
the decision is issued,
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
applicant’s agent, if there is one, the engineer or surveyor of the
subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjacent to the land being
subdivided.
   C.   Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat must be drawn to scale, in
detail, and in accordance with generally accepted surveying standards and the
acceptable filing standards of the County Recorder’s Office. The preliminary
plat, must include:
      1.   The proposed subdivision name, which must be distinct from any
subdivision name on a plat recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
      2.   Proposed development:
         a.   Sufficient information to locate accurately the property shown on
the plat.
         b.   Lot and street layout.
         c.   The boundaries, course, and dimensions of all proposed parcels.
Dimension of all lots to the nearest foot (which may be scaled values).
         d.   Total acreage of the entire proposed subdivision.
         e.   Lots and blocks numbered consecutively. The lot or unit
reference; block or building reference; street or site address; street name or
coordinate address; acreage or square footage for all parcels, units, or lots;
and length and width of the blocks and lots intended for sale
         f.   Locations and identification of all existing and proposed public
and private easements. Every existing right-of-way and recorded easement
located within the plat for underground, water, and utility facilities.
         g.   Existing and proposed street names.
         h.   Street plans to show proposed grades, curb-gutter and sidewalks.
         i.   Typical street cross sections.
         j.   Proposed water facilities, including pipe diameters, valve
locations, fire hydrant locations, water sources, water rights, reservoirs,
pumps and design calculations.
         k.   Excavation or grading of areas requiring in excess of three foot
(3') cuts or fills.
         l.   A site plan showing proposed dwelling locations and driveway
locations for each lot where sensitive or special topographic and geologic
conditions exist. The planning commission may determine, after review of the
concept plan, that lot site plans arc required because existing conditions
merit more specific details or requirements for developing specific lots.
         m.   Proposed storm sewer systems indicating pipe diameters, location
of detention ponds, manholes, inlets and other pertinent appurtenances with the
design calculations.
         n.   Proposed on site wastewater facilities, including dimensioned
locations of septic tanks, pump facilities and wastewater drain fields.
         o.   Approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or
stormwater overflows or floods of an intensity estimated to occur with a return
frequency of once every one hundred (100) years.
         p.   Setbacks.
         q.   Whether any parcel is intended to be used as a street or for any
other public use.
         r.   Whether any parcel is reserved or proposed for dedication for a
public purpose.
      3.   Existing conditions:
         a.   Any known and unrecorded water conveyance facility located,
entirely or partially, within the plat.
         b.   Location of existing on site wastewater disposal systems,
sanitary sewer systems, storm drains, water supply mains, culinary or secondary
water sources, storage facilities, water treatment facilities, and culverts
within the tract or within five hundred feet (500') thereof.
         c.   Location, width, and other dimensions of proposed lots, streets,
alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces with proper labeling of spaces
to be dedicated to the public.
         d.   Location, principal dimension, and names of all existing or
recorded streets, alleys, and easements, both within the proposed subdivision
and within five hundred feet (500') of the boundary thereof, showing whether
recorded or claimed by usage; the location and principal dimensions for all
watercourses, including ditches, canals, and natural drainage channels, public
utilities, and existing structures within the land and adjacent to the tract to
be subdivided, including railroads, and exceptional topography.
         e.   Location of existing bridges, culverts, surface, or subsurface
drainageways, areas subject to occasional flooding, marshy areas, swamps,
utilities, buildings, pumping stations or appurtenances within the subdivision
or within five hundred feet (500') thereof.
         f.   Location of the nearest elevation bench mark and survey control
monument.
         g.   Landowners adjoining the land to be subdivided and the boundary
lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided land, showing ownership and property
monuments.
         h.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals for predominant
ground slopes within the tract between level and five percent (5%) grade and
five foot (5') contours for predominant ground slopes within the tract over
five percent (5%) grade. Elevations shall be based on national geodetic survey
sea level data. In cases of level topography through a subdivision, one foot
(1') contours may be required.
         i.   Copies of any agreements with adjacent property owners relevant
to the proposed subdivision and the substance of all other covenants, grants of
easements or restrictions to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and
structures.
         j.   ALTA Survey.
         k.   If any portion of the proposed subdivision is within 300 feet of
an Agriculture Protection Area, the notice language found in Utah Code § 1741-
403(4).
         l.   If any portion of the proposed subdivision is within 1,000 feet
of an Industrial Protection Area, the notice language found in Utah Code §
1741-403(4).
         m.   If any portion of the proposed subdivision is within 1,000 feet
of a Critical Infrastructure Materials Protection Area, the notice language
found in Utah Code § 17-41-403(4).
         n.   If any portion of the proposed subdivision is within 1,000 feet
of a Mining Protection Area, the notice language found in Utah Code § 17-41-403
(4).
         o.   If any portion of the proposed subdivision is within 1,000 feet
of a Vested Critical Infrastructure Materials Operation (extracting,
excavating, processing, or reprocessing sand, gravel, or rock aggregate where
that use is not permitted by City ordinances), the notice language found in
Utah Code § 10-9a-904.
      4.   If the subdivision includes a condominium, the requirements found in
Utah Code § 57-8-13, as amended.
      5.   Signature blocks for the owners of the land to be subdivided, the
Planning Commission Chair, and the City Attorney.
   D.   A boundary traverse map of the perimeter of the proposed subdivision.
The surveying shall have an error of closure of not greater than one part in
ten thousand (10,000). The boundary survey and traverse shall be certified by a
land surveyor, registered to practice in the State of Utah.
   E.   A vicinity map, drawn at a scale not less than one inch equals two
thousand feet (1" = 2,000'), showing the perimeter of the plat, access points,
abutting subdivision outlines and names, and other relevant information within
one-half (0.5) mile of the perimeter of the proposed plat
   F.   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the developer’s land, or
is part of a larger vacant area, the plat shall show the location of the
subdivision as it forms pari of a larger tract or parcel. In such a case, a
sketch of the prospective future street system of the unplanned parts shall be
submitted and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in
the light of adjustments and connections with the future street system of the
larger area.
   G.   A traffic study, if one is required by an applicable UDOT Access
Management Plan.
   H.   An improvement plan and drawings, created in accordance with applicable
portions of chapters 6 and 7 of this Title, for all public improvements
proposed by the applicant or required by City ordinances.
      1.   In addition to the requirements in chapters 6 and 7, the improvement
plan must contain an engineer’s estimate of the cost of completing the required
improvements.
      2.   A feasibility study that demonstrates the feasibility of the
proposed water and sewage systems necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter, together with letters of feasibility from the local Health Department
and the Sanitary Sewer Authority.
   I.   An electronic copy of all plans in PDF format.
   J.   Payment of any preliminary-application-processing fees required by the
City.
   K.   Certifications, including:
      1.   An affidavit from the owner/ applicant certifying that the submitted
information is hue and accurate.
      2.   The signature of each owner of record of land described on the
preliminary plat, signifying their consent to the preliminary subdivision
application and their intent to dedicate portions of the preliminary plat to
the public as described in the application.
      3.   Certification that the surveyor who prepared the plat:
         a.   Holds a license in accordance with Utah Code 58-22; and
         b.   Either:
            (1)   Has completed a survey of the property described on the plat
in accordance with state requirements and has verified all measurements; or
            (2)   Has referenced a record of survey map of the existing
property boundaries shown on the plat and verified the locations of the
boundaries; and
            (3)   Has placed monuments as represented on the plat.
   L.   Final Plat. To be considered complete, a final subdivision application
must include the following:
      1.   The approved land use application that was accepted and approved
during the preliminary application review process deems the applicant to submit
a final subdivision application, as long as it was done so within 365 days.
      2.   A final plat. The final plat should be the version of the
preliminary plat approved by the Planning Commission during the preliminary
application review process, plus any other additions and immaterial changes
(e.g., formatting) necessary to comply with the recording requirements of the
County Recorder’s Office.
      3.   The improvement plan that the Planning Commission approved during
the preliminary application review process.
      4.   A completion assurance for all public improvements required by the
approved improvement plan, or a statement that such improvements will be
completed before development occurs on the proposed subdivision and before the
applicant records the plat, as required by chapter 7 of this Title.
      5.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
applicant’s agent, if there is one.
      6.   Certifications, including:
         a.   A Title Report or Title Insurance Policy for the land to be
subdivided verifying property ownership.
         b.   A Tax Clearance Certificate from the state indicating that all
taxes, interest, and penalties owing on the land have been paid.
         c.   An affidavit from the owner/applicant certifying that the
submitted information is true and accurate.
         d.   The signature of each owner of record of land described on the
plat, signifying their consent to the final subdivision application and their
dedication and approval of the final plat.
         e.   Certification that the surveyor who prepared the plat:
            (1)   Holds a license in accordance with Utah Code 58-22; and
            (2)   Either:
               (A)   Has completed a survey of the property described on the
plat in accordance with state requirements and has verified all measurements;
or
               (B)   Has referenced a record of survey map of the existing
property boundaries shown on the plat and verified the locations of the
boundaries; and
            (3)   Has placed monuments as represented on the plat.
      7.   Binding dedication documents, including:
         a.   As applicable, formal, irrevocable offers for dedication to the
public of streets, City uses, utilities, parks, easements, or other spaces.
         b.   If the plat is to be part of a community association, signed and
binding documents conveying to the association all common areas.
      8.   Copies, including:
         a.   A PDF document of the final plat and all other plans and
supporting documents required by this Chapter.
      9.   Payment of any final-application-processing fees required by the
City.
   M.   The Land Use Authority shall produce, maintain, and make available to
the public a list of the specific items that comprise complete preliminary and
final applications and a breakdown of any fees due upon submission or approval
of the applications.
   N.   The Land Use Authority may require, and the applicant shall provide,
additional information beyond the requirements of this Section or those
published by the City relating to an applicant’s plans to ensure compliance
with City ordinances and approved standards and specifications for construction
of public improvements and to protect the health and safety of City residents.
   O.   Notwithstanding the above, the [..and Use Authority may waive specific
application requirements for good cause on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 2025-1,
1-8-2025)
11-2-3: NOTICE TO AFFECTED ENTITIES:
   A.   Within 15 days after receiving a complete subdivision application under
this Title, the Land Use Authority shall provide written notice of the proposed
subdivision to the facility owner of any water conveyance facility located,
entirely or partially, within 100 feet of the subdivision plat.
      1.   To determine whether any water conveyance facility is located within
100 feet of a proposed subdivision, the Land Use Authority shall review
information:
         a.   From the facility owner under Utah Code § 10-9a-211, using
mapping-grade global positioning satellite units or digitized data from the
most recent aerial photo available to the facility owner;
         b.   From the state engineer’s inventory of canals; or
         c.   From a licensed surveyor who has consulted with a representative
of an existing water conveyance facility that services an area near the land
the application concerns.
   B.   For the purpose of giving water conveyance facilities time to provide
feedback on subdivision applications, the Land Use Authority shall not approve
a subdivision application under this Title sooner than 20 days after the
applicant submits a complete application. This waiting period does not apply to
revised applications the applicant may submit during the application review
process.
      1.   A water conveyance facility owner’s failure to provide comments to
the Land Use Authority about a subdivision application does not affect or
impair the Land Use Authority’s authority to approve the subdivision
application. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-2-4: REVIEW:
   A.   The Land Use Authority shall review all subdivision applications under
this Title in accordance with the requirements of this Section before approving
or denying a subdivision application.
   B.   The figure below is intended to show the preliminary and final
subdivision application processes:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8ff4fc892cbeaa17558e6c2a6caadd96a1e0aaa5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1313.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8ff4fc892cbeaa17558e6c2a6caadd96a1e0aaa5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1315.jpg]
 
   C.   The table below illustrates the review cycles and timelines for
subdivision applications:
Table A - Review Cycles, Hearings, and Timelines by Subdivision Use Type
Use Type Approval Stage Max Review Phases Max Public Hearings City Turnaround
                                                              Deadline**
Table A - Review Cycles, Hearings, and Timelines by Subdivision Use Type
Use Type       Approval Stage Max Review Phases Max Public City Turnaround
                                                Hearings   Deadline**
1-2 Family     Preliminary    3                 1          15 Business Days
Residential*   Final          1                 0          15 Business Days
All Other Uses Preliminary    6                 2          15 Business Days
               Final          2                 0          15 Business Days
* Includes single-family homes, duplexes, and townhomes.
**Describes the total time (per review cycle) the City may take to complete
both Phase #2 and Phase #3.
 
   D.   The review process begins when an applicant submits a complete
application.
      1.   The Land Use Authority shall not review an incomplete subdivision
application, except to determine whether the application is complete.
      2.   If the Land Use Authority determines that an application is not
complete, it shall notify the applicant of the incompleteness, highlighting any
insufficiencies and explaining that the application will not be reviewed until
completed.
   E.   After the applicant submits a complete application, the Land Use
Authority shall review and provide feedback to the applicant in up to four
“review cycles.”
      1.   A review cycle consists of the following phases:
         a.   Phase #1: The applicant submits a complete application (or, if
after the first cycle, submits a revised version of the complete application);
         b.   Phase #2: The Land Use Authority reviews the application in
detail and assess whether the application conforms to local ordinances;
         c.   Phase #3: The Land Use Authority responds to the applicant,
citing any missing requirements or areas of noncompliance and providing a
detailed list of necessary revisions to the applicant, within 30 days after the
applicant submitted the complete application. For any required modification or
addition to the application or request for more information, the Land Use
Authority shall be specific and include citations to ordinances, standards, or
specifications that require the modification and shall provide the applicant
with an index of all requested modifications or additions.
         d.   Phase #4: The applicant revises the application, addressing each
comment or requirement the Land Use Authority made. The applicant must submit
both revised plans and a written explanation in response to the City’s review
comments, identifying and explaining the applicant’s revisions and reasons for
declining to make revisions, if any. This written explanation shall be
comprehensive and specific, including citations to applicable standards and
ordinances for the design and an index of requested revisions or additions for
each required correction. If the applicant fails to respond to a comment made
by the Land Use Authority in its review, the review cycle is not complete and
will remain open until the applicant addresses all comments.
   F.   The Land Use Authority shall not (nor shall any other representative of
the City) require more than four review cycles for a subdivision application
under this Title. If no further revisions arc needed, the Land Use Authority
may end the review period early and approve or deny the application.
      1.   This provision notwithstanding, for any subdivision application that
affects property within an identified geological hazard area, the City is
exempt from limits on the number of permitted review cycles and the City’s
deadlines for reviewing and responding (Phases #2 and #3). The Land Use
Authority will still conduct its review in a reasonable time.
      2.   If the applicant makes a material change to a preliminary or final
application not requested by the City at any point in the review process, the
Land Use Authority may restart the review process, but only with respect to the
portion of the application that the material change substantively affects.
      3.   For both preliminary and final applications, if an applicant takes
longer than 20 business days, to submit a revised application and respond to
the City’s requests for modifications and additions (Phases #1 and #4), the
City shall have an additional 20 business days to review and respond to the
revised application (Phases #2 and #3 of the next review cycle or issuing an
approval decision).
      4.   For both preliminary and final applications, if an applicant takes
longer than 180 calendar days to submit a revised application and respond to
the City’s requests for modifications and additions (Phases #1 and #4), the
application shall, at the option of the Land Use Authority, expire. If an
application expires, the applicant must restart the subdivision application
process.
      5.   If the applicant has not submitted a final application within 180
calendar days after the Land Use Authority notifies the applicant that it has
approved the related preliminary application, the related preliminary approval
shall expire. In this case, the applicant shall not submit a final application
until the Land Use Authority has issued a new preliminary application approval.
   G.   After the fourth or final review cycle is complete, the Land Use
Authority shall approve or deny the preliminary subdivision application within
20 days.
      1.   If the Land Use Authority has not approved or denied the application
within 20 days after the fourth or final review, the applicant may request a
final decision. After such a request, the City shall, within 10 days:
         a.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision improvement plans,
assemble an appeal panel in accordance with Utah Code § 10~9a-508(5)(d) to
review and approve or deny the final revised set of plans; or
         b.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision ordinance review,
advise the applicant, in writing, of the deficiency in the application and of
the right to appeal the determination to the designated Appeal Authority.
   H.   After the Land Use Authority provides comments in the fourth or final
review cycle, the City shall not require further modifications or corrections
unless those modifications or corrections are needed to protect public health
and safety or to enforce state or federal law or unless the review cycle reset
due to the applicant making a material change that the Land Use Authority did
not request.
      1.   With the exception of modifications or corrections that are needed
to protect public health and safety, that are needed to enforce state or
federal law, or that arise from the review cycle being reset, the City waives
noncompliant subdivision-related requirements that the Land Use Authority docs
not identify during the review process.
      2.   The applicant shall make reasonable changes, unless prohibited
otherwise by a contract or deed, to the subdivision application to accommodate
water conveyance facilities to the extent required by Utah Code § 73-1-15.5.
   I.   The City may conduct one (but no more than one) public hearing for the
purpose of asking questions of the applicant and receiving commentary on the
technical aspects of the application from affected entities, interested
parties, and the public. If the City elects to hold this public hearing, the
hearing must occur before the end of the Land Use Authority’s review period in
the fourth or final review cycle. Scheduling issues shall not extend the review
and approval deadlines in this Title.
   J.   Other chapters of this Title notwithstanding, the Land Use Authority
shall approve or deny a subdivision application under this Title after
reviewing a complete subdivision application as described in this Section. This
singular application and review process includes the combined elements of
traditional “preliminary” and “final” applications, as those terms are used in
Utah Code § 10-9a-604.2. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-2-5: APPROVAL:
   A.   The Land Use Authorities shall approve any complete subdivision
application made under this Title that complies with applicable municipal
ordinances § 10-9a-6, any additional requirements in state law. and that have
been approved by the culinary water authority and the sanitary sewer authority.
A recommendation from the fire authority and the public safety answering point
is also encouraged before approving a plat.
   B.   The Land Use Authorities shall issue all approvals in writing and shall
certify the approved plat either by signing the plat directly or by attaching a
signed certification to the plat.
   C.   The Land Use Authority’s approval of a plat operates, when recorded, as
an acceptance of the dedication o f any streets or public places, as long as
funding is available, and vests the fee of those parcels of land in the City
for the public for the uses named or intended in the plat. However, such a
dedication does not impose liability upon the City for public streets and other
public places that are dedicated in this manner but are unimproved unless
adequate financial assurance has been provided in addition to the City
accepting the dedication. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-2-6: POST-APPROVAL ACTIONS:
   A.   The applicant shall record the approved subdivision plat with the
County Recorder’s Office within 180 days after the City approves the
subdivision application, provided that the applicant has completed any
improvements or posted any performance guarantee required by City ordinances or
described in the approved improvement plan. The applicant shall not record the
approved final plat until such improvements arc completed or guaranteed in
compliance with City ordinances and the approved improvement plan.
   B.   An approved plat not properly recorded within the timeline specified in
11-2-6(A) is void, unless the City Council approves an extension.
   C.   City staff must work with the County Recorder to submit within 30 days
after approving a subdivision application to the Utah Geospatial Resource
Center either:
      1.   An electronic copy of the approved plat; or
      2.   Preliminary geospatial data that depict any new streets and situs
addresses proposed for construction within the bounds of the approved plat.
   D.   If requested by the Utah Geospatial Resource Center, the City staff
shall:
      1.   Coordinate with the Utah Geospatial Resource Center to validate the
information the City submitted about the final plat; and
      2.   Assist the Utah Geospatial Resource Center in creating electronic
files that contain the information described in the final plat for inclusion in
the unified statewide 911 emergency service database. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-2-7: EXCEPTIONS TO SPECIFIC APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Agricultural Land.
      1.   Applications to subdivide agricultural land are exempt from the
preliminary and final plat requirements (but not the other application
requirements) of Section
11-2-1 if the resulting parcels:
         a.   Qualify as land in agricultural use under Utah Code § 59-2-502;
         b.   Meet the minimum size requirement of applicable City land use
ordinances; and
         c.   Are not used and will not be used for any nonagricultural
purpose.
      2.   For subdivision applications for which this exception applies, an
applicant may submit to the City-in place of a plat-a record of survey map that
illustrates the boundaries of the parcels.
      3.   If the City approves a subdivision application based on a record of
survey map, the applicant shall record the map, signed by the City, with the
County Recorder’s Office. This shall be done in the same manner as is done for
a plat under Sections
11-2-6 and
11-2-7.
      4.   If a parcel resulting from a subdivision under this exception ever
ceases to be used for agriculture, the subdivision shall no longer be exempt
under this section and shall be required to conform to typical plat
requirements. The City may, in its discretion, impose the penalty in Section
11-1-4 and/or require a subdivision amendment before issuing a building permit.
   B.   Minor Subdivisions.
      1.   Applications to subdivide land are exempt from the plat requirements
(but not the other application requirements) of Chapter 2, if the subdivision:
         a.   Results in no more than five parcels;
         b.   Is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street (as
shown in the Bluff General Plan), City easement, or any other land required for
public purposes;
         c.   Has been approved by the culinary water authority and the
sanitary sewer authority; and
         d.   Is located in a zoned area.
         e.   Conforms to all applicable land use ordinances or has properly
received a variance from the requirements of an otherwise conflicting and
applicable land use ordinance.
      2.   For subdivision applications for which this exception applies, an
applicant may submit to the City-in place of a plat-both;
         a.   A record of survey map that illustrates the boundaries of the
parcels; and
         b.   A legal metes-and-bounds description that describes the parcels
illustrated by the survey map.
      3.   If the City approves a subdivision application based on a record of
survey map and metes-and-bounds description, the applicant shall record the map
and description, signed by the City, with the County Recorder’s Office. This
shall be done in the same manner as is done for a plat under Sections
11-2-6 and
11-2-7, except that the City shall also provide the notice required in Utah
Code § 10-9a-611(1).
   C.   Development Agreements.
      1.   Subdivisions platted in a valid development agreement are exempt
from the application requirements (Section
11-2-2) and review and approval requirements (Sections
11-2-4 and
11-2-5) of this Chapter.
      2.   Clauses in a valid development agreement with the City superseded
all conflicting requirements in this Title, except where a clause in the
development agreement poses a substantial danger to the health and safety of
City residents. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-2-8: AMENDING A SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Amendments as Further Subdivisions: A petition to amend an existing
subdivision such lots are further subdivided for additional development shall
proceed as an application for a new subdivision under Section
11-2-2.
   B.   Vacating a Subdivision: The City Council may vacate a subdivision or a
portion of a subdivision by enacting an ordinance to that effect that describes
the subdivision or the portion being vacated and recording that ordinance in
the County Recorder’s Office.
   C.   Immaterial Corrections: A property owner or agent of a property owner
may correct minor typographical or clerical errors in a document of record by
filing with (he County an affidavit or other appropriate instrument. This
provision does not apply to changing the name of a subdivision, which requires
a material amendment described in the following provisions.
   D.   Material Subdivision Amendments:
      1.   A fee owner of land in a platted subdivision may request a material
subdivision amendment, so long as the amendment docs not result in additional
lots, by filing a written petition with the City Council. This petition must
meet all the requirements for a subdivision application specified in Section
11-2-2, with the following changes:
         a.   The plat (or the record of survey map, if applicable) should:
            (1)   Depict only the portion of the subdivision that is proposed
to be amended;
            (2)   Include a plat name distinguishing the amended plat from the
original plat;
               (A)   Subdivision names must be unique within County records.
            (3).   Describe the differences between the amended plat and the
original plat;
            (4)   Include references to the original plat; and
            (5)   Meet all the other plat requirements specified in Section
11-2-2.
         b.   The petition must include the name and address of each property
owner affected by the petition and the signature of each of those property
owners who consent to the petition.
         c.   The petitioner must include with the petition envelopes addressed
to each property in the subdivision.
      2.   Upon receipt of an amendment petition, the City Council (or City
staff, as delegated) shall provide notice of the petition to:
         a.   Each utility provider that services a parcel of the subdivision.
The City shall not approve an amendment petition until at least 10 calendar
days after noticing these utility providers. The City may notify the utility
providers in any effective manner (email, mail).
         b.   Each property owner in the subdivision. The City shall notify
these property owners by mail.
      3.   The City Council shall hold a public hearing, before approving an
amendment petition, and within 45 calendar days after the day on which the
petition is submitted if;
         a.   A property owner objects in writing to the amendment within 10
days of the City notifying the property owner by mail, or
         b.   Not every property owner in the subdivision has signed the
revised plat.
      4.   Notwithstanding the requirements of this Section, the City Council
needs not hold a public hearing if notice has been given to adjoining property
owners in accordance with any applicable local ordinance and the petition seeks
to:
         a.   Join two or more of the petitioner’s contiguous lots;
         b.   Subdivide one or more of the petitioner’s lots;
         c.   Adjust the lot lines of adjoining lots or between a lot and an
adjoining parcel if the fee owners of each of the adjoining properties join in
the petition, regardless of whether the properties are located in the same
subdivision;
         d.   On a lot owned by the petitioner, adjust an internal lot
restriction imposed by the local political subdivision; or
         e.   Alter the plat in a manner that does not change existing
boundaries or other attributes of lots within the subdivision that are not
owned by the petitioner or designated as a common area.
      5.   If the City Council approves the amendment petition, it must be
signed by the City Council and signed, acknowledged, and dedicated by each
owner of record of the portion of the plat that is amended. Then the petitioner
shall record the plat, subject to the completion or guarantee of any
improvements, as described in this Section.
   E.   Any amendment petition the City Council approves must identify and
preserve any easements owned by a culinary water authority and sanitary sewer
authority for existing facilities located within the subdivision. (Ord. 2025-1,
1-8-2025)
11-2-9: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The fee owners of two parcels may petition to adjust the lot line
separating the parcels without a subdivision amendment. Such a petition shall
include:
      1.   A record of survey map and a metes-and-bounds description showing
the adjustment,
      2.   An explanation of the reason for the adjustment.
      3.   Signatures from all the parcel owners involved in the adjustment.
      4.   Any other information the Planning Commission requests.
   B.   If the adjustment will not result in a violation of a land use
ordinance or an adverse development condition, the Planning Commission shall
approve the petition.
   C.   If the adjustment is approved, the Planning Commission shall sign the
record of survey map and accompanying metes-and-bounds description.
   D.   The petitioner shall record the document in the County Recorder’s
Office:
      1.   A notice of lot line adjustment that:
         a.   Is approved by the land use authority; and
         b.   Recited the legal descriptions of both the original properties
and the properties resulting for the exchange of title; and
      2.   A document of conveyance. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Standards And Specifications
11-3-2: Blocks And Lots
11-3-3: Common Area/Open Space
11-3-4: Streets And Street Improvements
11-3-5: Water System
11-3-6: Sewer System
11-3-7: Storm Drainage
11-3-8: Irrigation Ditches
11-3-9: Trees
11-3-10: Lighting
11-3-11: Signs
11-3-12: Monuments
11-3-1: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Standards for design, construction specifications, and inspection of street
improvements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drainage and Hood control
facilities shall be provided by the City Engineer; standards for water
distribution and sewage disposal facilities by the Board of Health; and similar
standards for fire protection by the Fire Department. All subdividers shall
comply with the standards established by such departments and agencies of the
City, County and State; provided, that such standards shall be approved by the
City Council. Construction specifications approved, and as may be amended from
time to time by action of the City Council, are hereby adopted by reference as
if fully set forth herein, three (3) copies of which are on file in the City
Recorder’s office for public inspection. These standards and specifications, in
addition to the general standards set forth in this Title, shall be used by all
subdividers. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-2: BLOCKS AND LOTS:
The design of the preliminary and final plats of the subdivision in relation to
streets, blocks, lots, and other design factors shall be in harmony with design
standards recommended by the Planning Commission and by other departments and
agencies of City government as is necessary. Design standards shall be approved
by the City Council and shall include provisions as follows, which are hereby
approved by the City. All improvements shall be designed by a professional
engineer licensed in the State.
   A.   Length: Blocks shall not exceed nine hundred fifty feet (950') in
length. Where existing conditions dictate, longer blocks may be approved, by
the Planning Commission and subsequently, the City Council.
   B.   Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to adequately accommodate two (2)
tiers of lots.
   C.   Walkways: Dedicated walkways through the block may be required where
access is necessary to a point designated by the Planning Commission. Such
walkways shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in width, but may be required to
be wider where determined necessary by the Planning Commission. The subdivider
shall surface the full width of the walkway with a concrete surface, and
install a chain link fence, or its equal, where required and as approved by the
City. Barriers at each walkway entrance shall be provided by the subdivider to
prevent the use of the walkway by any vehicle (motorized or non motorized)
greater than three feet (3') in width.
   D.   Business, Industrial Use: Blocks intended for business or industrial
use shall be designated specifically for each purpose with adequate space set
aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities.
   E.   Multi-Family Housing: Multi-family dwellings or other types of cluster
housing will be considered at the option of the City. If approved, adequate
space for off-street parking shall be required.
   F.   Arrangement; Design: The lot arrangement and design shall be such that
lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, be properly
related to topography, to the character of surrounding development and to
existing requirements.
   G.   Zoning Requirements: AH lots shown on the preliminary and final plats
must conform to the minimum requirements of the
Zoning Title for the zone or proposed zone in which the subdivision is located,
and to the minimum requirements of the County Board of Health for water supply
and sewage disposal.
   H.   Adjoin Street: Each lot shall abut on a street or lane shown on the
subdivision plat or on an existing publicly- dedicated street. Double frontage
lots shall be prohibited, except where unusual conditions make other designs
undesirable.
   I.   Side Line Angles: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right
angles, or radial to the street lines. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord.
2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-3: COMMON AREA / OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Units shall be clustered in the most developable and least visually
sensitive portions of the site with common open space corridors separating
clusters. This applies to both multi-family and single family as well as
commercial projects. The open space corridors should be designed to coincide
with significant vegetation and in many cases, should be left in the natural
state. Open space areas will be the maintenance responsibility of the
homeowners unless dedicated to the City. Open space conservation easements
dedicated in perpetuity to a City qualified land trust arc encouraged to
prevent future development in valuable open space.
   B.   A person may not separately own, convey, or modify a common open space,
on a plat recorded in compliance with this part, independent of the other lots,
units, or parcels created by the plat unless:
      1.   An association holds in trust the parcel designated as common open
space for the owners of the other lots, units, or parcels created by the plat;
or
      2.   The following three parties agree to the conveyance or modification:
         a.   The local government;
         b.   For a common open space that:
            (1)   An association owns, 67% of the voting interests in the
association; or
            (2)   An association does not own, 67% of the owners of lots,
units, and parcels designated on a plat that is subject to a declaration and on
which the common area or common area and facility is included; and
         c.   The declarant if, during the period of administrative control.
   C.   If a conveyance or modification of a common open space or common area
and facility is approved, the person who presents the instrument of conveyance
or modification to the county recorder shall
      1.   Attach a notice of the approval as an exhibit to the document of
conveyance or modification, or
      2.   Record a notice of the approval concurrently with the conveyance or
modification as a separate document.
   D.   If a plat contains a common open space, each parcel shall have an equal
ownership interest in the common open space within the plat by default, unless
the plat or an accompanying recorded document says otherwise.
   E.   As used in this section, and regarding a common area or common area and
facility:
      1.   “Association” means the same as that term is defined in state law.
      2.   “Common area” or “common open space” means the same as “common area”
is defined in state law.
      3.   “Common area and facility” or “common open space and facility” means
the same as “common area and facility” is defined in state law.
      4.   “Declarant” means the same as that term is defined in state law.
      5.   “Declaration” means the same as that term is defined in state law.
      6.   “Period of administrative control” means the same as that term is
defined in state law. (amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-4: STREETS AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Arrangement: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the continuation of existing- streets in adjoining areas and
shall provide access to unsubdivided adjoining areas insofar as such
continuation or access shall be deemed necessary by the City.
   B.   Connection: New streets must connect with existing public streets.?
   C.   Width; Costs:
      1.   The total street right of way shall be standard at eighty feet (80')
for major streets; sixty feet (60') for collector streets; and fifty feet (50')
for feeder streets. All reference to the “total width” of a street, road, right
of way or casement shall refer to the “total width” stated in the property
title or right-of-way rights transferred or dedicated to the City. The paved or
traveled portion of the street or road may be less than the “total right of
way” to allow for public improvements in accordance with City ordinances.
      2.   Costs of new roads and repairs to existing roads caused by
development for collector (60') and feeder (50') streets shall be borne by the
subdivider. Where a major (80') street is required, the cost of paved sections
over and above that required to the collector (601) street may be shared by the
City. The City’s participation shall be determined by cost estimates reviewed
by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council. The approved estimates
shall be part of the development agreement attached to the final plat.
   D.   Surfacing: Asphalt surfacing shall be provided on all roads with a two
and one-half inch (2 1/2") minimum asphalt pavement thickness. All asphalt
paving shall be installed over a minimum of a four inch (4") granular base over
a minimum of eight inch (8") granular sub-base material.
   E.   Grades:
      1.   Grades of streets shall not be in excess of eighteen percent (18%)
on short unsustained stretches of street, nor in excess of eight percent (8%)
on sustained grades, unless otherwise approved by City. Grades of roads shall
be a minimum of one-half of one percent (0.5%).
      2.   Streets shall be leveled to a grade of less than four percent (4%)
for a distance of at least one hundred feet (100') approaching all
intersections; and at the intersection a grade of three percent (3%) shall be
maximum, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
      3.   All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
a minimum length equivalent to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in
the rate of grade for major streets and secondary streets and one-half (1/2) of
this minimum for all local streets.
   F.   Curvature On Center Line: Minimum radii of curvature on center line
shall be as follows: major streets, five hundred feet (500'); collector
streets, three hundred feet (300'); and feeder streets, one hundred feet
(100'); unless otherwise approved by the City.
   G.   Half-Streets: Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted half-street
or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be
platted; however, in most other cases, half-streets shall be prohibited. When a
half-street is approved, it will require sufficient right of way to provide
pavement.
   H.   Intersection Angles; Curb Radii: The Planning Commission will consult
on each proposed development with the City Engineer to determine proper
intersection angles and curb radii, taking into consideration such items as the
topography of the land, the location of planned and existing City streets and
public safety. In general, streets should intersect at right angles, feeder
streets should approach the major or collector street at an angle of not less
than eighty degrees (80°), and all curb comers should have a radius of not less
than twenty five feet (25'). Where streets meet at acute angles, the radii
should be forty feet (40'). The Planning Commission will forward their
recommendation to the City Council for final decision.
   I.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs should be planned in consideration of the
topography of the land, planned or existing streets and public safety and
should be held to a minimum in the planning of subdivisions. Cul-de-sacs must
be terminated by a turnaround right of way not less than one hundred twenty
feet (120') in diameter as measured to the property lines. Surface water
drainage, where possible, shall flow away from the turnaround of the cul-de-
sac. Where drainage is not possible because of physical topography,
alternatives will be reviewed by the planning commission in consultation with
the City engineer and a recommendation will be made to the City council for a
final decision.
   J.   Curbs And Gutters:
      1.   All streets within the subdivision shall be improved with pavement.
The pavement must be bounded by concrete curbs of the standard high back, roll
type, flat type unit, or by a properly prepared shoulder based on the
recommendations of the planning commission in consultation with the City
engineer and City staff to the City council for final approval. Street
classifications and roadway widths shall be recommended by the planning
commission in accordance with the master plan to the City council for final
approval.
      2.   Minimum grades for curb and gutters and streets shall not be less
than one-half of one percent (0.5%), and from crown of the road to the lip of
the curb shall be a minimum of two percent (2%).
   K.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided on either one side or both sides
of all public streets. Sidewalks placed on both sides of public streets shall
be concrete and four feet six inches (4'6") wide minimum and four inches (4")
thick minimum. Sidewalks placed on one side of the street shall be concrete and
four feet six inches (4'6") wide minimum and four inches (4") thick minimum.
All sidewalks that cross driveways shall be six inches (6") thick minimum.
Sidewalks at all intersections of public streets shall conform to adopted
American disabilities act standards. Based on topography, terrain, public
safety and other existing conditions, at the request of the subdivider, and in
consultation with the City engineer and City staff, the planning commission
will recommend placement of sidewalks to the City council for final approval.
   L.   Existing And Proposed Streets: The subdivider shall improve existing
and proposed streets in all subdivisions, except on the rear of lots that back
on streets where access is not permitted. Timetable of completion and the
security performance of all improvements will be listed in the development
agreement.
   M.   Damage: In the event existing sidewalks or curbs and gutters are
damaged at any time, the damaging party shall repair or replace the damaged
items as per section
7-3-1 of this code.
   N.   Storm Sewers; Inlets: Storm sewers, stormwater inlets and catch basins
shall be provided within the roadway improvements in accordance with the
requirements of state law. Design plans must be reviewed by the City engineer
and planning commission and their recommendations forwarded to the City council
for final decision.
   O.   Protection Strips Prohibited: Protection strips will not be allowed in
the City.
   P.   Non Connecting Streets; Turnarounds: At all temporary ends to streets
or non connecting streets, provisions shall be provided by the subdivider for a
turnaround for snow plows, garbage trucks and other service vehicles.
   Q.   Exemptions: Curb, gutter and sidewalk will not be required on
subdivision streets that front on established City streets and are scheduled to
receive curb and gutter under the capital improvement plan. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-
28-1998; amd. Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011; Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-5: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Design; Construction: The entire system shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with City standards and the state health department
standards. If there is conflict between the standards, the most stringent shall
rule.
   B.   Fees: The costs for connection to the City water supply shall be
specified in the fee schedule to be held in the City office.
   C.   Pipe: All culinary water pipes shall be ductile iron class fifty-one
(51), unless otherwise approved by the City.
   D.   Line Size: Minimum line size for mains and laterals shall be six inches
(6"). except for cul-de-sacs, where fire hydrants arc not needed, then a four
inch (4") line size will be allowed. Pipe sizes larger than six inches (6") may
be required where an extension to roads within a subdivision is anticipated,
thereby requiring service from a water line in the original subdivision. The
City engineer shall determine the size of lines greater than six inches (6") in
diameter. Where main lines larger than eight inches (8") arc requested by the
City for future development, the additional cost shall be shared by the City.
Service lines shall be one inch (1") copper tubing and shall be installed to
the property line of all lots within the subdivision by the subdivider.
   E.   Yoke; Meter Barrel: The subdivider shall provide and install a one inch
(1") yoke, an approved meter barrel and a cast iron barrel lid at each
subdivided lot. The diameter of the water barrel shall be eighteen inches (18")
for a three-fourths inch (3/4") meter and twenty one inches (21") fora one inch
(1") meter. The top of the barrel lid shall be installed at the height of the
finished road level. The yoke shall be set eighteen inches (18") from the top
of the meter barrel.
   F.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions at
finished road level, at the expense of the subdivider and in accordance with
the regulations of the Fire Department and City standards.
   G.   City Line To Subdivision: Where a subdivision docs not border an
existing City water line, the subdivider shall install and bear all costs of
pipeline from the subdivision to the nearest existing City water line.
   H.   Dead-End Lines: All water lines shall be “looped” rather than dead-
ended, except in cases of cul- de-sacs and temporary dead-end streets.
Temporary dead-end water lines shall continue to the property line of the
subdivision for the purpose of looping with adjacent subdivisions.
   I.   Depth: Depth of culinary water lines shall be a minimum of five feet
(5') to the top of the pipe.
   J.   Valves: Valves shall be placed in the system so that sections of pipe
no longer than six hundred feet ( 600') may be isolated and shut off from the
rest of the system so repairs may be made with a minimal number of water
connections being put out of service. When connecting to existing or new lines
at tees, a minimum of two (2) valves shall be installed; where crosses arc
used, a minimum of three (3) valves shall be used.
   K.   Pressure Testing: All water lines shall be pressure tested in the
presence of the City Engineer.
   L.   Inspection: All phases of waterworks must be inspected by the City
Engineer before backfilling procedures arc started. Actual connection of water
lines to any live water lines shall be performed by the contractor with a
representative of the Public Works Department present. (Ord. 8-28-98, 828-1998;
amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-6: SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Conformance To Sewer Regulations: Reference shall be made to the sewer
regulations of the City as it may be more restrictive and thereby controlling.
All sewer construction, service and maintenance shall conform to the sewer
regulations of the City.
   B.   Standards And Specifications: Sewer system design and layout shall meet
all standards and specifications of the State Department of Health.
   C.   Fees: The costs for connection to the City sewer system shall be
specified in the fee schedule to be held in the City office.
   D.   Wastes Allowed; Prohibited: Domestic wastes only shall be allowed to
enter a common collection system. Downspouts for roof drains, basement drains
which lower ground water conditions, and other similar possible inflows to the
sewer system shall not be allowed. Under no circumstance shall hazardous wastes
or drainage from garage floors be allowed to enter a common collection system.
   E.   Gravity Operation: Unless unfeasible, the system shall be designed so
that the system operates by gravity means only. Sewage lift stations and force
mains should be used only as a last resort.
   F.   Depth: Depth of sewers shall be adequate to service basements of all
houses within the subdivision or areas beyond the subdivision where it is
anticipated that there will be extensions to the sewer system.
   G.   Lines; Manholes: Sewer lines shall be ASTM C-14 Class 3 of eight inch
(8") minimum size, unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer. Manholes
shall be installed at all changes in grade and alignment and at maximum spacing
of four hundred feet (400'). All manholes shall be set in location and
elevation to a grade stake specifically set for that purpose. Where larger than
ten inch (10") sewers are requested by the City to accommodate future
development, the additional pipe cost will be shared by the City. Sewer service
lines shall be four inch (4") diameter PVC pipe. Sewer service lines shall be
furnished and installed by the subdivider to the property line of each
subdivided lot. A treated two by four by fourteen (2 x 4 x 14) shall be placed
to mark the “stubbed in” end of a sewer service line. A nine (9) gauge wire
shall also be attached to the “stubbed in” end of the service line and follow
the two by four by fourteen (2 x 4 x 14) to the surface, allowing a metal
detector to find the end of the service line.
   H.   City Main To Subdivision: As with the water system, the subdivider
shall be responsible for extending and connecting to the nearest existing sewer
main. The final line sizes and final approval shall also be subject to approval
by the City Engineer.
   I.   Pressure Testing: All sewer lines shall be pressure tested to as near
four (4) psi as possible. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-7: STORM DRAINAGE:
   A.   Ditches; Canals: No ditch or canal shall be approved as suitable for
the use of storm drainage without the written permission of the appropriate
ditch or canal company or of the water users for such use. No ditch or canal
shall be used for storm water unless adequately improved to handle such water
as might be reasonably expected to How from canal and ditch water, subdivision
runoff water, and other water expected to reach such canal or ditch. At the
discretion of the City, ditches, canals or other waterways may be prohibited on
property dedicated or to be dedicated for public use. The subdivider shall
remove such waterways from property to be so dedicated before approval of the
final plat shall be granted.
   B.   Structures Provided: Storm drains, cross-gutters, dip stone inlets and
other appurtenant structures shall be provided by the subdivider as required to
adequately dispose of the 100-year frequency flood flows developed within the
limits of the subdivision (if applicable) along with the existing flows
entering the proposed subdivision from adjacent properties. The subdivider
shall have the responsibility of providing “off-site” storm drain extensions in
order to satisfactorily dispose of drainage.
   C.   Plans: Complete drainage systems for the entire subdivision area shall
be designed by a professional engineer, licensed in the State and qualified to
perform such work, which shall be shown graphically. All existing drainage
features which arc to be incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If
the subdivision is to be platted in phases, a general drainage plan for the
entire area shall be presented with the first phase, and appropriate
development stages for the drainage system for each section indicated. All
proposed surface drainage structures shall be indicated on the plans. All
appropriate designs, details, and dimensions needed to clearly explain proposed
construction materials and elevations shall be included in the drainage plans.
   D.   Design Of System: The drainage and flood plan systems shall be designed
to:
      1.   Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
      2.   Ensure adequate drainage of all low points. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-
1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-8: IRRIGATION DITCHES:
The subdivider shall work with irrigation, drainage or ditch companies and the
City Engineer with regards to ditches or canals as to:
   A   Covering, Realigning, Eliminating: Methods of covering, realigning or
eliminating ditches or canals within or adjoining the subdivision.
   B.   Pipe Size; Culverts: The size of pipe and culverts required.
   C.   Responsibility: The responsibility for the periodic inspecting,
cleaning and maintaining of such ditches, pipes and culverts. In cases where
canals or ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads, specifications
and grades for pipe or culvert must be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 8-
28-98,8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-9: TREES:
Providing, installing and maintaining of street trees shall conform to the
design specifications and standards, rules and regulations of the City Council.
(Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-10: LIGHTING:
Street lighting shall conform to the design specifications and standards, rules
and regulations of the City Council. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-
1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-11: SIGNS:
Street signs shall conform to the design specifications, standards, rules and
regulations of the City and shall be installed at all street intersections by
the subdivider. To assure uniformity, the City shall make available all
required street signs and the cost thereof shall be charged to and paid by the
subdivider. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-3-12: MONUMENTS:
Permanent monuments shall be furnished, accurately established and set by the
subdivide! at such points as are necessary to definitely establish all lines of
the plat, except those defining individual lots. (Ord. 828-98, 8-28-1998; amd.
Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Water Stock Transfer
11-4-2: Adjacent Streets
11-4-3: Private Lanes
11-4-4: Extension Of Public Works Facilities
11-4-5: Utilities
11-4-6: City Water And Sewer Systems
11-4-7: Sharing Development Costs
11-4-1: WATER STOCK TRANSFER:
   A.   Intent; Requirement: The intent and requirement of this section is that
one water share per connection in all subdivisions will be transferred to the
City for future development and operation of the culinary or secondary water
systems, Water shares will be transferred to the City based on the number of
connections in the subdivision designated for building in each phase. Water
shares or stock will be transferred in no less than one share increments. The
City shall have the first right of refusal to purchase all water shares or
stock of the subdivider which has been used to irrigate real property in the
proposed subdivision, and which is in excess of those water shares or stock
required herein.
   B.   Not In Subdivision: For building lots not in a subdivision or for which
no prior transfer of water has been made and with no existing water
connections, shares of water will be transferred to the City at the time a
building permit is issued. If shares are unavailable, the City may charge an
index fee for a culinary water connection only. (Ord. 2011-2, 4-28-2011; amd.
Ord. 2018-3, 7-12-2018; Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-4-2: ADJACENT STREETS:
It shall become the responsibility of the developer to pay for all of the
necessary public improvements on one-half (1/2) of streets adjacent to the
proposed subdivision. The other adjoining one-half (1/2) of streets will be
negotiated with the. adjacent landowners as to participation and time of
construction. The value of the improvements shall be included in the
improvement guarantee and completion assurances as described in
Chapter 5. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-4-3: PRIVATE LANES:
   A.   When Permitted: Private lanes will be permitted only when terrain or
other geographical conditions do not permit any other standard street
development. All private lanes shall be negotiated with the City. Private lanes
shall be governed by a signed agreement of the homeowners residing on the
private lane, which agreement the City shall have power to enforce. The City,
however, shall have no responsibility or liability in the maintenance, snow
removal or garbage pick up on lanes. Water meters and barrels shall be placed
on City right-of-way, such that waterworks maintenance shall not extend beyond
public right-of-way in order to accommodate all properties equitably, and to
serve and maintain utilities on all properties, lanes shall not be obstructed.
Sidewalks, curbs and gutters and roads shall conform to the standards set in
this title. Road improvements shall also conform to the following:
      1.   For one or two (2) houses, the right-of-way shall be twenty feet
(20') in width with asphalt pavement of twelve feet (12') in width minimum. No
sidewalk or curb and gutter shall be required.
      2.   For three (3) or four (4) houses, the right-of-way shall be twenty
six feet (26') in width with asphalt pavement of eighteen feet (18') in width
minimum. No sidewalk or curb and gutter shall be required.
      3.   For five (5) or more houses, the right-of-way shall be thirty feet
(30') in width with asphalt pavement of twenty four feet (24') in width
minimum. Sidewalk and curb and gutter on both sides of the road may be
required. A “T” shaped turnaround shall be provided sufficient for a fire truck
to maneuver with a minimal amount of backing.
   B.   Compliance With Title: All Fire Codes, safety and beautification
regulations of this title shall be complied with. Street drainage shall be
designed consistent with acceptable engineering practices and the master plan.
A garbage disposal method shall be negotiated with the City. No street signs
indicating limited access will be permitted. Lanes shall be properly named as
approved by the City.
   C.   Homeowners' Agreement: The approved homeowners' agreement shall be
placed on the lots affected at the time of recording. In addition, a recorded
restriction will be placed on all lots on the private lane stating that all of
the above mentioned minimum improvements shall be complete before the City will
approve the issuance of a building permit by the building inspector, for
subdivided lots on the private lane. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2010-
1, 1-28-2010; Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-4-4: EXTENSION OF PUBLIC WORKS FACILITIES:
The extension of any City public works facilities, including, but not limited
to, roads, bridges, storm drains, water mains, sewer lines, and secondary water
systems, shall be installed by the developer of any subdivision. There shall be
no consideration or return to the developer within this area. (Ord. 8-28-98,
828-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-4-5: UTILITIES:
All utilities, privately or publicly owned, shall be placed underground. This
will include, but shall not be limited to, telephone, gas, electric power,
water, sewer, etc. These underground utilities shall be installed after cutting
the road to rough grade and before the surfacing of the streets and
installation of road base, curb and gutter, sidewalks, etc. (Ord. 8-28-98, 8-
28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-4-6: CITY WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
All subdivisions located within the corporate boundaries of the City shall be
required to connect to the water and sewer systems of the City, except as
provided by a resolution to the contrary. (Ord. 8-28-98, 828-1998; amd. Ord.
2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-4-7: SHARING DEVELOPMENT COSTS:
Public works improvements should be paid for by developers and landowners that
will benefit by their use. An agreement for sharing development costs by all
landowners that may use the facilities should be submitted by the developer
initially responsible for the facilities, along with the final plat. If such an
agreement is not negotiated at the time of permitting the original subdivision,
the developer who installs the facilities is entitled to future compensation as
follows:
   A.   Statement Of Costs: The original developer must file a letter with the
city engineer that includes the acquisition cost of land used by the public
works facilities, costs for engineering the facilities and costs for
constructing the facilities, i.e., water and sewer lines, roads, curbs and
gutter, and sidewalks.
   B.   Future Development; Pro Rata Share: Future planned developments that
would use the public improvements would not be approved by the city until the
new developer agrees in writing to adequately compensate the original developer
or legal agent for a pro rata share of the costs of the facilities.
Determination of pro rata costs may be based on the following:
      1.   Length of frontage, for example, if two (2) landowners shared the
same length along both sides of a street, the cost would be split equally.
      2.   Number of lots per subdivision, for example, costs for sewer or
water lines may be based on the number of hookups to both.
   C.   Reimbursement To Original Developer: Reimbursement to the original
developer would be one hundred percent (100%) of the pro rata share during the
first five (5) years following construction of the improvements, costs would be
depreciated twenty percent (20%) per year thereafter, and no pro rata share
would be due after ten (10) years following initial construction, unless a
specific agreement was developed and agreed to that extended this time frame.
(Ord. 8-28-98, 8-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES, COMPLETION ASSURANCES, AND WARRANTIES
SECTION:
11-5-1: Required Improvements
11-5-2: Completion Of Improvements
11-5-3: Improvement Guarantees, Completion Assurances, And Warranties
11-5-1: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements are required for all subdivisions, except those that
qualify under the Agricultural Land exemption of Section
11-2-7:
   A.   Utilities, including water, sewer, telephone, cable, gas, and
electricity.
   B.   Streets, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
   C.   Street Grading and Surfacing.
   D.   Storm Water Drainage.
   E.   Fire hydrants.
   F.   Street lights, signs, and monuments.
   G.   Any other infrastructure (or infrastructure improvement) that is
reasonably necessary to meet the needs of the proposed development.
      1.   The Land Use Authority may require an analysis to be completed and
provided to determine if adequate public facilities and services are available
to serve the proposed development and if such development will change the
existing levels of service, or will create a demand for services that exceeds
acceptable service levels. Public facilities that may be required by the Land
Use Authority to be included in a public facilities analysis include, but are
not limited to, road and street facilities and capacities, intersection and
bridge capacities, culinary water facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, storm
drainage facilities, fire protection and suppression facilities, park and
recreational facilities, culinary water pressure, fire and emergency services
response times, police protection services, and other required public
facilities and services. The Land Use Authority may deny or modify any proposed
development activity if the demand for public facilities and services exceeds
accepted or adopted levels of service, or require an applicant for an approval,
license, or permit to provide the required facilities and services concurrent
with the demand created by the development activity, consistent with all
applicable legal authorities. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-5-2: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Before a subdivision plat may be recorded, and before a building permit
may be issued, all improvements required by this Paid or other City ordinances
shall be either:
      1.   Completed, inspected, and accepted by the City, or
      2.   Guaranteed according to Section
11-5-3.
   B.   The decision whether to guarantee an improvement or to complete it
before recording and obtaining a building permit rests solely with the
applicant.
   C.   All improvements are subject to City inspection before such
improvements may be accepted by the City or considered complete. The Town
Engineer shall be responsible for conducting such inspections. Improvements
shall be accepted only if they conform to applicable City ordinances and do not
pose a risk to public health or safety. All public improvements are subject to
the warranty described in Section
11-5-3.
   D.   The provisions of this Part do not supersede the terms of a valid
development agreement, an adopted phasing plan, or the state construction code.
(Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
11-5-3: IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES, COMPLETION ASSURANCES, AND WARRANTIES:
   A.   If an applicant elects to guarantee any required improvement, the
applicant shall provide completion assurance for 110% of the cost of the
improvement, guaranteeing that the improvements will be completed within two
years after the date of the guarantee.
   B.   For the purpose of posting an improvement guarantee, the cost of the
improvement shall be determined by an engineer’s estimate or licensed
contractor’s bid.
   C.   The City shall accept any of the following forms of guarantee for an
improvement:
      1.   Bond. The applicant may furnish a bond with corporate surety, which
bond shall be approved by the City Attorney and filed with the City Recorder.
      2.   Escrow. The applicant may make a deposit in escrow with an escrow
holder approved by the City Council, under an escrow agreement approved by the
City Attorney and filed with the City Recorder.
   D.   As improvements arc completed, inspected, and accepted by the City, the
City Council shall, each quarter, at the option of the applicant, issue a
partial release of bonded or escrow funds proportional to the improvements
accepted during the prior quarter.
   E.   The City shall not require improvement guarantees for any of the
prohibited uses listed in Utah Code § 10-9a-604.5(3)(d), including improvements
the City has previously inspected and accepted, private improvements that are
not essential to meet the building code, fire code, flood or storm water
management provisions, street and access requirements, or other essential
necessary public safety improvements adopted in a land use regulation.
   F.   Upon acceptance of all required improvements, the applicant shall
warrant that said improvements shall remain free from defects in material and
workmanship for a period of 12 months after the date of acceptance by the City.
The subdivider shall be solely responsible for all repairs and maintenance
required to keep the improvements in good working condition for this 12-month
period. (Ord. 2025-1, 1-8-2025)
