CITY CODE
of
HOLLADAY, UTAH
1999
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-22, passed 12-4-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Holladay, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-22, passed December 4, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Exhibit_A (PDF LINK)
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1.08
INTRODUCTORY TITLE
SECTION:
1.08.010: Definitions; General
1.08.020: Penalty For Violation Of Code
1.08.030: Copies Available For Inspection
1.08.010: DEFINITIONS; GENERAL:
In the construction of the ordinances set out in this code, and all ordinances
amendatory thereof, the following definitions shall be as follows, unless such
definitions would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council,
or repugnant to the context of the ordinance. Any reference in the ordinances
set out in this code to a city division, department, branch, agency, or similar
term that is not currently in existence, shall mean the city of Holladay, Utah,
or its contract providers as the context dictates.
BOARD OF HEALTH, HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR SIMILAR TERM: The Salt Lake city-county
board of health.
BUSINESS: Any activity, operation, enterprise or calling referred to in this
code for which a license is required.
CITY: The city of Holladay, Utah, and its contract providers as the context
dictates.
CITY ATTORNEY OR ATTORNEY: The attorney of the city, or its contract providers
as the context dictates.
CITY CLERK, CLERK OR SIMILAR TERM: The recorder or the director of community
development as the context dictates.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
CITY ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT, ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT, CITY ENGINEER, ENGINEER OR
SIMILAR TERM: The engineering department of the city, or its contract providers
as the context dictates.
CITY RECORDER, RECORDER OR SIMILAR TERM: The recorder of the city as the
context dictates.
CITY TREASURER, TREASURER OR SIMILAR TERM: The treasurer of the city.
COUNTY SHERIFF, SHERIFF, SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT, LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY,
POLICE OR SIMILAR TERM: The law enforcement authorities of the city, including
its contract providers as the context dictates.
FIRE DEPARTMENT OR SIMILAR TERM: The fire department of the city, or its
contract providers as the context dictates.
HIGHWAY, PUBLIC HIGHWAY OR SIMILAR TERM: Any road, street, lane, court, place,
viaduct, culvert, bridge, alley, or other public way situated within the city,
laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated, abandoned or open to
the public, or made such in any action for the partition of real property, or
such public property so designated by any ordinance or statute, and includes
the entire area within the right of way.
HIS/HER, HE/SHE OR SIMILAR TERMS: Include the masculine, feminine or neuter
form, and the singular of nouns, pronouns and verbs shall include the plurals
and vice versa.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that facts exist that bring the act or
omission within the provisions of these ordinances. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAW: Means and denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of
the state of Utah, the ordinances of the city and when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE OFFICIAL OR SIMILAR TERM: The director of the appropriate division
within the city, or its contract providers as the context dictates.
MALICIOUSLY OR MALICE: Means and imports a wish to vex, annoy or injure another
person, or an intent to do a wrongful act, established either by proof or by
presumption of law.
OWNER: When applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or less of the whole or of any part
of the building or land.
PERSON: Includes bodies politic and any individual, partnership, firm, business
trust, association, corporation, limited liability company or other entity or
enterprise of any kind, or group of individuals, however styled or designated.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.
PROPERTY: Means and includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS OR SIMILAR TERM: The
department of public works of the city, or its contract providers as the
context dictates.
REAL PROPERTY: Means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SEWER DEPARTMENT, DEPARTMENT OF SEWERS, WATER DEPARTMENT OR SIMILAR TERM: The
sewer department of the city, its contract providers or the applicable
improvement district as the context dictates.
STATE: The state of Utah.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: When applied to a building or land, means and includes any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, either
alone or with others.
WILFULLY OR WILFULNESS: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or
omitted, means and implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or
make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or
to injure another or to acquire any advantage.
WRITTEN: Means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed,
or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
YEAR: A calendar year unless specified otherwise. (1999 Code)
1.08.020: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CODE:
When no other penalty is prescribed, any person convicted of violating any
provision or provisions of an ordinance included in these ordinances or in
ordinances hereafter enacted, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months or by a
fine in any sum less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both, except that
in all cases where a corporation is convicted of an offense for the commission
of which a natural person would be punished as for a misdemeanor and there is
no other punishment prescribed by the ordinance, such corporation is punishable
by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (1999 Code)
1.08.030: COPIES AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION:
Three (3) copies of the ordinance or resolution imposing a penalty for
violating code provisions shall be on file for use and examination by the
public in the offices of the city recorder. (1999 Code)
TITLE 2
GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 2.01
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2.01.010: Governing Body
2.01.020: Election To Office
2.01.030: Powers And Duties
2.01.040: Meetings
2.01.050: Open Meetings Law
2.01.060: Notice Of Meetings
2.01.070: Agenda
2.01.080: Minutes And Recordings
2.01.090: Mayor Presides
2.01.100: Quorum
2.01.110: Voting
2.01.120: Reconsideration
2.01.130: Summary Action
2.01.140: Rules Of Order And Procedure
2.01.150: Attendance
2.01.160: Disorderly Conduct
2.01.170: Required Attendance Of Witnesses And Production Of Evidence
2.01.180: Council Committees
2.01.010: GOVERNING BODY:
The governing body of the city of Holladay shall be a six (6) member council
consisting of five (5) council members elected from districts of the city and
the mayor, who shall be elected at large. Districts shall be constituted as
determined by ordinance of the city council. The council is hereinafter
referred to as the “city council”. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.020: ELECTION TO OFFICE:
The mayor of the city shall be elected in an at large election. Council members
shall be elected from geographic districts of the city. The five (5) council
districts shall be substantially equal in population. A council member must be
a qualified elector residing in the district from which he or she is elected.
The term of office for the mayor and council members shall be four (4) years,
except when the term may be shorter by virtue of an appointment to fill a
remaining term. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.030: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city council is the legislative body of the city and shall exercise the
legislative powers and perform the legislative duties and functions of the city
and may perform such other functions as may be specifically provided or
necessarily implied by law. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.040: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council shall hold regular meetings to
conduct the business of the city at least once each month and shall prescribe
by ordinance the time and place for holding its regular meetings. The city
council shall prepare and provide notice of its annual meeting schedule in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a
special meeting of the city council, such a special meeting may be ordered by
the mayor or any two (2) council members. Notice of the special meeting shall
be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Utah open and public
meetings act and Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-502, as amended. The order of
the special meeting shall be entered into the minutes of the city council.
   C.   Closed Meetings: The affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of
the city council present at an open meeting for which notice is given and a
quorum is present may call a closed meeting to discuss certain items as
provided under Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-205, as amended. The reason or
reasons for holding a closed meeting and the vote, by name, of each member of
the city council, either for or against the motion to hold the closed meeting,
shall be entered on the minutes of the meeting. No ordinance, resolution, rule,
regulation, contract, or appointment shall be approved at a closed meeting.
   D.   Electronic Meetings: The city council may convene and conduct an
electronic meeting in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
section 52-4-207, as amended. The city council shall establish and adopt
written rules and procedures governing such electronic meetings. (Ord. 2025-07,
5-15-2025)
2.01.050: OPEN MEETINGS LAW:
All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public, except closed
meetings, and shall be conducted in accordance with the open and public
meetings act as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-101 et seq., as
amended. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.060: NOTICE OF MEETINGS:
The city shall give public notice at least once each year of its annual meeting
schedule. Notice of the agenda, date, time and place of each of its meetings,
other than emergency meetings, shall be in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
sections 52-4-202, as amended, and 63F-1-701, as amended, regarding postings on
the Utah public notice website. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.070: AGENDA:
A written agenda for each regular meeting shall be prepared by the city manager
or his or her designee and approved by the mayor or mayor pro tempore in the
mayor’s absence. Any two members of the city council may request that one or
more items be placed on the agenda. Each agenda shall provide reasonable
specificity to notify the public as to the topics to be considered at the
public meeting and topics discussed at the meeting shall comply with applicable
provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-202, as amended. (Ord. 2025-07,
5-15-2025)
2.01.080: MINUTES AND RECORDINGS:
Except as otherwise provided by law, written minutes and a recording shall be
kept of all meetings of the city council in accordance with the provisions set
forth in Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-203 and 206, as amended, and shall
be presented to the city council for review, correction and approval. The city
council shall establish and implement procedures for approval of written
minutes of its meetings. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.090: MAYOR PRESIDES:
The mayor shall be the chairperson and preside at the meetings of the city
council. In the absence of the mayor or because of his or her inability or
refusal to act, the city council may elect a member of the city council to
preside over the meeting as mayor pro tempore in accordance with the procedures
set forth in
chapter 2.02  of this title. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.100: QUORUM:
No action of the city council shall be official or of any effect except when a
quorum of the council members are present, provided, that fewer than a quorum
may adjourn a meeting. The number of council members necessary to constitute a
quorum is four (4). (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.110: VOTING:
   A.   How Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions, and any action which would create a liability against
the city and in any other case at the request of any member of the city council
by a “yes” or a “no” vote. Every resolution or ordinance shall be in writing
before the vote is taken. A written resolution or ordinance may be amended by
oral motion.
   B.   Number Required: The minimum number of “yes” votes required to pass any
ordinance, resolution, or to take any action by the city council, unless
otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the voting members of the
city council without considering any vacancy in the city council. Any
ordinance, resolution, or motion of the city council having fewer favorable
votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and invalid.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a council meeting may be adjourned by a majority
vote of the council even though the majority is less than required herein, and
a majority of the council members, regardless of number, may fill any vacancy
in the council as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510, as
amended. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.120: RECONSIDERATION:
Any action taken by the city council shall not be reconsidered or rescinded at
any special meeting unless the number of members of the city council present at
the special meeting is equal to or greater than the number of members present
at the meeting when the action was approved. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.130: SUMMARY ACTION:
When two (2) or more agenda items for a city council meeting are determined by
the city manager to be of a routine nature, such items may be placed upon a
summary action calendar on the agenda. The summary action calendar may be voted
upon by the council as one matter and shall have the same effect as if a
separate vote on each summary action calendar item was taken. Prior to a final
vote on the summary action calendar, any member of the city council may request
to take any or all items on the summary action calendar off the summary action
calendar for discussion, debate or question. Any question, debate or discussion
regarding an item on the summary action calendar, except in the nature of
clarification or brief explanation of the content of an item, shall require a
request to remove the item from the summary action calendar. No items requiring
a public hearing shall be placed on the summary action calendar. (Ord. 2025-07,
5-15-2025)
2.01.140: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Adoption Of Rules: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-606, as
amended, the city council shall adopt rules of order and procedure governing
public meetings of the city council (“rules of order and procedure”). All
public meetings of the city council shall be conducted in accordance with the
adopted rules of order and procedure. The rules of order and procedure shall be
made available to the public at each public meeting of the city council and on
the city’s website. Members of the city council are elected officers within the
meaning of the Utah municipal officers’ and employees’ ethics act, as set forth
in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended. City council
members shall comply with the provisions of the ethics act in all matters
pertaining to the city and in public meetings of the city council.
   B.   Civil Discourse: Remarks and comments made in public meetings of the
city council should be relevant to the matters before the city council.
Speakers should speak in an audible and clear tone and refrain from attacking
city council members or others or their motives. City council meetings should
be conducted in a courteous manner to promote an atmosphere in which all points
of view may be expressed and heard. Council members should not interrupt other
members during discussion and debate. Remarks should be addressed through the
mayor. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.150: ATTENDANCE:
The city council shall have the power to compel the attendance of its own
members at its meetings and to provide penalties it considers necessary for the
failure to comply with an exercise of authority to compel attendance. (Ord.
2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.160: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
The city council on a two-thirds (2/3) vote of its members may expel any person
who is disorderly and/or disruptive during the meeting of the city council. The
city council may also on a two-thirds (2/3) vote of its members expel or fine
any council member for disorderly and/or disruptive conduct. This section or
any action taken by the governing body pursuant hereto shall not preclude
prosecution under any other provision of law. (Ord. 2016-09, 5-26-2016)
2.01.170: REQUIRED ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES AND PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE:
The city council may require the attendance of any person to give testimony or
produce records, documents or things for inspection, copying or examination
necessary or useful for the governance of the city. The city council may issue
subpoenas in its own name in the manner provided in the Utah rules of civil
procedure or may by ordinance establish its own procedure for issuing subpoenas
under this section. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.01.180: COUNCIL COMMITTEES:
   A.   Generally: The city council may from time to time delegate portions of
its authority by resolution to committees composed of at least two (2) members
of the city council.
   B.   Authority: Committees of the city council shall be limited in authority
to the specific assignment of the city council and shall exercise their
authority subject to a standard specified by the council in making the
delegation.
   C.   As A Whole: The authority delegated to any committee of the council
must be exercised by vote of the committee as a whole and no individual
committee member may exercise the delegated authority independently.
   D.   Administrative Directives Limited: A committee of the council may not
issue instructions or recommendations to the city manager or other city
employees other than for routine support services without express delegation of
authority to do so by the city council.
   E.   Reporting: The committee may return any recommendation or suggestions
to the city council which may at any time extend, restrict, or otherwise alter
the delegation of authority to the committee.
   F.   Designation Of Chair: The assignment of a committee chair may be made
by the city council when delegating any portion of its authority to a committee
of the council. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.02
MAYOR
SECTION:
2.02.010: General Powers
2.02.020: Voting Authority
2.02.030: Mayor Pro Tem
2.02.040: Restrictions And Appointments
2.02.010: GENERAL POWERS:
The Mayor of the City of Holladay shall be the Chief Ceremonial Officer of the
City, the Chair of the City Council and may represent the City in external
relationships. Subject to the provisions of 2.11.290, the Mayor may execute
contracts and interlocal agreements. (Ord. 2016-09, 5-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-
07, 5-15-2025)
2.02.020: VOTING AUTHORITY:
The Mayor shall be elected at large and shall be a voting member of the City
Council and shall have the associated powers and privileges. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-
15-2025)
2.02.030: MAYOR PRO TEM:
In the absence of the Mayor or because of his or her inability or refusal to
act, the City Council may elect a member of the City Council to preside over
the meeting as Mayor Pro Tempore. The election of a Mayor Pro Tempore shall be
entered in the minutes of the City Council meeting at which he or she is
elected. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside at the Council meeting and
perform, during the Mayor’s absence, disability, or refusal to act, the duties
and functions of the Mayor. Any member of the City Council elected as Mayor Pro
Tempore shall still retain his or her power and authority as a member of the
Council and shall be entitled to vote as a member of the City Council on all
matters. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.02.040: RESTRICTIONS AND APPOINTMENTS:
The Mayor may not serve as the City Recorder or the City Treasurer. (Ord. 2025-
07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.03
ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION
SECTION:
2.03.010: Elections
2.03.020: Declaration Of Candidacy
2.03.030: Nomination Petition
2.03.040: Residency And Registered Voter Requirements
2.03.050: Term Of Office
2.03.060: Vacancies
2.03.070: Oath Of Office
2.03.080: Fidelity Bonds And Theft Or Crime Insurance
2.03.090: Salaries
2.03.100: Transfer Of Records
2.03.110: Campaign Finance Statement
2.03.120: Ethics Act
2.03.010: ELECTIONS:
The offices of mayor and council member shall be filled by election of the
registered voters of the city of Holladay in a municipal election held on the
Tuesday after the first Monday in November, as provided in title 10, chapter 3
of the Utah Code Annotated. Municipal elections for the offices of mayor or
council member shall be conducted in the manner provided in the Utah election
code, set forth in title 20A of the Utah Code Annotated. Council members shall
be elected from districts, as more fully set forth below. The mayor shall be
elected at large. Primary elections, as required, shall be conducted in
accordance with all applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-
2025)
2.03.020: DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY:
Any eligible and qualified person desiring to run for the elected municipal
offices of mayor or council member shall file a declaration of candidacy with
the city recorder in accordance with the filing requirements set forth in title
20A, chapter 9 of the Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.030: NOMINATION PETITION:
Any resident of the city may nominate a candidate for elected municipal office
by filing a nomination petition with the city recorder in accordance with the
filing requirements set forth in title 20A, chapter 9 of the Utah Code
Annotated. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.040: RESIDENCY AND REGISTERED VOTER REQUIREMENTS:
Persons eligible to file a declaration of candidacy or to be nominated for the
elected office of mayor or council member shall have been a resident of the
city of Holladay for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days
immediately before the date of the election, shall be a registered voter of the
city, and shall meet the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-203,
as amended. Each person elected to the office of mayor or council member shall
maintain residency within the boundaries of the city and for council members
the appropriate district during his or her term of office. If a person elected
to the office of mayor or council member establishes his or her principal place
of residence outside the municipality or the appropriate district during his or
her term of office, the office is automatically vacant. If a person elected to
the office of mayor or council member is absent from the city anytime during
his or her term of office for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days
without the consent of the city council, that person’s elected office is
automatically vacant. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.050: TERM OF OFFICE:
Persons elected to the office of mayor or council member shall begin their term
of office at twelve o’clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January
following their election, and shall continue in office for four (4) years
thereafter and until their respective successors are chosen and qualified,
except in case of death, resignation, removal, or disqualification from office.
(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.060: VACANCIES:
Vacancies in the offices of mayor or council member shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510, as
amended. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.070: OATH OF OFFICE:
   A.   Required: All elected officials shall take, subscribe and file the
constitutional oath of office before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices. Elected officials shall take their oath of office at twelve
o’clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their election or
as soon thereafter as is practical.
   B.   Administered: The oath of office shall be administered by the city
recorder, any judge, or any notary public.
   C.   Filed: All oaths of office shall be filed with the city recorder.
   D.   Failure To Comply: No official act of any officer shall be invalid for
the reason that he or she failed to take the oath of office. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-
15-2025)
2.03.080: FIDELITY BONDS AND THEFT OR CRIME INSURANCE:
   A.   Required: All elected officers, appointees and employees shall be
bonded or insured as required by state law. The City Council shall prescribe
the amount of a general fidelity bond or have in place theft or crime insurance
acquired for each municipal officer.
   B.   The premium charge required by this section shall be paid for by the
City. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.090: SALARIES:
Elected officers shall receive such compensation for their services as the city
council may fix or amend by ordinance in accordance with the notice and hearing
requirements set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-818, as amended. The
compensation of elected officers shall be paid at least monthly. City staff, as
part of the regular budget process, may review the appropriateness of the
compensation received by the mayor and city council members and recommend
adjustments thereto as deemed appropriate, taking into consideration the impact
of inflation, consumer price index, and the compensation of elected officials
in nearby cities of similar size. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.100: TRANSFER OF RECORDS:
Every officer of the city upon expiration of his or her term for any cause
whatsoever shall, within five (5) days after notification and request to do so,
deliver to his or her successor all books and records, electronic data and any
technology which may be the property of the city. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.110: CAMPAIGN FINANCE STATEMENT:
Statement Required: Each candidate for municipal office shall comply with the
provisions of Section 10-3-208 of the Utah Code Annotated in the filing of
campaign finance disclosure statements. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.03.120: ETHICS ACT:
All elected officers, appointed officers and employees of the city shall comply
with the provisions, conditions and requirements of the Utah municipal
officers’ and employees’ ethics act as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
10-3-1301 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.04
LEGISLATION
SECTION:
2.04.010: Ordinances
2.04.020: Resolutions
2.04.030: Public Records
2.04.010: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Legislative Power: Except as otherwise specifically provided, the city
council shall exercise its legislative powers through ordinances.
   B.   Extent Of Power: The city council may pass any ordinance to regulate,
require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity, business, conduct
or condition authorized by law.
   C.   Form: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall contain and be in
substantially the order and form as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
10-3-704, as amended. No ordinance shall be void or unlawful by reason of its
failure to conform to certain provisions of said law.
   D.   Effective Date: Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance, ordinances
shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty
(30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner.
Ordinances may become effective at an earlier or later date after publication
or posting if so provided in the ordinance.
   E.   Signed: Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council, before taking
effect, shall be signed by the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro
tempore.
   F.   Publication: All ordinances, before taking effect, shall be posted and/
or published as required by law.
   G.   Recording: The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively
for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder
shall give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not already done
so. The city recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the
date of passage and the date of publication or posting of the ordinance, as
required. (UCA 10-3-713)
   H.   Prima Facie Evidence: The record and certificate prepared by the city
recorder, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage, and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
In addition, the ordinances printed and published by the authority of the city
council, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and legal
publication of such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in the publication in
all courts and administrative proceedings.
   I.   Proved Under Seal: The contents of all ordinances of the city of
Holladay, the dates of passage, and the dates of publication or posting, may be
proved by the certification of the city recorder under the seal of the city of
Holladay. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.04.020: RESOLUTIONS:
   A.   Administrative Authority: Unless otherwise required by law, the city
council may exercise any administrative authority by resolution.
   B.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form and
contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
   C.   Effective Date: Resolutions may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage.
   D.   Publication: Resolutions may become effective without publication or
posting.
   E.   Limitation: No punishment, fine, or forfeiture may be imposed by
resolution. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.04.030: PUBLIC RECORDS:
The ordinances, resolutions, and any other books, records, accounts or
documents of the city shall be kept at the office of the city recorder.
Approved copies shall be open and available to the public during regular
business hours for examination and copying in accordance with the Utah
government records access and management act, as adopted by the city. (Ord.
2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.05
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES
SECTION:
2.05.010: Purpose And Intent
2.05.020: Constitutional Taking
2.05.030: Guidelines And Procedures For Review
2.05.040: Limitations
2.05.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide advisory guidelines to assist the
city in identifying and reviewing actions of the city which may involve the
physical taking or exaction of private real property that may involve
constitutional taking issues in accordance with the advisory provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 63L-4-101 et seq. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.05.020: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING:
   A.   As used herein “constitutional taking issues” means actions involving
the physical taking or exaction of private real property by the city that might
require compensation to a private real property owner because of:
      1.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States;
      2.   Article I, section 22 of the Utah constitution; or
      3.   Any recent court rulings governing the physical taking or exaction
of private real property by a governmental entity.
   B.   Actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property is not a constitutional taking if the physical taking or
exaction:
      1.   Bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest; and
      2.   Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an
individualized property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the
proposed development on the legitimate government interest. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-
15-2025)
2.05.030: GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of the owner’s private real property by the city shall request a review
of the final decision of any official, employee, board, commission or council
of the city implicating such constitutional taking. The following guidelines
and procedures shall be followed in the event such review is requested:
   A.   Final Decision: The person requesting a review must have obtained a
final and authoritative determination, internally, within the city, relative to
the decision from which they are requesting review.
   B.   Time For Filing: The person requesting a review shall file his or her
request in writing to the office of city recorder within thirty (30) days from
the date of the final decision that gave rise to the concern that a
constitutional taking has occurred.
   C.   Date For Review: The city council or its designee shall immediately set
a time to review the decision that gave rise to the constitutional taking
claim.
   D.   Additional Information: In addition to the written request for review,
the applicant shall submit prior to the date of review the following
information. An application shall not be deemed “complete” or “submitted” until
the reviewing body certifies to the applicant that all the materials and
information required herein has been received. The reviewing body shall
promptly notify the applicant of an incomplete application.
      1.   Name of the applicant requesting review;
      2.   Name and business address of current owner of the property, form of
ownership, and name and address of all principal shareholders or partners if a
business entity is involved;
      3.   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has
been a constitutional taking;
      4.   A detailed description of the property alleged to have been taken;
      5.   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property alleged
to have been taken, including any evidence of the value of the property before
and after the alleged taking, the name of the party from whom the property was
purchased and the relationship if any between the person requesting review and
the party from whom the property was acquired;
      6.   The nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such
as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold, etc.;
      7.   Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a
full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the
date of application;
      8.   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3)
years prior to the date of application;
      9.   The assessed value of and the ad valorem taxes on the property for
the previous three (3) years;
      10.   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured
by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest
rate, remaining loan balance and term of loan and other significant provisions,
including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to assume the loan;
      11.   All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years;
      12.   All studies commissioned by the applicant within the previous three
(3) years concerning feasibility of development or utilization of the property;
      13.   Itemized income and expense statements from the property for the
previous three (3) years for income producing property;
      14.   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
      15.   Any other additional information requested by the city which is
reasonably necessary in its opinion to arrive at a conclusion concerning
whether there has been a constitutional taking.
   E.   Review: The city council or its designee shall hear all the evidence
related to and submitted in connection with the request for review to determine
whether or not the action by the city constitutes a constitutional taking as
defined herein, including consideration of the following:
      1.   Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property
bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest;
      2.   Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action
taken by the city; and
      3.   Whether the taking or exaction is roughly proportionate and
reasonably related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent,
to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision
being reviewed.
   F.   Decision: The city council or its designee shall render a final
decision on the review within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete
application for review was submitted to the city recorder. The decision of the
city council or its designee regarding the results of the review shall be given
in writing to the applicant and the official, employee, board, commission or
council that rendered the final decision that gave rise to the constitutional
taking claim. When determined to be necessary and appropriate, the reviewing
body shall make a recommendation to the official, employee, board, commission
or council that made the decision that gave rise to the constitutional taking
claim.
   G.   Failure To Render Decision: If the city fails to hear and decide the
appeal within fourteen (14) days, the acting body’s decision or action is
presumed to be approved. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.05.040: LIMITATIONS:
The guidelines set forth herein and any decision rendered pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter are advisory only and shall not be construed to
expand or limit the scope of the city’s liability for a constitutional taking.
The city shall have no legal liability to any person, firm or entity of any
nature whatsoever and a court may not impose liability upon the city for
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-
2025)
CHAPTER 2.06
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
2.06.010: Appointment Of City Manager
2.06.020: Functions And Duties
2.06.030: Intergovernment Cooperation
2.06.010: APPOINTMENT OF CITY MANAGER:
The city council shall select and appoint by majority vote of at least four (4)
affirmative votes, an individual to serve as the city manager. Said individual
shall perform such duties and responsibilities as set forth in this title. In
the absence of the city manager, a qualified individual shall be appointed as
the interim city manager. In the event the manager will be absent from his or
her position, or unable to perform the duties of the job for more than three
(3) consecutive weeks, the city council shall approve and appoint an interim
city manager. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.06.020: FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
city. He or she shall have the power and duty to:
   A.   Supervise the administration and enforcement of all laws, this code,
and other ordinances of the city as they affect the administrative departments;
   B.   Execute the policies affecting the administrative departments that are
adopted by the city council;
   C.   Conduct performance evaluations and administrative pay adjustments as
prescribed by this code and other city ordinances or policy;
   D.   Authorize the issuance of administrative rules and outline general
administrative procedures;
   E.   Investigate, examine, or inquire into the affairs or operations of any
department or office; and when authorized by the city council, employ
consultants and professional counsel to aid such investigations or inquiries;
   F.   Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, parks and other
public property under the control and jurisdiction of the city;
   G.   Supervise the preparation and presentation of the annual budget for the
city;
   H.   Direct activities relating to contracts for services for the city;
   I.   Examine performance requirements, delivery schedules and estimates of
costs of various contracts involving the city, to ensure completeness and
accuracy;
   J.   Prepare bids, specifications, progress reports and other items that may
be required in connection with contracts, or proposed contracts, involving the
city;
   K.   Review bids and proposals from other agencies for conformity to
contract requirements and help determine acceptable bids and proposals;
   L.   Appoint and remove administrative assistants, including a chief
administrative officer, and with the advice and consent of the city council,
appoint department heads, all statutory officers, commissions, boards and
committees of the city, except as may otherwise be specifically limited by law;
   M.   Remove department heads and officers and employees, commissions, boards
and committees;
   N.   Exercise control of all departments, divisions and bureaus within the
city government;
   O.   Attend all meetings of the city council with the right to take part in
all discussions and the responsibility to inform the city council of the
condition and needs of the municipality, and make recommendations and freely
give advice to the city council;
   P.   Appoint a budget officer to serve in place of the city manager for the
purpose of conforming with the requirements of the uniform municipal Fiscal
Procedures Act for Utah Cities and in all other respects fulfill the
requirements of that Act;
   Q.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the City Council, a qualified
person to each of the Offices of City Engineer, Recorder, Treasurer, Finance
Director and Attorney; create any other offices as may be deemed necessary for
good government, and make appointments to them; and regulate and prescribe the
powers and duties of all other officers of the City, within the general
provisions of law and ordinance;
   R.   Furnish the City Council with a report, periodically or as determined
by ordinance, setting forth the amounts of all budget appropriations, the total
disbursements to date from these appropriations, and the amount of indebtedness
incurred or contracted against each appropriation (including disbursements and
indebtedness incurred and not paid) and the percentage of the appropriations
encumbered to date, which reports shall be made available for public
inspections;
   S.   Execute agreements within certified budget appropriations on behalf of
the City, or delegate by written executive order the power to execute such
agreements to executive officials, subject to the procedure described in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-6-138;
   T.   When necessary, call on the residents of the City over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the State and
ordinances of the City; and
   U.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this title or may be
required by ordinance not inconsistent with the form of government. (Ord. 2025-
07, 5-15-2025)
2.06.030: INTERGOVERNMENT COOPERATION:
   A.   Information To City Council: The City Manager, or departments
designated by the City Manager, shall provide such information concerning City
finances, operations and procedures, as reasonably requested by the City
Council and necessary for the City Council to fulfill its statutory duties,
which are not privileged, private or confidential.
   B.   Interference By Council Prohibited: No member of the City Council shall
direct or request, except in writing, the appointment of any person to, or his
removal from, office or to interfere in any way with the performance by the
officers of their duties. The City Council shall not give orders to any
subordinate of the City Manager either publicly or privately, but may make
suggestions and recommendations regarding the work of subordinate employees to
the City Manager.
   C.   Investigations By Council Authorized: Nothing in this section shall
prevent the City Council from appointing committees of its own members or
citizens to conduct investigations into the conduct of any officer, department
or agency of City government, or any matter relating to the welfare of this
City, and delegating to these committees such power of inquiry as the City
Council may deem necessary. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.07
APPOINTED OFFICERS
SECTION:
2.07.010: Departments
2.07.020: Office Creation
2.07.030: Vacancies
2.07.040: City Recorder
2.07.050: City Treasurer
2.07.060: City Attorney
2.07.070: City Engineer
2.07.080: City Finance Director
2.07.010: DEPARTMENTS:
The administration of the city shall be organized into departments and/or
divisions, as directed by the city manager and approved by the city council.
Department heads shall be at will employees of the city and shall serve at the
pleasure of the city manager. The city may, from time to time, have and
maintain a public works department or may contract for the performance of
public works services, at the discretion of the city manager, and with the
concurrence of the city council. In the event the city maintains a public works
department, the head of that department shall be an at will employee of the
city, appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city
council. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.020: OFFICE CREATION:
The city council may create any office deemed necessary for the government of
the city of Holladay and shall, by resolution or ordinance, prescribe the power
and duties to be performed by appointed officials.(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.030: VACANCIES:
The city manager, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint
and fill vacancies in all appointed offices provided for by law or ordinance.
All appointed officers shall continue in office until their successors are
appointed and qualified. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.040: CITY RECORDER:
   A.   Appointment: The City Manager with the advice and consent of the city
council shall appoint a qualified person to the office of city recorder.
   B.   Office: The city recorder shall occupy an office in the city hall or at
some other place convenient thereto as the city council may direct.
   C.   Corporate Seal: The city recorder shall keep the corporate seal. When
certified by the city recorder under the corporate seal, copies of all papers
filed in the city recorder’s office and transcripts from all records of the
city council shall be admissible in all courts as originals.
   D.   Meetings Of City Council: The city recorder shall attend the meetings
as assigned and keep the record of the proceedings of the city council.
   E.   Actions Of The City Council: The city recorder shall record all
ordinances, resolutions, and regulations passed by the city council in the
manner provided in this title.
   F.   Contracts: The city recorder shall countersign all contracts made on
behalf of the city or to which the city is a party and shall maintain a
properly indexed record of all such contracts.
   G.   Bonds: The city recorder shall maintain a list of all outstanding bonds
of the city, including their purpose, amount, terms, date and place payable.
   H.   Elections And Appointments: The city recorder shall manage all
municipal election procedures and requirements as provided in the Utah Code
Annotated, as amended, and shall keep a record of all persons elected or
appointed to any office within the city, including the date of appointment or
election, term of office, date of death, resignation, or removal, and name of
person appointed to fill any vacancy.
   I.   Limitations: The City Recorder shall not serve as the City Treasurer.
   J.   Records Of The City: The City Recorder shall keep all the books,
records, accounts and documents of the City at the Recorder’s Office. Such
records shall be open for public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the
City of Holladay Government Records Access and Management Act. Retention
schedules, reflect electronic records.
   K.   Additional Duties: The City Recorder shall perform such other and
further duties as the City Council may provide by ordinance, resolution,
regulation or directive. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.050: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: The City Manager with the advice and consent of the City
Council shall appoint a qualified person to the Office of City Treasurer.
   B.   Custodian: The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money,
bonds, or other securities belonging to the City.
   C.   Collections: The City Treasurer shall ensure collections and receipt of
all monies payable to the City, including taxes, assessments, licenses, fines,
forfeitures, service charges, fees and other revenues of the City. The City
Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all monies received hereunder and
shall verify the prompt deposit all such monies in the appropriate bank
accounts of the City. The City Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the
City separate and distinct from his or her own money.
   D.   Receipts: The City Treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every
person paying money to the City treasury, a receipt or other evidence of
payment therefor, specifying the date of payment and the account paid.
   E.   Checks: The City Treasurer may sign all checks prepared by the Accounts
Payable Clerk and shall, prior to affixing said signature, determine or cause
to be determined that sufficient funds are on deposit in the appropriate bank
account of the City to honor such check.
   F.   Warrants: The City Treasurer shall ensure the payment of all warrants
in the order in which presented and as money available for payment thereof in
the appropriate funds of the City. The City Treasurer shall make provisions for
the payment of all warrants issued prior to signing any subsequently issued
checks.
   G.   Special Assessments: The City Treasurer shall ensure receipt of all
monies received by the City on any special assessment and shall apply the
payments thereof to the cost of the improvement for which assessment was made.
   H.   Accounting: The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate and detailed
accounting of all transactions, receipts, collections, disbursements and other
matters within the Treasurer’s charge as provided by State law or as the City
may by ordinance or resolution direct.
   I.   Limitations: The City Treasurer shall not serve as the City Recorder.
   J.   Additional Duties: The City Treasurer shall perform such other and
further duties as the City Council may provide by ordinance, resolution,
regulation or directive. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.060: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment: The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Manager,
with the advice and consent of the Council. The City may contract with or
retain an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Utah. The City may
make a separate contract with an attorney or attorneys for the performance of
criminal prosecutorial legal services. Attorneys under contract with the City
shall work under the general direction of the City Attorney, and the City
Manager and shall communicate with the City Attorney and City Manager as
necessary to properly correlate their efforts.
   B.   Duties: The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor to the City in all
matters pertaining to contracts with or by the City or questions of legality
arising out of any law, ordinance or otherwise. The City Attorney or counsel
designated by the City in consultation with the City Attorney shall appear on
behalf of the City in all suits at law or in equity in which the City is a
party, and shall prosecute or defend them, as the case may be, in all courts
until they are finally disposed of. The City Attorney shall advise all City
officers in relation to their official duties, prepare and draft all such
ordinances, resolutions and regulations as the City Manager may from time to
time request and perform such other duties as the ordinances of the City and
the general laws require or as the City Council may direct. The City Attorney
shall attend meetings of the City Council and other meetings of the City when
requested to do so. The City Attorney shall, when requested to do so, furnish
written opinions on subjects submitted by the City Council or by the City
Manager.
   C.   Additional Duties: The City Attorney shall perform such other duties as
the City Council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation, or
directive. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.070: CITY ENGINEER:
The City Council may, by ordinance, establish the office of city engineer and
prescribe the duties and obligations for that office. Each person appointed as
city engineer shall be a registered professional engineer under Title 58,
Chapter 22, Professional Engineers and Professional Land Surveyors Licensing
Act. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.07.080: CITY FINANCE DIRECTOR:
   A.   The City Council may, by ordinance, create a director of finance
position to perform the financial duties and responsibilities of the city
recorder as established by the Utah Fiscal Procedures Act.
   B.   A director of finance:
      1.   Shall be:
         a.   A qualified person; and
         b.   Appointed and removed by the city manager, with the advice and
consent of the City Council; and
      2.   May not assume the duties of the city or town treasurer.
   C.   The legislative body may adopt the financial administrative duties of
the director of finance prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah
Cities. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.08
COMMITTEES
SECTION:
2.08.010: General
2.08.010: GENERAL:
   A.   Intent And Purpose:
      1.   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to encourage citizen
involvement and obtain citizen advice and input by creating certain committees,
councils, and commissions of the City as hereinafter discussed. Any and all
committees, councils or commissions established pursuant to this chapter have
no authority to bind the City or impose any conditions on the City or its
citizens.
      2.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or preclude the City Manager
from establishing or creating executive committees, task forces, etc., to give
advice and recommendations to the Office of the City Manager.
   B.   Composition; Appointment: Unless otherwise specifically stated in a
committee, council or commission enabling ordinance, all committees, councils,
and commissions established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter should
be composed of at least seven (7) members, all of whom shall be appointed by
the City Manager with the advice and consent of the City Council. Committee
members shall be residents of the City. The appointed members shall serve as
the decision making body for the committee. Committees shall make reasonable
efforts to assure that voting committee membership is comprised of an odd
number of members. Each committee may seek nonvoting members/volunteers who
desire to participate consistent with the purpose and/or mission of the
respective committee.
   C.   Term; Removal; Vacancies:
      1.   Terms; Vacancies: Unless otherwise specifically stated in a
committee, council or commission enabling section, the following provisions
shall govern the membership on any committee, council or commission established
pursuant to this chapter. The members shall serve for a term of three (3) years
and may be removed by the City Manager only for cause, with the provision that
the first appointment of two (2) members shall be for a term of one (1) year;
the first appointment of the next two (2) members shall be for a term of two
(2) years; the first appointment of the remaining member(s) shall be for a term
of three (3) years; thereafter the members shall be appointed for three (3)
year terms. Vacancies occurring through expiration of terms of appointment,
death, disability, resignation or removal from the City, if applicable, shall
be filled by appointment of the City Manager with the advice and consent of the
City Council. Members shall not serve more than two (2) consecutive terms.
   D.   Rules Of Procedures; Meetings: Unless otherwise specifically stated in
a committee, council or commission enabling section, each committee, council
and commission established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
formulate its own rules for the selection of a Chairman, that there shall be at
least one (1) meeting of the committee, council or commission each quarter at
City Hall, unless a different location for a meeting is approved by the City
Manager. Each committee shall prepare written minutes of all meetings which
shall be approved by each committee at subsequent meetings. The original
approved minutes shall be maintained in the Office of the City Recorder.
   E.   Historical Commission: A Historical Commission is hereby created. The
commission shall be composed of up to seven (7) members. Members shall be
appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council
and shall serve terms of three (3) years. The initial terms of the members
shall be staggered to provide for continuity. Members shall not serve for more
than two (2) consecutive terms. Appointed members should, to the extent
reasonably possible, represent all the council districts of the City. The
purpose and duties of the commission shall be:
      1.   To provide information to the City regarding the identification and
documentation of local historic and archeological resources;
      2.   To work towards the continuing education of citizens regarding
community history;
      3.   To research and preserve history of the areas that now comprise the
City of Holladay;
      4.   To sponsor events to share the history of the area with residents of
the City; and
      5.   To identify historic resources, including photographs, documents,
and other media related to the area.
   F.   Arts Council: An Arts Council is hereby created. The council shall be
composed of up to eleven (11) members. The council may also have non-voting ex-
officio members as approved by the City Council. Members shall be appointed by
the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council and shall
serve terms of three (3) years. The initial terms of the members shall be
staggered to provide for continuity. Members shall not serve for more than two
(2) consecutive terms. Appointed voting members should, to the extent
reasonably possible, represent all the council districts of the City. The
purpose and duties of the council shall be:
      1.   To foster the visual and performing arts within the City of Holladay
by creating opportunities for display and performance and by identifying those
residents of the City with talent and ability that can benefit the community;
      2.   To provide opportunities for the community to be benefitted by the
performing and visual arts through the sponsorship and/or identification of
community events providing such opportunities; and
      3.   To provide information to the City Council and City administration
regarding ways and opportunities to enhance the quality of life within the City
through the support of visual and performing arts.
   G.   Tree Committee: A Tree Committee is hereby created. The committee shall
be composed of five to seven (7) members. The committee may also have non-
voting ex-officio members as approved by the City Council. Members shall be
appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council
and shall serve terms of three (3) years. The initial terms of the members
shall be staggered to provide for continuity. Members shall not serve for more
than two (2) consecutive terms, unless a suitable successor cannot be found.
Appointed voting members should, to the extent reasonably possible, represent
all the council districts of the City. The purpose and duties of the committee
shall be:
      1.   To encourage the planting, maintenance and preservation of the
City’s tree canopy for the benefit of City residents;
      2.   To encourage and administer programs, as directed by the City
Council from time to time, regarding the City’s inventory of trees; and
      3.   To provide recommendations for the planting of different species of
trees on City property. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.09
EMPLOYEE APPEALS HEARING OFFICER
SECTION:
2.09.010: Appointed
2.09.010: APPOINTED:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1106(7), the city hereby
designates that the hearing of employee appeals pursuant to the above
referenced section shall be by a hearing officer to be appointed by the city
manager. The city manager may appoint the same hearing officer or officers
designated to hear appeals of land use matters pursuant to the land use and
zoning ordinances of the city of Holladay. The process utilized to hear
employee appeals shall observe all required due process protections and shall
be conducted consistent with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-
3-1106(3) - (4). A final action or order of the hearing officer may be reviewed
by the Utah court of appeals by filing with that court a petition for review.
(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.10
GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS MANAGEMENT ACT
SECTION:
2.10.010: Purpose And Intent; State Provisions Adopted
2.10.020: Records Custodian And Management
2.10.030: Limitation On Disposal Of Records
2.10.040: Denials
2.10.050: Appeals
2.10.060: Confidential Treatment Of Records For Which No Exemption Applies
2.10.070: Criminal Penalties; Liability For Damages
2.10.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT; STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting
this chapter to adopt the provisions applicable to municipalities for the city
of Holladay, guidelines and procedures for retention, and an appeals process in
accordance with the government records access management act (hereinafter
referred to as "GRAMA"), Utah Code Annotated, title 63G, chapter 2. All
entities of the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and with
GRAMA, and shall also comply with other federal and state statutory and
regulatory recordkeeping requirements.
   B.   Constitutional Rights: In enacting this chapter, the city council
recognizes two (2) fundamental constitutional rights: the right of privacy in
relation to personal data gathered by the city; and the public's right of
access to information concerning the conduct of the public's business.
   C.   Access Restricted: The city council also recognizes a public policy
interest in allowing the city government to restrict access to certain records,
as specified in this chapter, for the public good.
   D.   Intent: It is the intent of the city council:
      1.   That all records of the city, which are defined by applicable Utah
statutory and case law as public records, shall be made available to citizens
within a reasonable time after request and at a reasonable cost as set forth in
this GRAMA;
      2.   To establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the
economical and efficient management of the city's records as provided in this
chapter;
      3.   To provide guidelines for both disclosure and restrictions on access
to government records, which are based on the equitable weighing of the
pertinent interests and which are consistent with nationwide standards of
information practices; and
      4.   Favor public access when, in the application of this chapter,
countervailing interests are of equal weight.
   E.   Adoption Of State Provisions: Utah Code Annotated title 63G, chapter 2,
parts 1 and 3; sections 63G-2-201; 63G-2-202; 63G-2-205; 63G-2-206; 63G-2-601;
63G-2-602; and are hereby adopted as part of the GRAMA of the city and are made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.10.020: RECORDS CUSTODIAN AND MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Records Custodian Designated: The city recorder is hereby designated
the records custodian for purposes of GRAMA.
   B.   Retention Schedule: For those records not covered under the Utah
municipal general records retention schedule developed by the state archives,
the city recorder shall develop a retention schedule as approved by the state
records committee.
   C.   Documents To State Archives: The city recorder shall provide to the
state archives, all retention schedules, and all designations and
classifications applied to record series maintained by the city, including a
statement explaining the purposes for which record series designated private or
controlled are collected and used by the city. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.10.030: LIMITATION ON DISPOSAL OF RECORDS:
   A.   Specified: Any city record which has been requested in accordance with
this chapter and GRAMA, that is disposable by an approved retention schedule,
may not be disposed of until the request is granted and fulfilled, or sixty
(60) days after the request is denied if no appeals are filed, or sixty (60)
days after all appeals are completed, pursuant to section
2.10.050 of this chapter.
   B.   Litigation Or Audit Pending: No city record, disposable by an approved
retention schedule, which is subject to pending litigation or audit shall be
disposed of until the litigation or audit has been completed or resolved. (Ord.
2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.10.040: DENIALS:
   A.   Notice Of Denial: If the city denies a records request, in whole or in
part, it shall provide a notice of denial to the requester either in person or
by sending the notice to the requester's address as provided.
   B.   Content: The notice of denial shall contain the following information:
      1.   A description of the record or portions of the record to which
access was denied; provided, that the description does not disclose private,
controlled or protected information, or information exempt from disclosure;
      2.   Citations to the provision of this chapter, court rule or order,
GRAMA, or another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation that
exempts the record or portions of the record from disclosure; provided, that
the citations do not disclose private, controlled or protected information or
information exempt from disclosure;
      3.   A statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial;
      4.   The time limits for filing an appeal, and the address where an
appeal is filed. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.10.050: APPEALS:
Persons aggrieved by the city’s classification or designation of a record, or
of an access decision or by a response to a record request may appeal the
determination to the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of Utah
Code Ann. Section 63G-2-401. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.10.060: CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT OF RECORDS FOR WHICH NO EXEMPTION APPLIES:
Notwithstanding the provisions regarding classifications and right of access
contained in this chapter, the city reserves the right to request a court to
restrict access to a record under Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-405. (Ord.
2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.10.070: CRIMINAL PENALTIES; LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
   A.   Prohibited Disclosure; Defenses: A city employee or other person who
has lawful access to any private, controlled or protected record under this
chapter, and who intentionally discloses or provides a copy of a private,
controlled or protected record to any person knowing that such disclosure is
prohibited, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. It is a defense under this
subsection that:
      1.   The person released the information in the reasonable belief that
the disclosure of the information was necessary to expose a violation of law
involving government corruption, abuse of office, or misappropriation of public
funds or property; or
      2.   The record could have lawfully been released to the recipient if it
had been properly classified.
   B.   Prohibited Access: A person who by false pretenses, bribery or theft
gains access to or obtains a copy of any private, controlled or protected
record to which they are not legally entitled is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. No person shall be guilty under this subsection who receives the
record, information or copy after the fact and without prior knowledge of or
participation in the false pretenses, bribery or theft.
   C.   Limitation Of Liability: In accordance with GRAMA, neither the city nor
any of its agencies, officers, or employees shall be liable for damages
resulting from the release of a record where the requester presented evidence
of authority to obtain the record, even if it may be subsequently determined
that the requester had no such authority.
   D.   Intentional Refusal: A city employee who intentionally refuses to
release a record the disclosure of which the employee knows is required by law
or by final unappealed order of the city or a court is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
CHAPTER 2.11
PROCUREMENT
SECTION:
2.11.010: Purpose
2.11.020: Application And Compliance
2.11.030: General Guidelines
2.11.040: Definitions
2.11.050: Bid Evaluation
2.11.060: Responsibility Of Bidders And Offerors
2.11.070: Right To Inspect Facilities And Audit Records
2.11.080: Reporting Of Anticompetitive Practices
2.11.090: Prequalification
2.11.100: Competitive Bidding
2.11.110: Competitive Proposals (RFP)
2.11.120: Minimal Purchases
2.11.130: Small Purchases
2.11.140: State Contract Purchasing
2.11.150: Recent Purchases By Another Government Agency
2.11.160: Contracting For Designated Professional Services
2.11.170: Contracts With Other Governmental Entities
2.11.180: Sole Source Procurement
2.11.190: Emergencies, Public Threats And Unforeseen Conditions
2.11.200: Procurement Protests
2.11.210: Sanctions
2.11.220: Remedies For Solicitations Or Awards In Violation Of Law
2.11.230: Routine Expenditures
2.11.240: Providing Information And Records
2.11.250: Blanket Purchase Order
2.11.260: Administrative Regulations And Policies
2.11.270: Authorized Contract Types
2.11.280: Signing Authority
2.11.290: Disposal Of Surplus Property
2.11.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the City purchases goods and
services in a manner that ensures that all such purchases are made fairly,
equitably, efficiently, and economically and in the best interest of its
residents.(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.020: APPLICATION AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   This chapter applies to agreements for the procurement of supplies,
services and construction entered into by the City. This chapter applies to
every expenditure of public funds by the City for public purchasing
irrespective of the source of the funds. Any expenditure involving Federal
funds shall comply with applicable Federal law and regulations. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the City from complying with the terms and conditions of
any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law.
   B.   The City may take any action with respect to purchasing, bidding and
contracting that is in the best interest of the City, including rejecting any
bid from a bidder in an adverse position to the City in a present, pending or
threatened litigation. The City may also reject a nonresponsive bid, and may
reject bids when the City’s interest will be served, unless this rejection
would be contrary to existing law or be considered arbitrary. Finally, the City
may waive or modify requirements within a particular bid process when it is in
the best interest of the City, and when it is consistent with mandatory
applicable legal requirements and fair and equitable practices. (Ord. 2025-07,
5-15-2025)
2.11.030: GENERAL GUIDELINES:
   A.   The City Manager may act as the Purchasing Agent. The City Manager may
delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services or construction items
to other City officials, if the delegation is necessary for the effective
procurement of those items. The City Manager may designate a Purchasing Agent
whose duties include procurement, soliciting bids and proposals, advising City
departments regarding procurements, maintaining a bidders' list and vendor
files, as well as records needed for purchasing. Responsibility rests with
employees who purchase goods and services, department directors, and the City
Manager.
   B.   Purchasing Agent or any department or division may prepare, file or
amend specifications, requisitions or quantity estimates for supplies and
services.
      1.   Purchases less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) may be made with
the approval of department directors or the city manager, with or without
competitive bids or quotes. Departments should take reasonable steps to assure
fair pricing.
      2.   Subject to the provisions of section
2.11.130 , Purchases between ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and seventy-five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00) shall be made only after soliciting at least
three (3) formal quotes or completing the competitive bidding process.
      3.   All purchases of or exceeding seventy five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) shall be made only after completing the competitive bidding
process. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.040: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS: Any corporation, limited liability company, partnership, individual,
sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private
legal entity.
BUSINESS DAY: Any day when the city administration offices are open for public
business.
CONSTRUCTION: The process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or
demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine repair or
routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property.
CONTRACTOR: Any person having an agreement with the city.
DEPARTMENT: Any city department, commission, committee, board, or agency
requiring the procurement of supplies, services, or construction pursuant to
this chapter.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: The city's appointed director of finance.
EMPLOYEE: An individual drawing a salary or wages from the city, whether
elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal services for
the city or any department, agency, commission, council, board, or any other
entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the city; and any
individual serving as an elected official of the city.
INVITATION FOR BIDS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids.
MANAGER: The city's appointed manager.
PERSON: Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization,
or group of individuals.
PROCUREMENT: The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring
of any supplies, services, or construction, including description of
requirements, selection, and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of
agreement, and all phases of agreement administration.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Those services that are provided by a person skilled in
the practice of a learned or technical discipline. Providers of professional
services often require prolonged and specialized intellectual training, and
profess attainments in special knowledge as distinguished from mere skills.
Disciplines may include, but are not limited to, accounting, auditing, court
reporting, experts in a specialized field, finance, law, materials testing,
medicine, and others.
PUBLIC AGENCY: A public entity subject to or created by the city.
PURCHASING AGENT: The city manager or other persons designated in this chapter
to procure supplies, services, or construction on behalf of the city.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS OR RFP: All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR: A person who has the capability in all respects
to perform fully the agreement requirements, and the experience, integrity,
reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, and credit which will assure good
faith performance.
RESPONSIVE BIDDER: A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all
material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by any person, including
professional services.
SUPPLIES: All property, including, without limitation, equipment, materials,
printing, insurance, and leases of real property, but excluding land or a
permanent interest in land. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.050: BID EVALUATION:
   A.   Generally: Bids, proposals, and related matters shall be evaluated
using the criteria in this section.
   B.   City's Evaluation Process: When evaluating matters, the city shall
consider the following:
      1.   Solicitation Criteria: The city shall consider the evaluation
criteria stated in a bid or proposal package or other solicitation document.
      2.   Policy Criteria: As further described in this section, the city
shall consider whether a bid, proposal or other offer or submission is
responsive to the city's request; whether the bidder or offeror is responsible;
and whether any element conflicts with the other criteria of this chapter.
         a.   Due Diligence: The city may take steps as it deems appropriate to
verify and determine any matter. The city shall determine in its sole
discretion what steps may be appropriate in light of the matters being
considered and the resources of the city. The failure to discover any matter
shall not preclude any subsequent evaluation or action.
         b.   Records: In the manner it shall determine, the purchasing agent
shall retain in the procurement file records relevant to a solicitation or
award; provided, however, that if the award contract is approved by resolution
of the city council, the city recorder shall keep the procurement file records.
         c.   Evaluating Responsiveness: To be responsive, a bid, proposal or
other offer or submission must conform in all material respects to the terms of
the city's solicitation documents. Such terms may include, without limitation,
using bid forms, mandatory submittals, required securities, and appropriate
substantive responses. Ministerial errors and other matters in a bid, proposal
or other offer or submission will not necessarily render it nonresponsive, and
the purchasing agent shall review such matters and determine whether the
submission is responsive. The purchasing agent may evaluate responsiveness
based on any additional reasonable criteria.
         d.   Evaluating Responsibility: To be responsible, a bidder or offeror
must have the capability in all respects to fully perform the agreement
requirements, and the integrity, capacity and reliability which will assure
timely, proper performance.
         e.   Factors: The city may consider any relevant factors when
evaluating responsibility, including, without limitation, the following:
            (1)   The bidder's capacity to perform the contractual
requirements, including whether the bidder has available appropriate financial,
material, equipment, facility and personnel resources and expertise, or the
ability to obtain them. Without limitation, capacity may also include legal
capacity to enter agreements, the ability to perform within required times, or
the ability to perform any necessary future service and maintenance.
            (2)   The bidder's ability, skill and quality of performance.
            (3)   The bidder's character, integrity, reputation, judgment,
experience and efficiency.
            (4)   The bidder's ability to work cooperatively with the city,
including, without limitation, whether the bidder has previously failed to
comply with city agreements or other requirements; nonpayment of sums due to
the city; poor working relationships with or adversarial actions against the
city; prior suspension or other proceedings by the city against the bidder; or
failure to assist the city in determining responsibility.
         f.   Making A Determination: The submission of any bid, proposal or
other offer or submission constitutes an agreement by the bidder or offeror to
reasonably assist the city with its determination of responsibility.
         g.   Effect Of Determination: The city's determination of
responsibility relates solely to a bidder's overall ability to perform for a
specific procurement, and is not a general assessment of a bidder's
capabilities.
         h.   Evaluating Specific Matters: For any bid, proposal, other offer,
or submission:
            (1)   Tie Bids: Tie bids occur when identical prices are submitted
from responsive and responsible bidders and that price is the low bid. The
purchasing agent shall make an award in a manner that is beneficial to the
city, and may make an award in a manner that will discourage tie bids. Such may
include:
               (A)   Award to the person closest to the point of delivery.
               (B)   Award to the person who previously held the agreement.
               (C)   Award to the person with the earliest delivery date.
            (2)   Only One Bid Received: If the city receives only one
responsive bid, proposal or other offer or submission, the city may make an
award to that bidder or offeror if the purchasing agent determines that the
bid, proposal or other offer or submission is fair and reasonable and conforms
to all applicable requirements, and that other prospective bidders or offerors
had reasonable opportunity to respond or that there is not adequate time for a
resolicitation. The written determination and basis for decision by the
purchasing agent shall be placed in the procurement file. Alternatively, the
city may reject the sole bid, proposal or other offer or submission.
         i.   Inspections And Tests: The city may perform inspections, tests
and other evaluations in any manner conducive to the city's interest,
including, without limitation, the use of third parties. All prospective and
actual recipients of a bid or agreement shall provide all reasonable assistance
and information required by the city to perform any such inspection, test or
other evaluation.
         j.   Modifying Submissions: After the time for submission, a bid,
proposal or other offer or submission may be modified as follows:
            (1)   Confirmation: When it appears a mistake has been made, or
when the city desires an assurance of any matter, the city may request a bidder
or offeror to confirm in writing such bid, proposal or other offer or
submission.
            (2)   Notification Of Error: A bidder or offeror shall notify the
purchasing agent of any error contained in a bid, proposal or other offer or
submission within two (2) business days after bid opening or the time for
submitting proposals unless the purchasing agent waives this requirement. The
purchasing agent shall have sole discretion to determine whether to permit any
such modification or withdrawal.
            (3)   Modifications By Agreement: The purchasing agent may agree
with a bidder or offeror to any modifications so long as they do not prejudice
fair competition or the city's interests. Modifications may include such
matters as the following:
               (A)   Time For Accepting: The purchasing agent and bidder or
offeror may agree that a bid, proposal or other offer or submission will remain
effective for a longer period of time than that stated in the bid, proposal or
other offer or submission.
               (B)   Subcontractor Or Supplier Changes: Any proposed change in
subcontractors or suppliers must be submitted to the purchasing agent, and the
purchasing agent may reject any such proposed change. The bidder or offeror
will receive no additional compensation as a result of a change to any
subcontractors or suppliers, and must continue to meet the requirements of any
federally mandated program and other contractual and legal requirements.
               (C)   Change In Specifications: The purchasing agent and bidder
or offeror may agree to a change in specifications when such change is in the
city's interest, is reasonably related to the work originally solicited, and
would not be prejudicial to fair competition.
               (D)   City's Correction Of Ministerial Mistakes: The purchasing
agent may at any time correct mistakes in a bid or proposal that are of a
ministerial or minor nature. Ministerial or minor informalities are clerical
errors and matters of form rather than substance that are evident from the
document, or insignificant mistakes or informalities that can be waived or
corrected without prejudice to other bidders or offerors. They generally do not
have a substantial effect on price. Examples include a failure to:
                  (i) Sign the bid, proposal, or other submissions requiring
signature, but only where they are accompanied by other materials indicating
intent to be bound.
                  (ii) Acknowledge receipt of an addendum, but only if the
materials demonstrate the bidder or offeror received the addendum and intended
to be bound by it, or the addendum has a negligible effect on the bid, proposal
or other offer or submission.
               (E)   City's Correction Of Mistakes Where The Intent Is Evident:
If the intent of the bid, proposal or other offer or submission is clearly
evident on the face of the document, the purchasing agent shall correct it as
intended and it may not be withdrawn. Examples include:
                  (i) Typographical errors. Errors in extending unit prices.
Transposition errors. Arithmetical errors.
                  (ii) Differences in written and numerical prices (written
shall control).
               (F)   No Withdrawal For Mistakes Where Intent Is Not Evident: If
the bidder or offeror's intent is not clearly evident on the face of the
document, the bid, proposal or other offer or submission may not be withdrawn
except as agreed by the purchasing agent.
               (G)   Correcting Errors In Judgment: Errors in judgment may not
be corrected, and the bid, proposal or other offer or submission may not be
withdrawn, except as agreed by the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent may
allow correction of an error in judgment if it can be done without prejudice to
other bidders or offerors. The purchasing agent may allow withdrawal if it is
in the city’s interest.(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.060: RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS:
Bid and performance bonds or other security as specified on the city’s bid form
are required on all construction contracts in excess of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) (or such lesser threshold as may be required from time to
time by state law) and may be requested for supply agreements or service
agreements as the purchasing agent deems advisable to protect the city’s
interests. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the
solicitation. Bid or performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a
determination of a bidder or offeror’s responsibility. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-
2025)
2.11.070: RIGHT TO INSPECT FACILITIES AND AUDIT RECORDS:
The city may, at reasonable times:
   A.   Inspect the part of the plant, place of business, or worksite of a
contractor or subcontractor which the city determines is pertinent to the
performance of any agreement awarded or to be awarded by the city; and
   B.   Audit the books, accounting and any applicable records of any
contractor or subcontractor. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.080: REPORTING OF ANTICOMPETITIVE PRACTICES:
When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected
among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be
transmitted to the city attorney. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.090: PREQUALIFICATION:
Where deemed appropriate by the city, bidders, proponents and/or suppliers may
be prequalified for particular types of supplies, services and construction to
determine the responsibility of such persons.
   A.   Standard Of Responsibility: Factors to be considered in determining
whether the standard of responsibility has been met by a bidder or supplier in
connection with a prequalification include:
      1.   Availability of the appropriate financial, material, equipment,
facility and personnel resources and expertise, or the ability to obtain them,
necessary to indicate the capability of the bidder or supplier to meet all
contractual requirements;
      2.   A satisfactory record of performance;
      3.   A satisfactory record of integrity;
      4.   Legal qualifications to contract with the city; and
      5.   Whether all necessary information has been supplied in connection
with the inquiry concerning responsibility.
   B.   Information Pertaining To Responsibility: In connection with a proposed
prequalification, the bidder, proponent or supplier shall supply information
requested by the city concerning the responsibility of such person. If such
information is not supplied, the city shall base its determination of
responsibility upon any available information or may find the bidder or
supplier nonresponsible if such failure is unreasonable, as determined by the
city. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.100: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
   A.   Conditions For Use: The city may use competitive sealed bidding or
other processes designed to assure competitive bidding except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   B.   Invitation For Bids: Each bid proceeding shall be commenced by the
purchasing agent or designee issuing an invitation for bids, which shall
include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to
the procurement, and otherwise shall be in compliance with this chapter. All
specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the
purposes intended and to encourage competition in satisfying the city’s needs,
and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy set forth in this section
applies to all specifications including, without limitation, those prepared for
the city by architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen.
   C.   Public Notice: All noticing shall be processed through the city
recorder or designee. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall
be given for a reasonable time, and not less than five (5) working days prior
to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Notice will be shared on
the public notice website and on other websites and in other appropriate
forums. Notice may also be shared directly with potential providers or vendors.
The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening.
   D.   Bid Opening: All bids shall be accepted and opened by the city recorder
or designee. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more
witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid, the name of each bidder, and such other relevant
information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, shall be recorded; the
record and each bid shall be open to public inspection.
   E.   Bid Acceptance And Evaluation: Bids shall be unconditionally accepted
without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this chapter. Bids
shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for
bids, which may include, without limitation, criteria to determine
acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and
suitability for a particular purpose. The invitation for bids shall set forth
the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation
that are not set forth in the invitation for bids. Those criteria that will
affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award (such as
discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs) shall be
objectively measurable.
   F.   Correction Or Withdrawal Of Bids; Cancellation Of Awards: Correction or
withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or
cancellation of awards or agreements based on such bid mistakes, may be
permitted by the purchasing agent where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before
bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written, digital or facsimile
notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to
the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be
permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing
evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of
the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After the bid opening, no
changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest
of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction,
a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw
its bid if:
      1.   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but
the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
      2.   The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or
withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or agreements based on bid mistakes,
shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent.
   G.   Award: Award shall be made with reasonable promptness by reasonable
notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the
requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, unless
otherwise provided for in this chapter. Such notice shall be sent by mail,
electronic mail and/or by posting on the city’s website.
   H.   Multistep Sealed Bidding: When it is considered impractical to prepare
an initial purchase description to support an award based on price, an
invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers
to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers
have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth
in the first solicitation.
   I.   Cancellation Of Invitation For Bids: An invitation for bids or other
solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected
in whole or in part, as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the
city’s interest. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the
solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in
whole or in part when in the best interests of the city. Notice of cancellation
shall be sent to all persons responding to the solicitation, which notice shall
identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where
appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any
resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-
2025)
2.11.110: COMPETITIVE PROPOSALS (RFP):
   A.   Conditions For Use: When the purchasing agent determines in writing
that the use of competitive bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the city, a purchase may be made by use of the competitive
proposals method described in this section.
   B.   Request For Proposals: Competitive proposals shall be solicited through
a request for proposals (“RFP”).
   C.   Public Notice: Adequate public notice of the RFP shall be given in the
same manner as provided in subsection
2.11.100 C of this chapter.
   D.   Receipt Of Proposals: No proposal’s contents, except for the names of
the offerors, shall be disclosed to competing offerors during the process of
negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of
each offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description
sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be
open for public inspection only after award.
   E.   Evaluation Factors: The RFP shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluation factors, including the quantitative basis for
evaluation. No criteria may be used in an RFP response evaluation that is not
set forth in the RFP.
   F.   Discussion With Responsible Offerors And Revisions To Proposals: As
provided in the RFP, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who
submit proposals determined to have a reasonable chance of being selected in
order to clarify and assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the
solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment
to discuss and revise proposals in writing and such written revisions may be
permitted after submissions and prior to award to obtain best and final offers.
In conducting such discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information
derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors, except for the names of
the offerors.
   G.   Award: Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is
determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into
consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the RFP. No other
factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The file shall contain the
basis on which the award is made.
   H.   Cancellation Of An RFP: An RFP or other solicitation may be canceled,
or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part, as may be
specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the city.
Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be
canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part when
in the city’s best interest. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all
persons responding to the solicitation. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.120: MINIMAL PURCHASES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to the purchase of goods, supplies,
materials, equipment or services having a total value of not more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000). So long as funds used for such purchases are part
of the approved annual budget for the department making the purchase, purchases
may be approved.
      1.    Purchases of operational or construction related supplies or
nonprofessional services having a total value of less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
      2.   Purchases of professional services having a total value of less than
sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), but only when such purchase is approved in
writing in advance by the department director, the purchasing agent and the
Director of Finance and Administration.
      3.   Purchases of construction work, but not architectural and
engineering services, having a total value of less than thirty-five thousand
dollars ($35,000.00), but only when such purchase is approved in writing in
advance by the department director, the purchasing agent and the Director of
Finance and Administration.
      4.   Purchases of building improvements or public works projects having a
total value of less than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00).
   B.   Required Accounting Procedures: Any department making purchases under
this section shall implement and follow accounting procedures that are
acceptable to the Finance Director.
   C.   Agreement: Any purchases of professional services or construction under
this section shall be formalized using an agreement, and such agreement shall
state the minimum terms necessary to protect the City’s interest. The fully
executed agreement shall be filed with the City Recorder’s Office.
   D.   Authorized Parties: Only the purchasing agent, department heads and
employees designated by department heads may make minimal purchases under this
section.
   E.   Procedure: Minimal purchases may be made by any reasonable means.
Documentation shall be retained by the purchaser and archived in the individual
department’s purchase records to demonstrate reasonableness.
   F.   Manipulation Prohibited: Purchases shall not be artificially divided
into smaller amounts to fall within this section. Such prohibition includes,
without limitation, awarding numerous purchases to a single person for
substantially similar performances, or by dividing the work required for a
single project solely for purposes of making use of this section. (Ord. 2025-
07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.130: SMALL PURCHASES:
   A.   Applicability: The following purchases may be made by the authorized
parties set forth in subsection B., below:
      1.   Contracts for operational or construction related supplies or
nonprofessional services having a total value of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) and not more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00).
      2.   Purchases of building improvements having a total value of thirty-
five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) and not more than the bid limit specified in
Section 11-39- 101(1) of the Utah Code Annotated.
      3.    Purchases of public works projects having a total value of thirty-
five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) and not more than the bid limit specified in
Section 11-39- 101 of the Utah Code Annotated.
   B.   Authorized Parties: Only the purchasing agent, department heads and
employees designated by department heads shall make small purchases as defined
in this section. In making small purchases, the following procedures shall be
used in lieu of a bid or proposal process:
      1.   Solicitation And Award: Purchases shall be made by soliciting quotes
from no fewer than three (3) vendors. Such solicitation may be completed in any
reasonable manner including, without limitation, telephone inquiry, internet
search or other price comparison. Award shall be made to the vendor offering
the lowest responsible quotation.
      2.   Records: Any department making a small purchase shall retain a
record of the names of the prospective vendors contacted, those offering
quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, and shall document all
quotes received.
   C.   Manipulation Prohibited: Purchases shall not be artificially divided to
fall within this section. Such prohibition includes, without limitation,
awarding numerous purchases to a single person for substantially similar
performances, or by dividing the work required for a single project solely for
purposes of making use of this section.
   D.   Small Purchase Modifications And Renewals: Any agreement solicited
under this section shall not be modified in excess of the maximum dollar limit
specified above, or renewed on a successive basis with the same party, without
written approval of the purchasing agent or the manager. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-
2025)
2.11.140: STATE CONTRACT PURCHASING:
Because an appropriate bid procedure has already been completed by the state of
Utah, any item that is a state contract or cooperative pricing contract item
may be purchased without following any otherwise applicable bid requirements,
provided that the purchasing agent or department head making the purchase shall
document the state contract number used and record that information in the
purchase file. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.150: RECENT PURCHASES BY ANOTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCY:
When purchasing supplies, material or equipment from a vendor who has been
awarded a bid for the same items from another governmental entity within the
preceding ninety (90) days, the price paid by the other governmental entity
shall be deemed to be the lowest price available for such items and the city
need not follow any other bidding requirements, provided that the purchasing
agent or department head making the purchase shall maintain in the purchase
file appropriate documentation demonstrating compliance with the requirements
of this section. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.160: CONTRACTING FOR DESIGNATED PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
The city may procure the services of financial and legal advisors, planners,
architects, engineers, accountants, and construction managers as defined by the
laws of the state of Utah, and other professional services, as negotiated based
on demonstrated competence and qualification and at fair and reasonable prices.
(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.170: CONTRACTS WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES:
Whenever the city agrees to make purchases together with another governmental
entity, and the agreement is entered in compliance with the solicitation
procedures of that other entity, the city shall be deemed to have complied with
the city’s solicitation requirements. Contracted services from other
governmental entities are exempt from any requirements to obtain bids or
quotes. Unless not legally required, all contracts with other governmental
entities shall comply with the Utah Interlocal Cooperation Act and shall be
approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.180: SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT:
   A.   Definition: Without limitation, sole source procurement may arise when:
      1.   The city needs a supply or service of a unique or specialized
nature, and only one known supplier is reasonably available to meet the need.
      2.   Specific parts, accessories, equipment, materials, services,
proprietary items or other items are necessary to meet the city's needs, and
there are no comparable items reasonably available.
      3.   Items are procured for resale.
   B.   Procedure: To use sole source procurement, the purchasing agent shall
place a written determination in the procurement file after conducting a good
faith review of available sources, stating why no other sources are reasonably
available, or why competition would not be likely to produce other acceptable
offers. Sole source procurement shall not be used only to accommodate a desire
for a particular proprietary item unless the city has a very specific need for
such item which can be justified in writing. The city shall be deemed to have a
very specific need when there is a need to procure matching or compatible
supplies and services and when other similar supplies and services would not be
reasonably beneficial to the city's needs. The purchasing agent or designee
shall negotiate and use appropriate means to obtain the best price available
for any item procured under this section. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.190: EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC THREATS AND UNFORESEEN CONDITIONS:
   A.   Generally: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and
conditioned on prior appropriation of necessary funds by the city council, the
purchasing agent may make, or authorize others to make, emergency procurement
of supplies, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to
public health, welfare, or safety; provided that procurement in response to
such emergencies, public threats or unforeseen conditions shall be made with
such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. Procurement made on
this basis shall occur as set forth in this section, subject, however, to any
contrary requirements of, or procedures under, Utah state law or any emergency
management plan for the city from time to time in effect.
   B.   Definitions: The conditions specified in this section are defined as
follows:
   EMERGENCY CONDITION: Creates an immediate and serious need for supplies or
services that cannot adequately be addressed using normal procurement methods.
Such a need may arise by reason of a natural disaster, epidemic, riot,
equipment failure or other reason.
   PUBLIC THREATS: Circumstances that appear likely to adversely impact the
public's health, welfare, convenience or safety. They may arise when
circumstances appear to create a risk of environmental contamination, traffic
congestion or hazards, disruption of utility or other public services, or other
matters.
   UNFORESEEN CONDITION: Creates a need to procure supplies or services within
time frames that could not reasonably be anticipated or accommodated under
normal procurement methods.
   C.   Procedure: The purchasing agent shall examine the circumstances and
determine whether they constitute a condition set forth above. If so, the
purchasing agent may take any action required by such condition. The purchasing
agent shall place in the procurement file a written determination and
explanation of the condition. Procurement should be as competitive as possible
under the circumstances, but priority shall be given to meeting the needs of
the emergency or combating the public threat. Only those supplies and services
impacted by the condition in question may be acquired under this section. (Ord.
2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.200: PROCUREMENT PROTESTS:
Any actual or prospective bidder or offeror who is aggrieved in connection with
the solicitation or award of a contract for procurement may protest the
procurement by filing a written protest with the purchasing agent. The protest
shall contain the following information:
   A.   The protesting party's name, mailing address and daytime telephone
number, the signature of the protesting party or the attorney for the
protesting party, and the date the protest is signed; and
   B.   The relief sought, a statement of facts and a recitation of the reasons
and legal authority in support of the protest sufficient to permit review.
   C.   Protests shall be submitted prior to the closing date for receiving
bids or proposals unless the protestor did not know and could not reasonably
have known of the facts giving rise to the protest prior to such time, but in
any event, all protests shall be submitted within five (5) business days after
the closing date for receiving bids or proposals.
   D.   The city may proceed with the procurement despite the protest, except
that the purchasing agent may suspend the procurement process for so long as
they determine is appropriate.
   E.   The purchasing agent may designate another individual to assist in
reviewing the matter, which assistance may include finding facts, analyzing the
protest, and making recommendations to the purchasing agent.
   F.   The purchasing agent or designee may request additional information
from the protesting party or from other persons to make a determination. The
protesting party shall provide all information requested by the purchasing
agent reasonably needed to decide the protest except information which is
protected from disclosure by law, or which could reasonably be expected to
result in unfair competitive injury to the protestor.
   G.   The purchasing agent shall review and decide protests, and shall issue
a written determination to the protesting party within fifteen (15) business
days of receipt of the protest.
   H.   The protesting party may appeal the written decision of the purchasing
agent by filing a written appeal with the manager within five (5) business days
of the purchasing agent's written determination. Unless otherwise agreed to by
the city and the appellant, the hearing shall be held no sooner than five (5)
business days and no later than thirty (30) business days after the date that
the appeal is filed.
   I.   At the hearing before the manager, the appellant and the city's
representative shall be allowed to testify, present evidence, and comment on
the issues. The manager also may allow other interested persons to testify,
comment or provide evidence on the issues.
   J.   No later than fifteen (15) business days after the hearing, the manager
shall issue a signed order either granting the appeal in whole or in part, or
upholding the determination of the purchasing agent in whole or in part. The
order of the manager shall include:
      1.   The decision, and any reasons for the decision the manager may wish
to provide; and
      2.   A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the decision to
the district court.
   K.   If the manager fails to issue a decision within fifteen (15) business
days after the hearing, said failure shall be considered the equivalent of an
order denying the appeal.
   L.   The manager may appoint a person other than the purchasing agent to
fulfill the manager’s responsibilities under this section. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-
2025)
2.11.210: SANCTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful:
      1.   For any bidder or prospective bidder, or city employee or city
officer, in restraint of freedom of competition or otherwise, by agreement with
any other person, bidder, or prospective bidder, to bid a fixed price, or to
“rotate” bidding practices among competitors unless specifically authorized by
the City’s policies, rules and regulations;
      2.   For any person to offer or to give to any employee of the city or
any member of his immediate family, any gain, whether in the form of money,
services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, promise, or other form,
under circumstances in which it could reasonably be intended to influence him
or could reasonably be expected to influence him in his duties concerning the
award of any contract or order of purchase, or for any city employee to
directly or indirectly solicit or directly or indirectly accept any such gift
for such purpose;
      3.   For any city employee or city officer to disclose, in advance of the
opening of the bids, the content of any bid invited through the formal
competitive bidding procedure;
      4.   For any city employee or city officer to actively participate in the
awarding of a contract from which he will directly benefit; and
      5.   For any city employee or city officer or other person to appropriate
for personal or private use any item of public property.
   B.   Any city employee or city officer committing any of the foregoing acts
may be discharged or suspended from employment, and the city may seek
additional appropriate legal redress.
   C.   At the discretion of the city council, the following contracts are
voidable:
      1.   Contracts which result from a conflict of interest under this
chapter or other applicable law;
      2.   Contracts awarded to a person or firm that tried to influence the
award of such contract by offering something of value to any city officer or
city employee; and
      3.   Contracts awarded by a city officer or city employee circumventing
the requirements of this chapter or other applicable statute.
   D.   The city council hereby declares its intent that the contracts
described in subsections C1 through C3 of this section would not have been
entered into on behalf of the city if such misconduct had been discovered prior
to the execution of the contract. In this regard, the council further states
that no city officer or city employee has authority, either actual, apparent or
implied, to negotiate or execute any such contract and that such contract
shall, at the discretion of the city council, be voidable, unless the action of
the city officers or city employees in executing the contract is ratified by
affirmative action of the city council after the misconduct was discovered and
made known to the city council.
   E.   All persons or firms responsible for any misconduct prohibited by this
section shall be liable to the city for any losses incurred by the city
resulting from any contract awarded due to such misconduct. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-
15-2025)
2.11.220: REMEDIES FOR SOLICITATIONS OR AWARDS IN VIOLATION OF LAW:
   A.   Prior To Bid Opening Or Closing Date For Receipt Of Proposals: If,
prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the
purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a
solicitation is in violation of applicable law, then the solicitation or
proposed award shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law.
   B.   Prior To Award: If, after a bid opening or the closing date for receipt
of proposals, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney,
determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of an agreement is in
violation of applicable law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be
canceled.
   C.   After Award: If, after an award, the purchasing agent, after
consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of
an agreement was in violation of applicable law, then:
      1.   If the person awarded the agreement has not acted fraudulently or in
bad faith:
         a.   The agreement may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is
determined that doing so is in the city's best interests; or
         b.   The agreement may be terminated and the person awarded the
agreement shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under
the agreement, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination; or
      2.   If the person awarded the agreement has acted fraudulently or in bad
faith, the agreement may be declared null and void or voidable, if such action
is in the city’s best interests. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.230: ROUTINE EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, but subject
to statutory compliance by the city's director of finance and treasurer, the
manager or designee may approve for payment routine expenditures such as
utility bills, leases and payroll related expenses, provided that such
expenditures are referenced in the then approved budget, that the funds are
available for such expenditures, and that sufficient documentation is provided
concerning such expenditures.
   B.   The manager or designee also similarly may approve payments for
supplies, nonprofessional and professional services and payments on city
approved contracts, provided that such expenditures are referenced in the then
approved budget, that the funds are available for such expenditures, and that
sufficient documentation is provided concerning such expenditures. (Ord. 2025-
07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.240: PROVIDING INFORMATION AND RECORDS:
   A.   Information and copies of records under this chapter may be requested
from the city recorder pursuant to the government records access and management
act (“GRAMA”), Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-101 et seq.
   B.   Quotations shall remain confidential until all quotations have been
received.
   C.   Sealed bids shall remain confidential until the bids are opened, after
which they shall be available for public inspection if provided by GRAMA,
except for information or data that the bidder designates as proprietary or
confidential. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.250: BLANKET PURCHASE ORDER:
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the manager,
purchasing agent or designee may arrange blanket purchase orders with suppliers
which shall authorize continuing charges against the city. Such purchase orders
shall be reviewed and renewed at least once each fiscal year. The manager,
purchasing agent or designee shall, in advance of any transaction negotiated
upon such blanket purchase order, notify the merchant or supplier of the
specific city employee authorized to take delivery and sign the purchase order.
No billing against the city shall be valid as applied against the purchase
order unless the person taking delivery was authorized to do so and the blanket
purchase order shall be available for public inspection if required by GRAMA.
(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.260: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS AND POLICIES:
The manager may prescribe administrative regulations and procedures which are
consistent with the provisions of this chapter and other written financial
procedures approved by the city council.(Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.270: AUTHORIZED CONTRACT TYPES:
As authorized by Utah Code Annotated 63G-6a-1205(4), the city is authorized to
use any of the following contract types:
   A.   A fixed price contract;
   B.   A fixed price contract with price adjustment;
   C.   A time and materials contract;
   D.   A labor hour contract;
   E.   A definite quantity contract;
   F.   An indefinite quantity contract;
   G.   A requirements contract;
   H.   A contract based on a rate table in accordance with industry standards;
or
   I.   A contract that includes one (1) or more of the following construction
delivery methods:
      1.   Design-build;
      2.   Design-bid-build; or
      3.   Construction contractor. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.280: SIGNING AUTHORITY:
The City Council may authorize the Manager to sign any agreement, purchase
order, obligation, form, or other document. In addition, the Manager has
authority to sign all documents necessary to allow the City to make minimal
purchases and small purchases, as defined in this chapter, provided that funds
have been previously appropriated by the City Council. When a specific
appropriation has been made by the City Council, or for any contract or written
obligations less than $100,000, the Manager may sign.
   A.    In any document accepted by the City in which a signature is required
or used, the City may authorize the use of an electronic signature, so long as
it complies with the requirements of this section.
   B.   The use of an electronic signature shall have the same force and effect
as the use of a “wet” or manual signature if:
      1.    The signature is capable of verification;
      2.    The signature is under the sole control of the person using it; and
      3.   The signature is linked to the data in such a manner that it is
readily ascertainable if the data is changed after the signature is applied.
   C.    The City Manager shall determine acceptable technologies and vendors
under this section consistent with industry best practices to ensure the
security and integrity of the data and the signature. The City Manager shall
further determine the documents for which the City will accept electronic
signatures. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
2.11.290: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY:
   A.   Purpose: For purposes of this section, significant parcel of real
property shall be defined as either a parcel or lot at least one-fourth (1/4)
acre in size or having a value of more than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) or property of any size dedicated to public use. Significant
personal property shall be defined as an item or a collection of like items
having a value in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as determined
by reasonable estimates based on other like surplus property sales of public
entities or like sales by private entities.
   B.   Authority: The City Manager shall have the authority to sell, lease,
convey and dispose of real and personal property for the benefit of the City as
provided by Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2, as amended.
   C.   Requirements: Before the City may dispose of a significant parcel of
real property, or significant personal property the City Council shall:
      1.   Provide reasonable notice of the proposed disposition at least
fourteen (14) days before a scheduled meeting at which the City will hear
public comment; and
      2.   Hold a meeting at which the City Council accepts public comment on
the proposed disposition.
      3.   Close or remove property from public use, if necessary.
   D.   Conditions, Limitations: All disposal, leases or subleases of such
property of the City other than a significant parcel of real property, shall be
made, as nearly as possible, under the same conditions and limitations as
required by City ordinances and State law for the purchase and sale of
property.
   E.   Methods Of Sale: The City Council may also authorize at its discretion
and under such terms and conditions as it may deem desirable, fair and
appropriate, considering intended use, property tax value and the interests of
the City, the sale of any surplus property, through public auction or other
method designed to best serve the interests of City residents and produce a
fair return; the trade or exchange of any surplus property; and the lease or
sublease of any surplus property. (Ord. 2025-07, 5-15-2025)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 3.08
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.08.010: Title
3.08.020: Purpose
3.08.030: Effective Date
3.08.040: Sales And Use Tax
3.08.050: Reserved
3.08.060: Penalties
3.08.070: Severability
3.08.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as THE CITY OF HOLLADAY SALES AND USE TAX
ORDINANCE. (1999 Code)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The Utah legislature has authorized municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
imposes a one percent (1%) sales and use tax. It is the purpose of this chapter
to conform the sales and use tax ordinance of the city to the requirements of
the sales and use tax act, as amended. (1999 Code)
3.08.030: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective one second after twelve o'clock (12:00:01)
A.M. on December 1, 1999. (1999 Code)
3.08.040: SALES AND USE TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: From and after the effective date of this chapter, there
is levied and there shall be collected and paid taxes as follows:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within the city at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the purchase price paid or charged on such retail sale.
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the effective date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property.
      3.   For the purpose of this chapter all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out of state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by
the state tax commission. "Public utilities", as defined by Utah Code Annotated
title 54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any
county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the
place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to
the city shall be as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an
appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by the state tax commission.
   B.   Adoption Of State Provisions: The provisions of Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12, as amended, are hereby adopted as follows:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, and in
force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales
and use taxes, excepting Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119
thereof, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set
forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of the city, or other name pursuant to a name change, shall be
substituted therefor. Nothing in subsection B of this section shall be deemed
to require substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that
word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the
constitution of the state, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for
that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the city, rather than by or against
the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
      3.   If a license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of
this chapter.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer; and
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the state, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by
that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax act. (1999
Code)
3.08.050: RESERVED:
3.08.060: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine in an amount not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or
imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (1999 Code)
3.08.070: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
section, including, but not limited to, any exemption, is for any reason held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter. It is the intention of the city council that each
separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other
provisions herein. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 3.09
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.09.010: Purpose
3.09.020: Definitions
3.09.030: Levy
3.09.040: Exemptions
3.09.050: No Effect Upon Existing Franchises; Credit For Franchise Fees
3.09.060: Tax Collection Contract With State Tax Commission
3.09.070: Incorporation Of State Statute
3.09.080: No Additional License Or Reporting
3.09.010: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the City of Holladay to adopt the Municipal Energy Sales
and Use Tax pursuant to, and in conformance with, section 10-1-301 et seq.,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, "the Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax". (Ord. 08-10, 6-5-2008, eff. 9-30-2008)
3.09.020: DEFINITIONS:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1.   A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
      2.   Any combination of subsection A of this definition or this
subsection B.
DELIVERED VALUE: A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for
sale or use in the Municipality and includes:
      1.   The value of the energy itself; and
      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, services
charges, or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in
usable form to each class of customer in the Municipality.
   B.   "Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under part
1 or part 2 of chapter 12, title 59 of the Utah Code.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimus amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the State Tax Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX:
   A.   A Franchise Tax;
   B.   A tax similar to a Franchise Tax; or
   C.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this State,
any county, city, municipality, district, or other local governmental entity of
the State, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use, or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in the city for any purpose
except sale in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE:
   A.   The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
   B.   "Use" does not include the sale, display, demonstration, or trial of
the taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. (Ord.
08-10, 6-5-2008, eff. 9-30-2008)
3.09.030: LEVY:
Beginning at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., October 1, 2008,
there is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city of Holladay equaling
six percent (6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
This tax shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable
energy to the consumer.
   B.   The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax or taxable energy
imposed by the city of Holladay authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 2 of
the Utah code, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 08-10, 6-5-2008, eff. 9-
30-2008)
3.09.040: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax
except as expressly provided in section 10-1-305(2)(b) of the Utah code;
notwithstanding an exemption granted by section 59-12-104 of the Utah code.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to section 10-1-305(2)(b) of the Utah code:
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels
subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah code;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
federal law, the United States constitution, or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah code;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
city.
   C.   The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is
exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter,
provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
state authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 3 of the Utah code; and
      2.   The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the
tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Ord. 08-10, 6-5-2008, eff. 9-30-2008)
3.09.050: NO EFFECT UPON EXISTING FRANCHISES; CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE FEES:
   A.   This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between
the city and energy suppliers.
   B.   There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount
of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      2.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 08-10, 6-5-
2008, eff. 9-30-2008)
3.09.060: TAX COLLECTION CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   On or before the effective date of this chapter, the city shall
contract with the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax, in
accordance with this chapter. This contract may be a supplement to the existing
contract with the commission to administer and collect the local sales and use
tax, as provided in section
3.09.050 of this chapter. The mayor, with the approval of the city manager and
city attorney, is hereby authorized to enter supplementary agreements with the
state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax ordinance enacted by this
chapter.
   B.   An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax
revenues collected from consumers directly to the city monthly if:
      1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more, and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax
directly to the city may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the
energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount
the energy supplier retains as authorized by section 10-1-307(4) of the Utah
code. (Ord. 08-10, 6-5-2008, eff. 9-30-2008)
3.09.070: INCORPORATION OF STATE STATUTE:
   A.   1. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of title 10, chapter 1, part 3, municipal
energy sales and use tax act, as well as this chapter, all of the provisions of
part 1, chapter 12, title 59 of the Utah code, and in force and effect on the
effective date of this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes,
excepting section 59-12-101 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales
and use taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein.
      2.   Whenever, and to the extent that in part 1, chapter 12, title 59 of
the Utah code, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the "taxing
agency", the name of the city shall be substituted, insofar as is necessary for
the purposes of that part, as well as part 3, chapter 1, title 10 of the Utah
code. Nothing in this subsection A2 shall be deemed to require substitution of
the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the
title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall
the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when
the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or
against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax
commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter.
      3.   Any amendments made to part 1, chapter 12, title 59 of the Utah
code, which would be applicable to the city for the purposes of carrying out
this chapter are hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective
upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 08-10, 6-5-2008,
eff. 9-30-2008)
3.09.080: NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under section 59-12-106 of the Utah code. (Ord.
08-10, 6-5-2008, eff. 9-30-2008)
CHAPTER 3.09A
ENERGY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
SECTION:
3.09A.010: Purpose
3.09A.020: Eligibility
3.09A.030: Appropriation Of Funds
3.09A.010:   PURPOSE:
The purpose of the energy assistance program is to provide funds from the
general fund for the rebate or refund of the amount of the municipal energy and
use tax ("MEUT") paid by the eligible residents during a calendar year. (Ord.
08-22, 9-18-2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
3.09A.020:   ELIGIBILITY:
To be eligible for the rebate or refund contemplated herein, the following
requirements must be satisfied:
   A.   The individual or household at the time of application has been a
resident of the city for at least one hundred eighty (180) days and eligible
under the state of Utah energy assistance program (HEAT) with a combined
household income no greater than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
federal poverty level in effect as of January 1 of each calendar year.
   B.   The individual or household presents to the city written proof of
eligibility under HEAT to the satisfaction of the city.
   C.   The resident or household has actually paid the MEUT for natural gas
and/or electrical service while a resident of the city during the period for
which the refund is sought. This shall be shown by actual bills, receipts or
other similar proof of payment of the MEUT.
   D.   An individual or household may apply for the rebate or refund of the
MEUT no more than twice a year during periods as indicated:
 
Consumption Period   Application Period    Payment Date Anticipated
January 1 - June 30  July 1 - September 30 October 15
July 1 - December 31 January 1 - March 31  April 15
 
   E.   Applicants shall not receive a rebate or refunds of MEUT paid by HEAT
or any other similar program. (Ord. 08-22, 9-18-2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
3.09A.030:   APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS:
The funds for this program shall be disbursed from the city's general fund. The
availability of funds for the program shall be subject to an annual
appropriation by the municipal council. (Ord. 08-22, 9-18-2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
CHAPTER 3.10
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3.10.010: Title
3.10.020: Purpose
3.10.030: Effective Date
3.10.040: Definitions
3.10.050: Transient Room Tax
3.10.060: Revenue Use
3.10.070: Severability
3.10.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known at THE TRANSIENT ROOM TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
HOLLADAY. (1999 Code)
3.10.020: PURPOSE:
The Utah legislature has authorized municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
imposes a one percent (1%) transient room tax. It is the purpose of this
chapter to conform the transient room tax ordinance of the city to the
requirements of the transient room tax act, as amended. (1999 Code)
3.10.030: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective at one second after twelve o'clock (12:00:
01) A.M. on January 1, 2000. (1999 Code)
3.10.040: DEFINITIONS:
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to
the public and includes a motel; hotel; motor court; inn; bed and breakfast
establishment; condominium; and resort home.
RENTS: Includes rents; and timeshare fees or dues.
TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30)
consecutive days or less. (1999 Code)
3.10.050: TRANSIENT ROOM TAX:
   A.   Imposed: From and after the effective date hereof, there is levied and
imposed, and there shall be collected and paid, a transient room tax on the
rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations within the city's
corporate limits in an amount that is equal to one percent (1%) of the rents
charged.
   B.   State Provisions Adopted: The provisions of Utah Code Annotated title
59, chapter 12, as amended, are hereby adopted as follows:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the transient room tax act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, and in
force and affect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales
and use taxes, excepting Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119
thereof, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set
forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of the city, or other name pursuant to a name change, shall be
substituted therefor. Nothing in subsection B of this section shall be deemed
to require substitution of the name of the city be substituted for that of the
state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action
to be taken by or against the city rather than by or against the state tax
commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter.
      3.   If a license has been issued to a person or entity (a "transient
facility") offering public accommodations for rent to transients under Utah
Code Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required
by reason of this chapter.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the rents charged (by which the
transient room tax is measured) the amount of any sales or similar transient
room tax imposed by the state or Salt Lake County upon the transient facility
or the transient in connection with such rental transaction.
   C.   Collection: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-354, the city
is empowered to either directly collect the tax imposed hereunder or to
contract with the state tax commission to collect such tax. Notwithstanding
subsection B of this section, or any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary, however, the city reserves the right, exercisable at its option, to
itself collect the tax imposed hereunder if at any time (including, without
limitation, during or for the time period of January 1, 2000 through March 31,
2000) the state tax commission fails or refuses to collect any such tax arising
at any time from or after one second after twelve o'clock (12:00:01) A.M. on
January 1, 2000. In availing itself of such right to directly collect such tax,
the city shall comply with Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-354, and any and
all other applicable legal requirements. To the extent, if any, that the city
elects to directly collect such tax, the city shall be entitled to impose
penalties and interest for nonpayment or underpayment of such tax in amounts
equal to the penalties and interest rates authorized for the state tax
commission under Utah Code Annotated sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402. (1999
Code)
3.10.060: REVENUE USE:
All revenues generated by the transient room tax and penalties, if any,
hereunder may be used by the city for general fund purposes. (1999 Code)
3.10.070: SEVERABILITY:
It is the intention of the city council that each separate provision of this
chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein.
Accordingly, if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, any exemption, is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 3.12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3.12.010: Definitions
3.12.020: Levy Of Tax
3.12.030: Rate
3.12.040: Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
3.12.050: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3.12.060: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
3.12.070: Procedure For Erroneous Collections
3.12.080: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter;
COMMISSION: Means the State Tax Commission.
CUSTOMER:
   A.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection A1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   B.   "Customer" does not include a reseller;
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications services, of a serving carrier under
an agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER:
   A.   Means the person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Means those gross receipts from
a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
Municipality for the purposes of Sales and Use Taxes under Utah Code title 59,
chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act and determined in accordance with Utah Code
section 59-12-215.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:
   A.   Means the revenue that a telecommunications provider receives for
telecommunications service rendered except for amounts collected or paid as:
      1.   A tax, fee or charge;
         a.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
         b.   Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
         c.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
      2.   Sales and Use Taxes collected by the telecommunications provider
from a customer under title 59, chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act; or
      3.   Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is as defined in the Mobile
Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 USC section 124.
MUNICIPALITY: Means City of Holladay.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE:
   A.   For telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications
service, means the street address representative of where the customer's use of
the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
      3.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the Mobile
Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS:
   A.   Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service address"
means:
      1.   If the location described in this subsection is known, the location
of the telecommunications equipment;
         a.   To which a call is charged; and
         b.   From which the call originates or terminates;
      2.   If the location described in subsection A1 of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection A2 is known, the location
of the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
         a.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider;
or
         b.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
      3.   If the locations described in subsection A1 or A2 of this definition
are not known, the locations of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
   A.   Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "telecommunications
provider" means a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service;
or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A1 of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the Public Service Commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunication service that the person owns, controls,
operates, or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah Code section 54-8b-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Means:
   A.   Telephone services, as defined in Utah Code section 59-12-102, other
than mobile telecommunications services, that originates and terminates within
the boundaries of this State; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code section 59-
12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.020: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a Municipal Telecommunications License Tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this Municipality. (Ord.
2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.030: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be 3.5 percent of the telecommunication
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed
to the Municipality pursuant to the provisions of section 10-1-407 Utah Code
Annotated. (Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.040: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION THEREFROM:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed 7.5 percent of the telecommunication
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to the
Municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters
in this Municipality that vote in:
   A.   A Municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.050: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax is currently being levied pursuant to the authority of ordinance 04-12
of the City of Holladay at the statutorily authorized rate of 3.5 percent, and
shall continue to be levied at that rate, or the rate set forth in the
Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act of Utah. (Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.060: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date of this chapter, the Municipality shall enter
into the uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah
Code section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of
this Municipality Telecommunications License Tax. (Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.070: PROCEDURE FOR ERRONEOUS COLLECTIONS:
   A.   A customer may not bring a cause of action against a telecommunications
provider on the basis that the telecommunications provider erroneously
recovered from the customer Municipal Telecommunications License Taxes
authorized by this part:
      1.   Unless the customer provides the telecommunications provider written
notice that:
         a.   The customer requests a refund of the amounts paid by the
customer pursuant to Utah Code sections 10-1-408 and 59-12-110.1; and
         b.   Contains the information necessary to determine the validity of
the request described in subsection A1a of this section; and
      2.   Before sixty (60) days from the day on which the telecommunications
provider receives the written notice required by subsection A1 of this section.
(Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
3.12.080: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this Municipality under authority of Utah
Code 10-1-203 or Utah Code title 11, chapter 26, Local Taxation of Utilities
Limitation is hereby repealed. (Ord. 2018-03, 2-22-2018)
CHAPTER 3.16
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FEES
SECTION:
3.16.010: Appeals To The Administrative Appeals Officer (AAO)
3.16.020: Subdivision Application Fees
3.16.030: Land Use Amendment Fees
3.16.040: Conditional Use Permit Application Fees
3.16.050: General Plan Application Fees
3.16.060: Roadway Matters Fees
3.16.070: Other Land Use Application Fees
3.16.080: Waiver, Modification And Refund Of Fees
3.16.010: APPEALS TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS OFFICER (AAO):
The fees for application to the administrative appeals officer shall be as
required by
chapter 3.35 of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
3.16.020: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION FEES:
The fees for subdivision review shall be as required by
chapter 3.35 of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
3.16.030: LAND USE AMENDMENT FEES:
The fees for amendments shall be as required by
chapter 3.35 of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
3.16.040: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION FEES:
The fees for conditional use permit applications shall be as required by
chapter 3.35 of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
3.16.050: GENERAL PLAN APPLICATION FEES:
The fee for an application to amend the city general plan shall be as required
by
chapter 3.35 of this title. The fee shall be paid by the applicant within ten
(10) days after a decision has been made to consider such amendment. Whenever
the planning commission or city council require that a general plan amendment
hearing be advertised to a greater extent than required by law because the
amendment would likely generate broad public interest or concern, the applicant
shall pay the additional advertising costs. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
3.16.060: ROADWAY MATTERS FEES:
The fees for roadway matters shall be as required by
chapter 3.35 of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
3.16.070: OTHER LAND USE APPLICATION FEES:
Fees for other applications, review processes, appeals to the city manager
permitted under any provision of this code, and impact fees shall be as
required by
chapter 3.35 of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
3.16.080: WAIVER, MODIFICATION AND REFUND OF FEES:
   A.   Waiver, Modification Or Refund: The city council may, on its own motion
or otherwise, waive, modify or refund any fee imposed by this chapter as
provided herein. Otherwise, all requests for waiver, modification or refund of
any fee imposed by this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the city
manager, who shall then forward the request to the mayor for his determination
as provided below.
   B.   Standard For Waiver, Modification Or Refund Of Fees Imposed By This
Chapter: The city manager may waive, modify or refund any fee imposed by this
chapter upon a determination, in his sole and absolute discretion, that:
      1.   The applicant is engaged in business for solely religious,
charitable or other types of strictly nonprofit purposes which are tax exempt
in such activities under the laws of the United States or the state;
      2.   The applicant is engaged in the business specifically exempted from
municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the United States or the state; or
      3.   There is a prevailing public interest in waiving, modifying or
refunding the fees. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
CHAPTER 3.24
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND
SECTION:
3.24.010: Purpose; General Provisions
3.24.020: Expenditure Of Funds
3.24.030: Application And Approval Process
3.24.040: Budget Requirements
3.24.010: PURPOSE; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Specified: An economic development fund is created for the following
purposes: improvement of the infrastructure in the city, financial contribution
towards capital projects which serve and benefit neighborhoods, business and
commercial areas of the city; and do studies to assist the city council and the
planning and zoning commission in reviewing and updating the city general land
use plan prepared pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 9, and
similar purposes. (Ord. 03-12, 5-1-2003)
   B.   Infrastructure, Capital Projects Defined: For the purposes of this
chapter, the word "infrastructure" means the relocation, installation, repair
or improvement of traffic control devices and related devices, such as traffic
islands, water, sewer, storm drains, power facilities, communication
facilities, curb, gutter and sidewalk, and other similar utility improvements;
the words "capital projects" mean buildings and related improvements which are
owned and operated by a 501(c)(3) organization, as defined in the United States
internal revenue code and regulation, or by an agency sponsored by the state, a
county, municipality or other governmental agency, provided all other
requirements are satisfied and includes projects to improve the building fronts
and facades in the area known as Holladay village. (Ord. 03-12, 5-1-2003; amd.
Ord. 06-21, 9-21-2006)
   C.   Maximum Funding: Funding towards a capital project under this section
may not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) in any fiscal year.
Funding of studies to update the general land use plan shall be determined by
the city council.
   D.   Exceptions: Funding of capital projects and relocation benefits
provided for in this section and funds appropriated to review and update the
city general land use plan are not subject to sections
3.24.020 and
3.24.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-12, 5-1-2003)
3.24.020: EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS:
The expenditure of any funds pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
chapter are subject to the following guidelines and/or procedures:
   A.   Public Benefit: Contemplated improvements must be expended on
improvements which will demonstrate a general public benefit beyond the
individual project;
   B.   Completion Of Improvements: No economic development funds shall be
expended for improvements until said improvements have been completed by the
developer. Funds shall be paid directly to any owner or developer only after
there is adequate assurance that the owner or developer has fully paid for the
improvements;
   C.   Approvals Required: No application for economic development funds may
be submitted until all applicable planning and zoning approvals have been
received. (Ord. 03-12, 5-1-2003)
3.24.030: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
The application and approval process shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
   A.   Approval Process Complete: Applicant will complete the necessary
approval process for development in the city prior to submitting an application
for economic development funds.
   B.   Submission Of Application; Information: Applications must be submitted
to the mayor, together with the following information:
      1.   Approved, detailed site plan;
      2.   Pro forma income and expense schedule;
      3.   Financing commitment/statement;
      4.   Statement of impacts/benefits to the city to include, but not be
limited to:
         a.   Net tax contribution (property, sales, other);
         b.   Net revenues (fees, payments, other);
         c.   Jobs created;
         d.   Use of utilities and other infrastructure;
         e.   Increases in public service levels and costs;
      5.   Detailed request for assistance.
   C.   Review; Analysis And Recommendation: The mayor may submit the
applications to the city finance, public services and contract providers for
review. The city finance, public services and contract providers shall submit
an analysis and recommendation to the economic development advisory board.
   D.   Economic And Development Advisory Board Analysis And Recommendation:
The economic development advisory board shall conduct analysis and evaluation
to include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Analysis of project's financial feasibility:
         a.   Net operating income;
         b.   Cash flow;
         c.   Equity requirements;
         d.   Return on investment.
      2.   Costs/benefit analysis:
         a.   Costs of participation based on applicant's request;
         b.   Costs deferred or not incurred because of project;
         c.   Payback based on revenues and taxes and time of recovery.
   E.   Recommendations To Mayor: The economic development advisory board shall
submit its recommendations to the mayor.
   F.   City Council Decision: The mayor shall submit a completed application,
with recommendations from the economic development advisory board, to the city
council. The city council shall make the decision to approve and disapprove the
application which shall be final and not subject to further review.
   G.   Time Limit For Use Of Funds: Funds approved by the city council must be
used within two (2) years of approval. (Ord. 03-12, 5-1-2003)
3.24.040: BUDGET REQUIREMENTS:
No funds may be expended under the terms and conditions of this chapter except
funds identified in the annual budget specifically for economic development.
(Ord. 03-12, 5-1-2003)
CHAPTER 3.30
MUNICIPAL GRANTS
SECTION:
3.30.010: Budgeting
3.30.020: Submission Of Proposals For Use
3.30.030: Proposal Review
3.30.040: Hearing On Proposals
3.30.050: Decision On Projected Use
3.30.060: Compliance With Criteria Required
3.30.070: Funding Restricted
3.30.010: BUDGETING:
The city council shall each fiscal year designate and set aside funds in the
general fund budget for grants in an amount as follows:
   A.   The funds for the total number of grants each fiscal year shall not
exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the projected general funds
revenue for that year; and
   B.   The amount of this grant shall appear as a line item in the
nondepartmental budget.
   C.   Allocation of community development block grant (CDBG) federal monies
shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 03-08, 4-3-2003)
3.30.020: SUBMISSION OF PROPOSALS FOR USE:
The city, in adopting the general budget, shall fix the amount to be set aside
for grants for the fiscal year beginning July 1. (Ord. 03-08, 4-3-2003)
3.30.030: PROPOSAL REVIEW:
   A.   After the proposals have been submitted to the city, the office of
planning and community development shall then review the proposals and rank
them in order of priority, according to the following criteria:
      1.   Demonstrated financial need of the civic group requesting the funds;
      2.   Benefit provided to city residents;
      3.   Commitment to raise matching funds from other sources.
   B.   The planning and development services office shall then submit the
ranked proposals, together with recommended funding levels, to the mayor and
city council. (Ord. 03-08, 4-3-2003)
3.30.040: HEARING ON PROPOSALS:
The city council shall set a public hearing date and have a notice of public
hearing on these proposals published as per public noticing provisions provided
in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13 for two (2) weeks prior to
the public hearing. The notice shall make clear that the order of the proposals
is tentative and subject to final approval following the public hearing. (Ord.
03-08, 4-3-2003; amd. Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
3.30.050: DECISION ON PROJECTED USE:
After the public hearing, the city council may confirm or amend the order of
the projects or add or delete projects. The city council may fund any or none
of the proposals within the fiscal guidelines set forth in section
3.30.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-08, 4-3-2003)
3.30.060: COMPLIANCE WITH CRITERIA REQUIRED:
The office of planning and community development shall monitor compliance with
the criteria of subsection
3.30.030A3 of this chapter by requiring proof of matching funds before
disbursing the grant. (Ord. 03-08, 4-3-2003)
3.30.070: FUNDING RESTRICTED:
No other grants may be made from any other fund of the city. (Ord. 03-08, 4-3-
2003)
CHAPTER 3.35
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
Section:
3.35.010: Adoption By Reference
3.35.010: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The City Council of the City of Holladay hereby approves and adopts the
Consolidated Fee Schedule as a rule of the City of Holladay, which Fee Schedule
is attached to the resolution codified herein as Exhibit A and incorporated
herein by reference, the same as if set forth in full. (Res. 2021-22, 8-5-2022)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5.02
LICENSE OFFICE AND LICENSE OFFICIAL
SECTION:
5.02.010: Definitions
5.02.020: Office Created; Personnel
5.02.030: License Official; Powers And Duties
5.02.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this title or elsewhere within any city ordinance:
LICENSE DEPARTMENT: The license office of the city.
LICENSE OFFICIAL: The city community development director or other designee
appointed by the city. (1999 Code)
5.02.020: OFFICE CREATED; PERSONNEL:
There is hereby created a license office within the city. The city license
official shall have charge of the license office and shall direct the same
subject to and in accordance with such terms and conditions as the mayor may
prescribe. (1999 Code)
5.02.030: LICENSE OFFICIAL; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The license official shall assess each licensee in accordance with the
provisions of this title and the applicable statutes of the state, and shall
receive all license fees required herein to be paid. The assessment shall be
based upon the rates herein established. The license official shall also keep
and maintain a suitable index, properly alphabetized, containing the names of
all licensees of each and every class to be assessed and of all miscellaneous
licensees. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.04
LICENSE CERTIFICATES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5.04.010: Business Rules And Regulations
5.04.020: Posting License On Premises Required
5.04.030: License Certificate To Be Shown To Officials
5.04.040: Unlawful Uses Of Certificates
5.04.010: BUSINESS RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Rules and regulations covering the health, safety, morals, peace, good order,
comfort and convenience of the general public with respect to any business
covered under this title shall be adopted by the city council, and copies of
such rules and regulations shall be made available to and displayed by the
licensee affected thereby in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises.
(1999 Code)
5.04.020: POSTING LICENSE ON PREMISES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (1999 Code)
5.04.030: LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE SHOWN TO OFFICIALS:
It shall be the duty of each and every person to whom a certificate of license
has been issued to show the same at any proper time when requested to do so by
the license official, sheriff, or other enforcement officer. (1999 Code)
5.04.040: UNLAWFUL USES OF CERTIFICATES:
It is unlawful to counterfeit a license certificate, or to deface or mutilate
the same while it is required to be posted, or to remove it or attempt to
remove it therefrom without destroying it, or to use, or permit the same to be
used at any place other than that designated therein, or for any licensee to
place or permit it to be placed or be in any place of business or upon one
amusement device, contrivance, game, machine or vehicle after it has been
placed in or upon any place of business, amusement device, game, machine or
vehicle prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this title or any other
ordinance or law. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.06
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
5.06.010: Definitions
5.06.020: License Required
5.06.030: Exemptions
5.06.040: License Fee
5.06.050: General Business License Fee Schedule
5.06.060: Branch Establishments
5.06.070: Title Provisions Not Exclusive
5.06.080: Fees And Interstate Commerce Activities
5.06.090: Business Record Keeping Requirements
5.06.100: Fee Payments; Delinquency Penalties
5.06.110: Term
5.06.120: Civil Actions To Recover Fees
5.06.130: License Application; Public Records, Exceptions
5.06.140: Filing False Return Prohibited
5.06.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein prescribed:
BUSINESS: Means and includes all activities engaged in within the incorporated
limits of the city, carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, and
for the purposes of these provisions shall include nonprofit corporations,
except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be
included in the term "business" unless otherwise specifically prescribed.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed by such person in the operation of that place of business, in any
capacity, and also any salesman, agent, leased employee or independent
contractor engaged in the operation of that place of business, in any capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Means and includes, but is not limited to, the sale of
tangible personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods
or property, and the rendering of personal services for others for a
consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business,
occupation, or other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an
employee to his employer under any contract of personal employment.
FEE SCHEDULE: The business license ordinance fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this chapter, as the same may be amended from time to time.
GROSS SALES: Means and includes the amount of any manufacturer's or importer's
excise tax included in the price of the property sold, even though the
manufacturer or importer is also the wholesaler or retailer thereof, and
whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge. "Gross
sales" shall not include: a) the amount of any federal tax, except excise taxes
imposed upon or with respect to retail or wholesale sales, whether imposed upon
the retailer, wholesaler, jobber or the consumer, and regardless of whether the
amount of federal tax is stated to customers as a separate charge; or b) the
amount of net state sales tax.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES: The average number of employees engaged at the place of
business each regular working day during the preceding calendar year. In
computing such number, each regular full time employee shall be counted as one
employee, and each part time employee shall be counted as one employee.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assigner, trustee in bankruptcy, trust,
estate, firm, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, club,
company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, society
or other group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative,
fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any location maintained or operated by a licensee within the
city, from which business activity is conducted or transacted. (1999 Code)
5.06.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business within the city without
first procuring the license required by this title. (1999 Code)
5.06.030: EXEMPTIONS:
No license fee shall be imposed under this title upon businesses which are
exempt from both property taxes and privileges taxes, or upon any person
engaged in business that is specifically exempt from licensing by political
subdivisions under the laws of the United States or the state; nor shall any
such fee be imposed upon any person doing business within the city who has paid
a like or similar license tax or fee to some other governmental unit within the
state, which governmental unit exempts from its license tax or fee, by written
interlocal cooperation agreement, businesses domiciled in the city and doing
business in such unit. (1999 Code)
5.06.040: LICENSE FEE:
There is hereby levied upon the business of every person engaged in business in
the city at a place of business within the city, not otherwise in this title
specifically provided, an annual license fee for "general or temporary business
license", plus an additional special fee as provided in section
5.06.050 of this chapter; provided, however, that any such person may receive
an annual exemption, as provided in the fee schedule, upon submitting a signed
statement that gross sales of goods and/or services for the business for the
preceding calendar year were less than the amount stipulated in the fee
schedule or for a new business that projected gross sales of goods and/or
services for the business for the coming year will be less than the amount
stipulated in the fee schedule. The license official may, in addition to the
signed statement, require an applicant or licensee claiming such an exemption
to produce for inspection federal income tax returns and/or state sales tax
returns for those years that are relevant to the exemption request. (1999 Code)
5.06.050: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
The business license fees shall be as required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.06.060: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location
of business engaged in business within the city as if such branch establishment
or location were a separate business, and each license shall authorize the
licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in
the manner designated in such license; provided, however, that warehouses and
distributing places used in connection with or incident to a business licensed
under this title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or
branch establishments. (1999 Code)
5.06.070: TITLE PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The general business license required under this title is in addition to all
other licenses and permits required by other ordinance provisions. No person
shall engage in business without first procuring the necessary licenses and
permits that are required by other provisions of the city ordinances, in
addition to the license required by this title. (1999 Code)
5.06.080: FEES AND INTERSTATE COMMERCE ACTIVITIES:
None of the license fees provided for by this title shall be applied to cause
an undue burden on interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is
believed by a licensee or applicant to place an undue burden on interstate
commerce, he may apply to the license official for an adjustment of that fee.
Such application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment
of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting
testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross
volume of business, and such other information as the license official may deem
necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on
commerce. The license official shall then conduct an investigation, comparing
applicant's business with other businesses of like nature, and shall make
findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed by this
chapter is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such applicant's
business, and shall recommend to the mayor a license fee for the applicant in
an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair. If the mayor is
satisfied that such license fee is the amount that the applicant should pay, it
shall fix the license fee in such amount. If the regular license fee has
already been paid, the mayor shall order a refund of the amount over and above
the fee fixed by the license official. In fixing the fee to be charged, the
license official shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of
gross sales, or employees, or may use any other method that will assure that
the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like
nature; provided, however, that the amount assessed shall not exceed the fee
prescribed in the "general business license" section of the fee schedule. (1999
Code)
5.06.090: BUSINESS RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the payment of any license fee
imposed by this title to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years such
books and records which accurately reflect the amount of his gross annual sale
of goods and services for any year for which an exemption is claimed, and the
number of employees, from which can be determined the amount of any license fee
for which he may be liable under this title. (1999 Code)
5.06.100: FEE PAYMENTS; DELINQUENCY PENALTIES:
   A.   New Businesses: Business license fees for new businesses shall be due
and payable upon making application to the license department. The application
shall not be processed until the fee is paid.
   B.   Renewal Businesses: Business license fees for renewal businesses shall
be due and payable each year on or before the first day of the month in which
the license was originally issued. If the license is not paid within one month
after the due date, a twenty five percent (25%) penalty of the amount of the
fee shall be added to the original amount due. If the fee is still not paid
within two (2) months after the due date, a one hundred percent (100%) penalty
of the amount of the fee shall be added to the original amount due. If the fee
plus penalty is still not paid within three (3) months, the business shall be
considered to be operating without a business license in violation of this
title, subject to criminal prosecution for every day of operation after three
(3) months from the due date and the license fee, if a license is granted
thereafter, shall be doubled.
   C.   Appeal: Penalty fees may be appealed to the license official who may,
for good cause shown, refund all or part of the applicable penalty fee that has
been paid. The decision of the license official may be appealed to the board of
license equalization as set forth in
chapter 5.16 of this title. The board of license equalization may, upon good
cause, recommend that all or part of the penalty fee be refunded. (1999 Code)
5.06.110: TERM:
All business licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire each year at the
first day of the month in which the license was originally issued. (1999 Code)
5.06.120: CIVIL ACTIONS TO RECOVER FEES:
   A.   Authority: Where this title requires a license to be obtained from the
city and the applicable fee is not paid at the time or in the manner provided
in this title, a civil action may be brought in the name of the city against
the person failing to pay such license fee, in any court of this state having
jurisdiction of such action, to recover the same, any penalties that may
attach, the city's reasonable attorney fees incurred in such action, and/or to
enjoin further operation by the licensee. Where several amounts for licenses as
fixed by any city ordinance remain due and unpaid by any person, the amounts
may be joined as separate causes of action in the same complaint in a civil
action.
   B.   City Attorney Prosecute: The city attorney shall prepare, bring and
prosecute the civil actions contemplated by this title upon the request of the
mayor. (1999 Code)
5.06.130: LICENSE APPLICATION; PUBLIC RECORDS, EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Application Public Record: License applications shall be public records
and information contained therein shall be public except for specific items of
data that the license official designates or classifies as private, controlled
or protected data consistent with the provisions of the government records
access and management act 1 .
   B.   Exception: Income tax returns and sales tax returns filed with a
license application made to the license official that are or may be required by
this title shall not be made public, nor shall they be subject to the
inspection of any person except the license official or his authorized agent,
or to those persons authorized to do so by order of the mayor.
   C.   Prohibited Disclosure: It is unlawful for any person to make public or
to inform any other person of the contents of any information contained
therein, or permit the inspection of any income tax return or state sales tax
return, except as authorized in this section. (1999 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 63-2-101 et seq.
5.06.140: FILING FALSE RETURN PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly file a license application, or an
accompanying tax return, or any other information required to be submitted to
the city in conjunction with a license application, that is false. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.08
LICENSE; PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING
SECTION:
5.08.010: License Required To Carry On Business
5.08.020: Persons Subject To Licensing
5.08.030: Application; Contents
5.08.040: Fees And Waiver
5.08.050: Fees Not Refunded When
5.08.060: Application Fee Refunds
5.08.070: Investigation Of Applicant
5.08.080: License Application Referred To Mayor
5.08.090: Additional Investigations
5.08.100: Report Of Investigations
5.08.110: Action By Mayor
5.08.120: Compliance With Building And Land Use Requirements
5.08.130: Approval Of License Application
5.08.140: Denial Conditions
5.08.150: Appeal Hearing On Denial Of License; Effect
5.08.010: LICENSE REQUIRED TO CARRY ON BUSINESS:
Unless exempted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for any person to
engage in or carry on or operate any business in the city, or to use any
property for such business, without first making application for and obtaining
the required license from the city. (1999 Code)
5.08.020: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSING:
Whenever a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any
business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or
occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirements if, by himself or
through an agent, employee or other related party, he holds himself forth as
being engaged in the business or occupation, or solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business or occupation in the city. (1999 Code)
5.08.030: APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
   A.   Required Information: Applications for licenses and permits required by
ordinance shall be made in writing to the license official at the department
unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Each application shall state the name
of the business; the name of the applicant; the permit or license desired; the
location to be used, if any; the time covered and the fee to be paid; the name
and address of the business agent within the city who is authorized to receive
service of process and any communication regarding the applicant's license via
certified mail, return receipt requested; and such additional information as
may be requested by the license official for the purpose of guidance of the
city in issuing the permit or license. Any change in the above information
furnished by the license applicant shall be forwarded to the license official
in writing, within ten (10) days after the change.
   B.   Forms; Filing: Forms for all license and permits, and the application
therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the license official. (1999
Code)
5.08.040: FEES AND WAIVER:
   A.   Payment Of Fee Required; Penalty Fee: Each application for a license
under this title shall be accompanied by the license fee required to be paid
for the issuance of the license desired. In addition to the license fee
regularly assessed, any applicant that commences doing business prior to
obtaining a valid license shall be assessed a penalty fee. The penalty fee
shall be equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the regular license fee if the
applicant has operated without a license for less than thirty (30) days, and
shall be equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the regular license fee if the
applicant has operated without a license for more than thirty (30) days during
the fiscal year in question. The fee may be paid by cash or check made payable
to the city or by a bond in favor of the city requiring payment of the license
fee to the city in the event of the issuance of the license. Any license which
has been issued pursuant to payment by means of a check or bond shall be void
and of no force or effect if such check or bond is not honored. Applications
received by the license official shall be numbered in the order of their
receipt.
   B.   Waiver For Certain Businesses: Notwithstanding the provisions of
subsection A of this section, the license official may waive the imposition of
license penalty fees for:
      1.   New businesses which have located within the city and have not
obtained a city business license; and
      2.   Existing businesses which have been licensed by the city and have
been purchased, but the new owner has not reapplied for a city business
license.
   C.   Conditions For Waiver: The license official may waive such penalty fees
as provided in section
5.06.100 of this title only upon the following conditions:
      1.   The business makes application for a city business license within
five (5) working days after being notified by the city that such a license is
required; or the business voluntarily makes application for a business license
prior to notification by the city; and
      2.   The business has either been located in the city for less than two
(2) years or the purchase of the business occurred less than two (2) years
prior to the business application.
   D.   When Waiver Prohibited: The license official may not, under any
circumstances, waive the business license fees due the city for the current
year or for prior years in which the business operated. (1999 Code)
5.08.050: FEES NOT REFUNDED WHEN:
No license fee, or any part thereof, shall be refunded for any reason
whatsoever once the license has been granted or issued by the city. (1999 Code)
5.08.060: APPLICATION FEE REFUNDS:
If a license is denied for any reason, the applicant shall be entitled to a
refund as per title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. However, the city manager may, in his sole
discretion, refund the entire application fee if deemed appropriate under the
circumstances. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.08.070: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where ordinances of the
city require an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit
or license, the license official or his authorized representative or such other
agency, including the sheriff's office and the planning and zoning division, as
these ordinances specifically empower, shall make such investigation within
five (5) business days after the time the application was received by the
agency or department. However, when adequate investigation requires
correspondence with agencies or other sources of information outside the city,
or the license applicant is not ready to be inspected, such investigation shall
be completed within fifteen (15) days, or as soon thereafter as possible. The
officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall
make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within five (5) business days
after making the investigation or inspection. The city or its designee shall,
for the protection of health, make or cause to be made an inspection in
connection with all licenses involving the care and handling of food, the
prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease. The fire department shall
make or cause to be made inspections relating to the safety of buildings or
other structures licensed hereunder. (1999 Code)
5.08.080: LICENSE APPLICATION REFERRED TO MAYOR:
After receipt of an application for a license, such application shall be
submitted to the mayor at the next regular meeting, unless, in the opinion of
the license official, or where city ordinances necessitate, the application is
or should be referred to the sheriff, fire department or other appropriate
official or body for investigation. (1999 Code)
5.08.090: ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS:
As soon as practical, the license official, in his discretion, may refer the
application for additional investigation to the fire department, sheriff, or
other official or body for the purpose of investigation and inspection
concerning the general reputation of the licensee, whether such place is or has
been conducted in a lawful, quiet, orderly and helpful manner, and the
conditions of health and safety of such premises, together with any other fact
or facts that the mayor should know in acting upon the application. (1999 Code)
5.08.100: REPORT OF INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon being requested to do so by the mayor or the license official, the
sheriff, fire department, or any other official or department so requested,
shall conduct the investigation and inspection provided for in this chapter and
submit to the mayor or license official a report on such investigation and
inspection, together with recommendations as to whether the license should be
granted or denied. (1999 Code)
5.08.110: ACTION BY MAYOR:
After receipt of the referenced reports and recommendations of the license
official, sheriff, fire department or other official or body, the mayor shall
act upon the application as he shall deem just and proper in regard to granting
or denying the same, and may order further information or investigation if such
appears necessary. (1999 Code)
5.08.120: COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING AND LAND USE REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or the performance of any act, if the premises and
building to be used for the purposes do not fully comply with the city building
and land use ordinances. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.08.130: APPROVAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION:
In the event the mayor approves any application for a license, such approval
shall be endorsed on the application, signed by the mayor or impressed by his
facsimile, and forwarded to the license official, who shall forthwith issue a
license certificate therefor. (1999 Code)
5.08.140: DENIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Conditions For Denial: The mayor, upon recommendation of the license
official, may deny the issuance of a license if the applicant:
      1.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude; or
      2.   Has obtained, or has aided another to obtain, a license by fraud,
deceit, material misrepresentation or material omission; or
      3.   Has failed to pay any applicable taxes or fees; or
      4.   Has violated the laws of the state, the laws of the United States,
the ordinances of the city, or the rules and regulations of any state or city
agency governing operation of the business holding the license or permit.
   B.   Reason Endorsed On Application; Notice To Applicant; Appeal: The reason
for denial shall be endorsed on the application by the license official, and
the city recorder shall return to the applicant, via certified mail, return
receipt requested, the application, notice of the applicant's rights to an
appeal, if any, and any fees that are refundable. (1999 Code)
5.08.150: APPEAL HEARING ON DENIAL OF LICENSE; EFFECT:
If the applicant files a written notice of appeal within twenty (20) days after
the notice of denial, a hearing to consider the denial of a license shall be
held as provided in
chapter 5.11 of this title. Unless the mayor or hearing examiner orders
otherwise, it shall be unlawful for an applicant who has been denied a license
to commence or conduct the business or occupation contemplated in the
application. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.10
SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL TO RENEW LICENSE
SECTION:
5.10.010: Enforcement Powers
5.10.020: Grounds For License Suspension, Revocation Or Denial To Renew License
5.10.030: Notice Of Violation And Hearing
5.10.040: Waiting Period For New License
5.10.010: ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
The license official shall be responsible for the enforcement of this title.
The license official may, on his own initiative or in response to complaints
referred from the general public or otherwise, investigate and gather evidence
of violations of the licensing provisions of this title. (1999 Code)
5.10.020: GROUNDS FOR LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL TO RENEW
LICENSE:
In addition to any fine imposed, every license or permit issued by the city may
be revoked, suspended or renewal denied as prescribed herein. Upon
recommendation of the license official or sheriff and upon a hearing held
pursuant to
chapter 5.11 of this title, the mayor or hearings examiner may revoke, suspend
or deny renewal of licenses or permits, if the licensee or permittee:
   A.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude;
   B.   Has obtained, or aided another to obtain, a license by fraud or deceit;
   C.   Has failed to pay any applicable taxes or fees;
   D.   Has violated the laws of the state, the laws of the United States, the
ordinances of the city, or the rules and regulations of any agency of the city
or the state governing the operation of the business holding a license or
permit; or
   E.   Has refused to permit authorized officers or employees to make an
inspection or to take a sample of a commodity, or has interfered with such
officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such
inspection. (1999 Code)
5.10.030: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND HEARING:
The license official shall send the licensee written notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, in care of the license or process agent specified in
the license application, of the alleged violation and notice of hearing and the
licensee's right to appear at the hearing, the consequences of the failure to
appear and answer, and of the date, time and place set for the hearing. (1999
Code)
5.10.040: WAITING PERIOD FOR NEW LICENSE:
No person whose license has been revoked under this chapter, or any person
associated or connected with such person in conduct of such business, shall be
granted a license for the same purpose for a period of six (6) months after the
revocation has occurred. However, the mayor may, in his discretion, waive such
prohibition against persons formerly associated or connected with an individual
whose license was revoked. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.11
HEARINGS; DECISION; ENFORCEMENT; APPEAL
SECTION:
5.11.010: Hearing Procedure
5.11.020: Hearing Examiner; Appointment And Powers
5.11.030: Chief Executive's Action
5.11.040: Unlawful To Operate Without A License
5.11.050: Appeal Of Hearing Decision
5.11.010: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Hearing Required: A suspension, revocation or denial to renew a license
issued pursuant to the ordinances of the city shall not be imposed until a
hearing is first held pursuant to this chapter before the chief executive or a
hearing examiner.
   B.   Notice To Licensee: At least ten (10) days prior to a hearing
hereunder, the city shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to
be served upon the licensee by mailing a copy to the licensee via certified
mail, return receipt requested, in care of the licensee or the process agent
specified in the license application.
   C.   Failure To Appear: Failure to appear at such hearing or otherwise
defend against suspension, revocation, or denial to renew a license shall
constitute grounds for immediate suspension, revocation or denial to renew a
license.
   D.   Sworn Witnesses; Record Of Proceedings: All witnesses called at a
hearing shall be sworn by a person authorized to administer oaths, and a record
of such hearing shall be made by a recording or a court reporter. The licensee
shall have the right to appear at the hearing in person or by counsel, or both,
present evidence, present argument on the applicant's behalf, cross examine
witnesses, and in all proper ways defend the licensee's position.
   E.   Findings Of Fact And Conclusions Of Law By Hearing Examiner; Time
Limit: If the hearing is before a hearing examiner, the hearing examiner shall,
within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, submit to the chief
executive proposed written findings of fact, and conclusions of law and order
based upon and supported by the evidence presented at such hearing. (Ord. 2011-
18, 10-7-2011)
5.11.020: HEARING EXAMINER; APPOINTMENT AND POWERS:
The chief executive may appoint one or more hearing examiners upon the advice
and consent of the city council, and the chief executive or any hearing
examiner shall have power and authority to call, preside at and conduct
hearings to consider the suspension, revocation or denial of license renewal,
including the power to examine witnesses and receive evidence, compel the
attendance of witnesses, and compel the production of documents. (Ord. 04-20,
10-21-2004)
5.11.030: CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S ACTION:
   A.   Upon receiving the hearing examiner's proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law and order, the chief executive may adopt and enter the
proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law and order, or may enter his own
findings of fact, conclusions of law and order, provided such order is based
upon and supported by the record. Immediately after entry, the order shall be
filed with the office of the city recorder and a copy served upon the licensee
personally or by mailing a copy to the licensee via certified mail, return
receipt requested.
   B.   In the event the chief executive's order institutes a denial or a
sanction of suspension, probation, denial to renew or revocation of a license,
such action shall apply immediately after entry and shall apply to the
licensee, the licenses issued by the city, and to the premises in question for
the full term of the imposed sanction. (Ord. 04-20, 10-21-2004)
5.11.040: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A LICENSE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct any
business, trade or occupation within the city without first procuring all
applicable city business licenses.
   B.   If at any time a license issued under the provisions of this title is
denied, suspended or revoked, it shall thereafter be unlawful for the holder of
such license to conduct business on the premises described in such application
or license until the old license is reinstated or a new license is issued.
(1999 Code)
5.11.050: APPEAL OF HEARING DECISION:
Any licensee aggrieved by an order entered by the chief executive may maintain
a plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction;
provided the action for such relief is filed with the court within thirty (30)
days after such decision is deposited in the office of the city recorder. (Ord.
04-20, 10-21-2004)
CHAPTER 5.12
LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY
SECTION:
5.12.010: License Transfer Limitations
5.12.020: Transfer Fee Or Fee For Changes In Partnerships And Associations
5.12.010: LICENSE TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Limitations: No license granted or issued under the city ordinances
shall be deemed to be assignable or transferable, or to authorize any person
other than the person therein mentioned or named to do business, or to
authorize any other business than is therein mentioned or named to be done or
transacted. (1999 Code)
   B.   Application For Transfer: Persons to whom one or more licenses have
been issued to transact or carry on some business at a definite location in the
city may, except as hereinafter provided, make application for the transfer of
said licenses for the sole purposes of transacting or carrying on the same
business as is therein mentioned at some other definite location in the city.
Applications therefor shall be filed with the license official ten (10) days in
advance of the proposed change. The mayor, after receiving reports furnished by
the license official or his authorized agent may, in his discretion, deny or
grant the transfer of licenses according to the above limitations. No change
shall be permitted without full compliance with the building and land use
requirements of this code. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.12.020: TRANSFER FEE OR FEE FOR CHANGES IN PARTNERSHIPS AND ASSOCIATIONS:
In the event of a transfer of location as described in section
5.12.010 of this chapter, or in the event a partnership or association applies
to delete the name or names of an individual or group of individuals from its
license, upon application a new license may be reissued for transfer of
location or in the name of the new partnership or association provided the
appropriate fee is paid as specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.14
TEMPORARY LICENSES
SECTION:
5.14.010: Definitions
5.14.020: License Required
5.14.025: Display Of License
5.14.030: License Fee
5.14.035: License Application
5.14.037: Expedited License Charge
5.14.040: Period Of Validity; Number Issued Per Year
5.14.045: Exemptions
5.14.050: Inspection Of Merchandise
5.14.060: Compliance With Laws
5.14.070: Zone Permitted
5.14.080: Code Exception
5.14.090: Removal
5.14.100: Fireworks Sales
5.14.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
definitions:
INDOOR SALES: Sales conducted inside permanent structures.
PERMANENT STRUCTURE: A nonmovable building, securely attached to a foundation,
housing a business licensed to sell merchandise generally, in addition to the
sale of fireworks.
PERSON: An individual, company, partnership, corporation or other business
entity.
SEASONAL SALES: A portable structure, including a vehicle, without a permanent
foundation, for use on a temporary or seasonal basis, from which goods or
merchandise are sold or where a service is provided which is utilized on the
premises.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: For the purposes of this chapter a temporary business shall
include "seasonal sales" and "temporary sales" as defined in this section.
TEMPORARY SALES: A use established for three (3) days or less with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. (Ord. 2011-12,
6-16-2011)
5.14.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall offer for sale or sell at
retail any food or merchandise from a seasonal sales or temporary sales
location or structure without first having applied for and received a temporary
business license from the city to do so. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.025: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A temporary business license granted pursuant to this chapter must be
conspicuously displayed in or at the site or premises in which the temporary
business is conducted and must be available for inspection. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-
16-2011)
5.14.030: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for engaging in, carrying on, or conducting a temporary business shall
be as specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.035: LICENSE APPLICATION:
An application for a temporary business license must be submitted ten (10) days
prior to the commencement of the temporary business and must include the
following:
   A.   Site Plan: Site plan delineating where the temporary business will be
located and the parking area available for patrons.
   B.   Permission From Property Owner: Written permission from the property
owner where the temporary business will be located in a form acceptable to the
city.
   C.   State Permit Or License: Acceptable evidence of a current sales tax
permit, license or special event sales tax number issued by the state. (Ord.
2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.037: EXPEDITED LICENSE CHARGE:
The license official may (in his discretion) waive the ten (10) day requirement
of section
5.14.035 of this chapter upon payment of an expedited license charge in the
amount specified by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.040: PERIOD OF VALIDITY; NUMBER ISSUED PER YEAR:
The temporary license shall specify the location at which the temporary
business may be conducted, and no temporary business may be conducted
simultaneously by that applicant (or members of his immediate family residing
in a common household) at any other location within the city without a separate
temporary license for that location. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.045: EXEMPTIONS:
A temporary business license is not required by the following:
   A.   A vegetable and fruit stand that sells produce grown solely on property
owned or leased by the operator of the vegetable and fruit stand and such
property is located in the city.
   B.   Isolated or occasional sales from a private home by a person not
regularly engaged in business.
   C.   Fundraising endeavors conducted by organizations exempt from federal
income tax pursuant to 26 United States Code section 501(c)(3) or other bona
fide charitable, religious, educational or scientific organizations or
endeavors as determined by the mayor. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.050: INSPECTION OF MERCHANDISE:
The sheriff or city official may inspect all goods and merchandise to be sold
pursuant to a temporary business license. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.060: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
Temporary license holders shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances
of the city, and the state governing the operation of its business. In
addition, all temporary business licenses shall require prior approval from all
appropriate city and/or county departments, including, but not limited to, the
fire and health departments, sheriff's office and community development
department. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.070: ZONE PERMITTED:
All seasonal sales stands, including fireworks stands shall be located only in
those zones allowed by title 13,
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A", of this code. All fireworks stands shall be
located no closer than twenty five feet (25') from any other fireworks stand or
any unit used for the storage or dispensing of any flammable substance. (Ord.
2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.14.080: CODE EXCEPTION:
Seasonal and temporary sales stands need not comply with the provisions of the
international building code, but all such stands shall be erected in a manner
that will reasonably assure the safety of occupants and patrons. (Ord. 2011-12,
6-16-2011)
5.14.090: REMOVAL:
Seasonal and temporary sales stands shall be removed within seven (7) days
after retail sales cease and the licensee shall clean the sale location or the
site upon which the seasonal or temporary stand was located. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-
16-2011)
5.14.100: FIREWORKS SALES:
Temporary sales stands offering fireworks for sale at retail shall comply with
the provisions of
chapter 5.50 of this title. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
CHAPTER 5.16
BOARD OF LICENSE EQUALIZATION
SECTION:
5.16.010: City Council; Powers And Duties
5.16.020: Council Meetings
5.16.030: Complaints On Assessments; Deadline For Presentation
5.16.010: CITY COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Authority Of City Council: The city council hereby constitutes the
board of license equalization for the equalization of license rates. The board
shall have authority to examine the assessments made by the license official,
hear complaints of aggrieved parties, and make changes in any assessments the
city council concludes to be illegal, unequal or unjust.
   B.   Corrections Documented: Corrections made by the city council shall be
entered in detail in the record of license assessment kept by the license
official, and the city council shall approve in writing such entries before the
license official shall adjust the accounts. (1999 Code)
5.16.020: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The city council shall meet as often as shall be necessary to complete the
business of equalization. The date, time and place of each meeting shall be set
by the majority vote of the city council during a regular session of the city
council. (1999 Code)
5.16.030: COMPLAINTS ON ASSESSMENTS; DEADLINE FOR PRESENTATION:
All complaints relative to an assessment made by the license official must be
presented to the city council within six (6) months after such assessment, or
be forever barred. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.18
SHERIFF'S REGISTRATION CARDS
SECTION:
5.18.010: Definitions
5.18.020: Persons And Establishments Which Require Registration Cards
5.18.030: Out Of State Entertainers; Group Work Card
5.18.040: Procedure For Obtaining Card
5.18.050: Fees
5.18.060: Card Numbers To Be Registered By Employer
5.18.070: Examination Of Employees' Cards
5.18.080: Period Of Validity
5.18.090: Possession Of Card Required; Cards Not Transferable
5.18.100: Denial Conditions; Appeals
5.18.110: Revocation Conditions; Appeals
5.18.120: Violation; Penalty
5.18.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
EMPLOYED: Performing any type of work or assistance for or on behalf of any
establishment covered by this chapter, at any establishment covered by this
chapter, during hours such establishment is open to its members or to the
public, whether or not pecuniary compensation is provided or offered therefor.
EMPLOYEE: Any person, female or male, who is "employed", as defined in this
section, by any establishment covered by this chapter, whether the person is
employed on a contract basis, by fixed salary, or by any other means.
EMPLOYER: Any establishment, or the principals thereof, covered by this
chapter. (1999 Code)
5.18.020: PERSONS AND ESTABLISHMENTS WHICH REQUIRE REGISTRATION CARDS:
The persons and establishments covered by this chapter are all employees of
class C and E beer establishments, class B establishments which provide live
entertainment on the premises, and class A and B private clubs which sell,
serve and dispense alcoholic beverages, including bartenders, waiters,
waitresses, managers; those engaged in the security or the checking of
identification; and those providing entertainment in such establishments. All
of such persons and establishments are required to obtain a registration card
under this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.18.030: OUT OF STATE ENTERTAINERS; GROUP WORK CARD:
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee of an establishment listed in
section
5.18.020 of this chapter desiring an out of state entertainer or entertainment
group to perform on the licensee's premises to ensure that the entertainer or
each member of the entertainment group has either obtained a work card or a
group work card for the entertainer or entertainment group, as appropriate. The
licensee shall submit the name, date of birth and address of each entertainer
or member of the entertainment group and shall verify that each entertainer or
each member of the entertainment group is over the age of twenty one (21). The
application for a group work card shall contain all information required by the
sheriff and shall be submitted to the sheriff by the licensee twenty four (24)
hours prior to the performance of the entertainer or the entertainment group.
The group work card shall be valid for only the performance of the entertainer
or entertainment group while at the licensee's premises, but in no event shall
it be valid for longer than ten (10) days. (1999 Code)
5.18.040: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING CARD:
   A.   Application; Photograph: Prior to commencing employment, the employee
must obtain a signed registration application from the employer, and then
submit himself to the sheriff's department to be photographed, or provide the
sheriff's department with two (2) one and one-half inch by one and one-half
inch (11/2" x 11/2") photographs.
   B.   Proof Of Age: Any male or female applicant between eighteen (18) and
twenty one (21) years of age who, by reason of his or her appearance, causes
the sheriff's examiner to doubt the truth of his or her stated age, may be
required to furnish satisfactory documented proof of his or her age. (1999
Code)
5.18.050: FEES:
The fee for work cards shall be as specified in the fee schedule adopted
pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.18.060: CARD NUMBERS TO BE REGISTERED BY EMPLOYER:
All sheriff's card numbers obtained under the provisions of this chapter are to
be registered by the employer personnel or payroll section and kept as a part
of the record of the employee. (1999 Code)
5.18.070: EXAMINATION OF EMPLOYEES' CARDS:
The person or persons designated by each establishment as the agent responsible
for hiring and/or checking employees under the provisions of this chapter shall
examine each employee's or prospective employee's sheriff's card for the
purpose of determining the validity of the card for use in the particular
establishment concerned. Such verification of validity shall be evidenced by
the name of the concerned establishment being stamped on the back side of the
sheriff's card in red ink. If the prospective employee's card is found to be
invalid as described above, he will be issued a new signed application form
which must be completed and presented along with his sheriff's card to the
sheriff's department for validation, prior to commencing employment. (1999
Code)
5.18.080: PERIOD OF VALIDITY:
Unless revoked or suspended, each sheriff's registration card issued pursuant
to this chapter shall remain valid for a period of one year from date of
original issuance. (1999 Code)
5.18.090: POSSESSION OF CARD REQUIRED; CARDS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
All persons employed by an establishment governed by this chapter must have in
their possession a valid sheriff's registration card. Sheriff's registration
cards are not transferable. (1999 Code)
5.18.100: DENIAL CONDITIONS; APPEALS:
   A.   Conditions: The sheriff may deny a registration card if the applicant:
      1.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude;
      2.   Has obtained a registration card by fraud or deceit;
      3.   Has failed to pay required fees; or
      4.   Has violated the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city
regulating the work of the applicant.
   B.   Appeal: Any person who is denied a sheriff's registration card may
appeal in writing within fifteen (15) days from the date of denial to the mayor
for a hearing regarding issuance of the registration card. The mayor shall then
schedule a hearing in conformance with section
5.08.150 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.18.110: REVOCATION CONDITIONS; APPEALS:
   A.   Conditions: The sheriff may revoke or suspend registration cards if the
holder:
      1.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude;
      2.   Has obtained a registration card by fraud or deceit;
      3.   Has failed to pay required fees;
      4.   Has violated the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city
regulating the work of the permit holder;
      5.   Has procured, attempted to procure, or agreed to procure, for any
person:
         a.   Another person for the purpose of sexual intercourse or any
immoral act; or
         b.   A controlled substance, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section
58-37-1 et seq.;
      6.   Has utilized his registration card for the purpose of obtaining
credit, or as identification for cashing checks.
   B.   Appeal: Any person whose sheriff's registration card has been revoked
or suspended by the sheriff may appeal within fifteen (15) days from the date
of the suspension or revocation to the mayor for a hearing regarding
reinstatement of the registration card. The mayor shall then schedule a hearing
in conformance with
chapter 5.11 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.18.120: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person in violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall be punished
by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for
not more than three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 5.20
INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
5.20.010: Officers Authorized To Examine And Inspect Businesses; Powers And
Duties
5.20.020: Inspections; Right Of Entry; Sampling Of Materials
5.20.030: Complaints And Citations For Violations
5.20.010: OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO EXAMINE AND INSPECT BUSINESSES; POWERS AND
DUTIES:
The sheriff and all deputy sheriffs, the license official and his designated
representatives, and the fire chief and his designated representatives, are
hereby appointed ex officio license deputies who, in addition to the several
duties of their respective offices or positions, are hereby authorized and
empowered to examine and inspect all places of business subject to paying a
license fee under this title as their duty shall bring them into contact with
same, inspect and verify all information listed on the license application and
to see that businesses covered and authorized by the license issued are carried
on or transacted in accordance with this title and other applicable law, and to
report to the license official the names of all persons doing business without
a license, and instances of the conduct by any party or business other than
that covered by the license issued. (1999 Code)
5.20.020: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY; SAMPLING OF MATERIALS:
   A.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer, employee or
agent of the license official who is authorized and directed to make such
inspections at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
   B.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure conformance with ordinance provisions, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is
governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee
requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity as are
necessary for analysis. (1999 Code)
5.20.030: COMPLAINTS AND CITATIONS FOR VIOLATIONS:
The sheriff, the license official and their authorized representatives shall,
in the discharge and performance of their official duties, have and exercise
the power to issue citations for the violation of any of the provisions of this
title. Such persons shall cooperate with the city attorney to cause complaints
to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this title.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.22
ALARM SYSTEMS; INTRUSION AND PHYSICAL DURESS
SECTION:
5.22.010: Purpose And Scope
5.22.020: Definitions
5.22.030: Registration Required To Operate Intrusion And Physical Duress Alarm
System Business; Fee
5.22.040: Individual Employee's Registration
5.22.050: Registration Procedure
5.22.060: Alarm User Permits Required
5.22.070: Alarm Information
5.22.080: User Instructions
5.22.090: False Alarms; Permit Revocation
5.22.100: Inter-Agency Communications
5.22.110: Deliberate False Alarms
5.22.120: Penalties
5.22.130: Policies
5.22.010: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the emergency services of the
city from misuse.
   B.   This chapter governs intrusion and physical duress alarm systems,
requires permits and registration, establishes fees, provides for the
allocation of revenues and deficits, provides for revocation of the permit,
provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of
administration. (1999 Code)
5.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM BUSINESS: The business by any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, removing, moving, installing, planning the installation or assisting
in the installation of any alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to
signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent
attention and to which peace officers are expected to respond.
ALARM USER: The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization thereof of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone line
and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by
voice message or code signal any emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
COORDINATOR: The individual designated by the sheriff to issue permits and
enforce the provisions of this section.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting a response by peace officers when a
situation requiring a response by them or other emergency response unit in fact
does not exist. It includes an alarm signal caused by conditions of nature
which are normal for that area and subject to control by the alarm business
operator or alarm user. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused
by extraordinarily violent conditions of nature not reasonably subject to
control.
INTERCONNECT: To connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing
device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device
that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry
into the area protected by the system.
LOCAL ALARM: Any noise making alarm device.
PHYSICAL DURESS SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a robbery or other physical
endangerment.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line serving the Valley 911 system or sheriff
dispatch that is designated to receive emergency calls.
SHERIFF: The Salt Lake County sheriff, or the city's other designated law
enforcement services provider.
VALLEY 911 AND SHERIFF DISPATCH: The governmental facilities used to receive
emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the
sheriff's office. (1999 Code)
5.22.030: REGISTRATION REQUIRED TO OPERATE INTRUSION AND PHYSICAL DURESS ALARM
SYSTEM BUSINESS; FEE:
   A.   License And Registration Required: It shall be unlawful for any person
to own, manage, conduct or carry on the business of selling, leasing,
installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or removing,
or causing to be sold, leased, installed, serviced, maintained, repaired,
replaced, moved or removed in or on any building, residence or other property
within the city any device known as an intrusion or physical duress alarm
system, or automatic dialing device connected to an answering service, unless
such person is licensed therefor in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section
58-55-101 et seq., and any other applicable laws or ordinances, and the name,
address and certificate number or ID card number of such person is registered
with the sheriff as provided herein.
   B.   Fee: The fee for an intrusion or physical duress alarm system business
license shall be as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.22.040: INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE'S REGISTRATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person employed by a person having a valid license
as an alarm business or company under Utah Code Annotated section 58-55-101 et
seq., to engage directly in the selling, leasing, installing, servicing,
maintaining, repairing, moving or removing in or on any building or other
property within the city any intrusion or physical duress alarm system unless
such person shall first be licensed therefor in accordance with all applicable
laws and shall register his name, address and ID card number with the sheriff.
There shall be no fee for registration under this section. (1999 Code)
5.22.050: REGISTRATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Registration Required: Every alarm business and its employees shall
register their name, address and license number or ID card number with the
sheriff.
   B.   Fingerprint And Photograph: Along with the registration information,
the registrant shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the sheriff. (1999
Code)
5.22.060: ALARM USER PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Every alarm user shall have on his premises or in his possession an
alarm user permit issued by the sheriff at no charge.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any alarm business to report to the sheriff or
other emergency service agency, any alarm system on any premises for which the
alarm user has not obtained an alarm user permit. (1999 Code)
5.22.070: ALARM INFORMATION:
   A.   Submission Of Information Card: An alarm information card will be
completed and submitted to the sheriff's alarm coordinator by the user of any
alarm system prior to the operation of the system.
   B.   Content Of Card: This card shall set forth the full name, address and
telephone number of both the owner or lessee on whose premises the system will
be installed, operated, connected or maintained, and the name of the person or
licensed alarm system business installing, maintaining, or servicing the
system, as well as the type of system to be installed, operated or maintained.
The card shall further contain the names, addresses and telephone numbers of
three (3) individuals who may be contacted by peace officers responding to an
alarm. The persons listed shall have authority to act for the alarm user in
granting peace officers access to any portion of the premises concerned and be
knowledgeable in the basic operation of the alarm system. The alarm information
card shall contain such additional information as the sheriff shall reasonably
deem necessary to properly identify and locate the user, the alarm business
installing, servicing or maintaining the alarm system, and the persons to be
contacted in the event of the filing of an alarm report.
   C.   Code Number: In addition to submitting the alarm information card,
users of audible outside local alarm systems shall post near the alarm and at a
position readable from ground level, a code number furnished by the alarm
coordinator to allow reference to the alarm information card required by this
section. (1999 Code)
5.22.080: USER INSTRUCTIONS:
Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system
which is installed on premises located in the city shall furnish the user with
written instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the
alarm system properly. (1999 Code)
5.22.090: FALSE ALARMS; PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   Revocation Of Permit: Any alarm user which has seven or more false
alarms within a twelve (12) month period shall be subject to revocation,
assessments, and/or misdemeanor violation. Revocation of a user permit shall be
in accordance with the license revocation provisions specified in this title.
   B.   Service Fee: A service fee is hereby imposed as provided in section
5.06.050 of this title for all false alarms on a physical duress or intrusion
alarm system to which peace officers respond. (1999 Code)
5.22.100: INTER-AGENCY COMMUNICATIONS:
A central station or other alarm dispatch center must provide the sheriff's
dispatch a toll free telephone number for the conducting of business and
contacting the central station dispatchers at the time of filing the alarm
report. (1999 Code)
5.22.110: DELIBERATE FALSE ALARMS:
No person shall cause to be transmitted any intrusion or physical duress alarm
knowing the same to be false or without basis in fact. Central stations shall
not request law enforcement officers to respond to alarm scenes when monitoring
equipment indicates an alarm system malfunction signal. (1999 Code)
5.22.120: PENALTIES:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in
an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   B.   Failure To Pay Service Fees: All service fees assessed under this
chapter are due and payable within thirty (30) days after written notice of any
fee due is issued by the city. A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the fee due
shall be assessed upon any person who fails to pay the fee within thirty (30)
days. The penalty shall be assessed for each thirty (30) day period, or
fraction thereof, that the fee remains unpaid beyond the original payment
period.
   C.   Revocation: Failure to timely pay any service fees imposed by this
chapter may result in an action to revoke the business license of the alarm
business. (1999 Code)
5.22.130: POLICIES:
The city council may from time to time adopt or modify by ordinance written
policies governing the allocation of the city's law enforcement resources and
other emergency services to alarm systems. Such policies may, without
limitation, prohibit response by the city's law enforcement personnel to alarms
of specific types, specify the conditions under which the city's law
enforcement personnel will respond to alarms of specific types, or in any other
manner control and protect from misuse the city's emergency services. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 5.24
ALCOHOL AND BEER
SECTION:
5.24.010: Adoption Of Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
5.24.020: Definitions
5.24.030: Sales
5.24.040: Retail License Classifications
5.24.050: Brewery
5.24.060: Bar Establishment
5.24.070: Off Premises Beer Retailer
5.24.080: On Premises Beer Retailer
5.24.090: On Premises Banquet
5.24.100: Reception Center
5.24.110: Restaurant; Beer Only
5.24.120: Restaurant; Full Service
5.24.130: Restaurant; Limited Service
5.24.140: Single Event Permit
5.24.150: Tavern
5.24.160: Prohibition On Issuance Of New Or Additional Tavern Licenses
5.24.170: Alcohol Registration Cards
5.24.180: Premises; Light And Open Space Requirements
5.24.190: Application For License
5.24.200: Referral Of Application To Health Department
5.24.210: Referral Of Application To Public Safety
5.24.220: Issuance Of License
5.24.230: Suspension And Revocation
5.24.240: Expiration Date
5.24.250: City License Requires State License
5.24.260: Qualification Of Licensee
5.24.270: Fees And Late Fees For Alcoholic Beverage Retail Licenses
5.24.280: Renewal Of Existing Licenses
5.24.290: Establishment Name Change; Fee And Notice To City
5.24.300: Transfer To New Location; Fee
5.24.310: Sublease, Transfer Or Assignment Prohibited
5.24.320: Forfeiture Conditions
5.24.330: Conformance With City Law Required
5.24.340: Local Consent
5.24.350: Liquor License Fee And Late Fees
5.24.360: Minors In Club Liquor Establishment Restriction
5.24.370: Criminal Offense
5.24.380: Civil Fine
5.24.010: ADOPTION OF UTAH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT:
The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time (the "Act"), is hereby adopted by this
reference in its entirety as if set forth in full herein. The Act as adopted
herein shall be construed to apply only to the incorporated areas of the City
and shall be interpreted and constructed where necessary to carry out the
intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to
them in the Act. In addition, the following words and phrases shall have the
following additional meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: "Beer" and "liquor" as those terms are defined herein.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES: A license issued pursuant to this chapter,
including:
Bar Establishment License: A license issued in accordance with chapter 5,
Retail Income Act, and chapter 6, part 4, Bar Establishment License of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated section 32B-1-101, et seq.
Bar establishment includes:
   A.   An equity license (such as a country club),
   B.   A fraternal license, or
   C.   A bar license.
Off Premises Beer Retailer: A place of business wherein beer is sold in
original containers for consumption off the premises in accordance with the
State's Liquor Control Act and the licensing ordinance of the City.
On Premises Banquet: A business licensed by the UDABC to sell liquor, wine,
heavy beer and beer to public patrons for consumption on the premises for
contracted banquet activities in conjunction with a hotel, resort, sports
facility or convention center.
On Premises Beer Retailer: A business licensed by the UDABC for the sale of
beer (not liquor) to public patrons for consumption on the premises, including
restaurants, sports facilities and other food/beverage facilities.
Package Agency: A business owned and operated by an individual and/or company,
typically located in a hotel or resort, licensed by the UDABC on a contract
basis which sells a limited selection of alcoholic beverage products for
consumption off the agency's premises.
Restaurant; Beer Only: A business license issued by the UDABC for the sale of
beer and for consumption on the premises of a restaurant that is engaged
primarily in serving food to the general public and maintains at least seventy
percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale of food.
Restaurant; Full Service: A business licensed by the UDABC for the sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a restaurant that is
engaged primarily in serving food to the general public, and maintains at least
seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale of food.
Restaurant; Limited Service: A business licensed by the UDABC for the sale of
wine, beer and heavy beer for consumption on the premises of a restaurant that
is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public, and maintains at
least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale of
food.
Single Event Permit: A permit issued by the City for a specific event for a
specific period of time and location and only available to groups,
partnerships, limited liability corporations, churches, lodges or chapters of
fraternal and social organizations or other bona fide organization and licensed
by the UDABC for the sale of a specific range of alcoholic beverages to the
general public or to the organization's invited guests for the duration of the
event.
State Store: A facility for the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages located on
premises owned or leased by the State and operated by State employees.
APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of a permit or license.
BEER: A product that contains at least 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume, but
not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent by weight;
and is obtained by fermentation, infusion or decoction of malted grain. Beer
includes products referred to as beer, ale, porter, stout, lager, or a malt or
malted beverage. "Beer" does not include a flavored malt beverage.
COMMISSION: The Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
FEE SCHEDULE: The City fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title.
FLAVORED MALT BEVERAGE: A beverage that contains at least 0.5 percent alcohol
by volume and is treated by processing, filtration, or another method of
manufacture that is not generally recognized as a traditional process in the
production of a beer.
LICENSED PREMISES: Any room, house, building, structure or place occupied by
any person licensed to sell beer or licensed to allow the consumption of liquor
on such premises under this title. Multiple beer or liquor dispensing
facilities located in one building and owned or leased by one licensed
applicant shall be deemed to be only one licensed premises; provided, that each
dispensing point must be designated and the appropriate fee paid and the
license prominently displayed at each dispensing point.
LICENSEE: Any person issued a license by the commission and the City to sell,
manufacture, store, or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises
owned or controlled by the person.
LIQUOR: A. Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or
other liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous
or fermented, and all other drinks, or drinkable liquids that contain more than
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for
beverage purposes, including a flavored malt beverage.
   B.   Liquor does not include any beverage defined as beer, malt liquor, or
malted beverage that has an alcohol content of less than four percent (4%)
alcohol by volume.
LOCAL AUTHORITY: The Governing Body of the City of Holladay.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
NUISANCE: Any room, house, building, structure, place or licensed premises,
where:
   A.   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored,
given away or used contrary to the laws of the State of Utah or this title, or
where persons resort to drinking alcoholic beverages contrary to the laws of
the State of Utah or this title; or
   B.   Any persons are allowed to perform or simulate sexual intercourse,
masturbation, oral copulation, anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or any
sexual acts prohibited by law; or
   C.   Any persons are allowed to simulate or actually touch, caress or fondle
female breasts, or the buttocks, anus or genitalia of either sex; or
   D.   Any persons are allowed to actually display or simulate the display of
pubic hair, buttocks, vulva, anus, genitalia or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or
   E.   Minors are permitted to purchase or drink alcoholic beverages; or
   F.   Laws or ordinances are violated by licensee or his agents or patrons
upon such premises or upon leaving such premises which tend to affect the
public health, peace, morals, welfare, comfort or safety.
OPEN BOTTLE, CAN OR OTHER RECEPTACLE: As used in this chapter, means a
container having within it an alcoholic beverage, which container has been
opened, its seal broken or the contents of which have been partially consumed.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, business
trust, limited liability company, or other form of business enterprise,
including a receiver or trustee, and the plural as well as the singular number,
unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Shall include cafes, restaurants, public dining rooms,
cafeterias, taverns, cabarets, and any other place where the general public is
invited or admitted for business purposes, and shall be deemed to include
private clubs, corporations and associations operating under charter or
otherwise wherein only the members, visitors and their guests are invited.
Occupied hotels and motels that are not open to the public shall not be deemed
to be "places of business" as herein defined.
PUBLIC PLACE: Means and refers to any of the following which are open to and
generally used by the public: streets, roads and alleys of incorporated cities
and towns; state or county highways or roads; buildings and grounds used for
school purposes, and public dance halls and adjacent grounds; any place of
public resort or amusement; lobbies, halls and dining rooms of hotels,
restaurants, theaters, stores, garages, and service stations; any public
conveyance and its depots and waiting rooms which are open to unrestricted use
and access by the public; publicly owned bathing beaches, parks or playground;
and all other places which under this title have been declared to be a public
place.
RESIDENCE: Means and includes any building or part of a building where a person
resides, but shall not include any part of a building which is not actually and
exclusively used as a private residence, nor any part of a hotel other than a
private guestroom, nor a club or any part thereof, nor any place from which
there is access to a club or hotel through a street or lane or other open and
unobstructed means of access, nor any portion of a building used in part for
business purposes unless such portion is separated from the part used for
business purposes by a wall or walls having no doors or other means of access
opening into such part used for business purposes.
RESTAURANT: A place of business where food is prepared and served to the public
for consumption on or off the premises.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
to the consumer.
SELL, SALE AND TO SELL: Any transaction, exchange or barter whereby, for any
consideration, an alcoholic beverage is either directly or indirectly
transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by any means or under
any pretext is promised or obtained, whether done by a person as a principal,
proprietor, or as an agent, servant, or employee, unless otherwise defined in
this title or the rules adopted by the City or the commission.
STATE STORE: A facility for the sale of packaged liquor located on premises
owned or leased by the State of Utah and operated by State employees. This term
does not apply to restaurants, private clubs or package agencies.
UNPERMITTED PUBLIC PLACE: A. As used in this chapter, means:
      1.   Any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, publicly owned property
or City, State or County road located within the City limits and which abuts
upon: a) any County or City owned real property; or b) any business required to
have a City business license pursuant to this title;
      2.   Boarded or abandoned commercial buildings;
      3.   Vacant lots in areas zoned for commercial or manufacturing uses; or
      4.   Any publicly owned building or publicly owned real property.
   B.   "Unpermitted public place" shall not mean or include a premises or area
identified in a license or permit issued by the City as authorizing the
possession or consumption of alcohol, when there is conformance with the
applicable license or permit restrictions; businesses specifically permitted
under this title; businesses licensed as "home occupations", as defined in this
title; or "apartments", as defined in accordance with title 13 of this Code.
Any term used herein but not specifically defined shall have the meaning set
forth within the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or, if not defined therein,
shall have the meaning commonly applied to the term within the context of this
chapter and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.030: SALES:
   A.   Licenses Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of selling alcoholic beverages within the City without first obtaining
a general business license pursuant to this title and a retail alcoholic
beverages license from the City. Unless provided otherwise in the retail
alcoholic beverages license, a separate retail alcoholic beverages license
shall be required for each individual location or place of business where beer
is sold.
   B.   Possession And Consumption: Except as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 32A-12-213(1), it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any place
of business, association, establishment, restaurant, club or similar business
which allows customers, members, guests, visitors or other persons to possess
or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises without first procuring a retail
alcoholic beverage license therefor as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06,
5-17-2018)
5.24.040: RETAIL LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
Retail licenses for alcoholic beverages licenses issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall be classified into the following types and shall be defined
as set forth in the Act. Each respective license shall carry the privileges and
responsibilities hereinafter set forth in this chapter.
   A.   Bar establishment license which may include:
      1.   Equity license;
      2.   Fraternal license;
      3.   Bar license;
   B.   Off premises beer retailer;
   C.   On premises beer retailer;
   D.   On premises banquet;
   E.   Full service restaurant;
   F.   Limited service restaurant;
   G.   Beer-only restaurant;
   H.   Reception center;
   I.   Hotel;
   J.   Resort;
   K.   Single event permit. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.050: BREWERY:
   A.   Sales: A brewery license may be issued to a business for the
manufacture, brewing, storage, transportation or export of beer and heavy beer
as allowed by the title R81 of the Utah State Administrative Code - Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administration. For the purposes of this title, a brewery
license shall only be issued in conjunction with a bona fide on premises beer
retail license.
   B.   Applicability Of Limited Service Restaurant Requirements: A brewery
shall abide by all requirements imposed on limited service restaurant licenses.
(Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.060: BAR ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Sales: A bar establishment license shall entitle the licensee, such as
an equity club, fraternal club, or a bar, to sell alcohol, wine, heavy beer and
beer for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food as
allowed by the title R81 of the Utah State Administrative Code - Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administration.
   B.   Presence Of Minors Prohibited: It is unlawful and shall constitute an
offense of strict liability for minors to be admitted to an equity, fraternal,
or social club under any circumstances except that:
      1.   A minor may be permitted on the premises of an equity or fraternal
club as allowed by the bylaws of that club but cannot be in a bar area, or
serve, purchase or consume alcohol.
   C.   Proximity Requirements: No bar establishment license shall be issued
unless it satisfies the proximity requirements of Utah Code Annotated section
32B-1-202, as amended. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.070: OFF PREMISES BEER RETAILER:
An off premises beer retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer in
original containers, for consumption off the premises. An off premises beer
retailer licensee shall comply with all operational restrictions of the State
of Utah. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.080: ON PREMISES BEER RETAILER:
   A.   An on premises beer retailer license shall entitle the licensee to sell
and serve beer for consumption on the premises. An on premises beer retailer
licensee shall comply with all the operation restriction of the State of Utah.
   B.   No on premises beer retailer license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the proximity requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 32B-1-202,
as amended. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.090: ON PREMISES BANQUET:
An on premises banquet license allows the sale of liquor, wine, heavy beer and
beer for contracted banquet activities in conjunction with a hotel, resort,
sports facility, or convention center. An on premises banquet licensee shall
comply with all the operational restrictions of the State of Utah. (Ord. 2018-
06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.100: RECEPTION CENTER:
   A.   A reception center license shall entitle the licensee to sell an
alcoholic product on the premises of a reception center of an event for
consumption on the premises.
   B.   No reception center license shall be issued unless it satisfies the
proximity restrictions of Utah Code Annotated section 32B-1-202, as amended.
(Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.110: RESTAURANT; BEER ONLY:
   A.   A beer only restaurant license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer
for consumption only on the premises of a restaurant that is engaged primarily
in serving food to the general public. A bar only restaurant shall comply with
all operational restrictions of the Act which are applicable to the license.
   B.   No limited service restaurant license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the proximity restrictions of Utah Code Annotated section 32B-1-202,
as amended. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.120: RESTAURANT; FULL SERVICE:
   A.   Sales: A full service restaurant alcohol sales license shall entitle
the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a
restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public. A
full service restaurant licensee shall comply with all operational restrictions
of the Act which are applicable to the licensee.
   B.   Proximity Requirements: No full service restaurant license shall be
issued unless it satisfies the proximity restrictions of Utah Code Annotated
section 32B-1-202, as amended. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.130: RESTAURANT; LIMITED SERVICE:
   A.   Sales: A limited service restaurant shall entitle the licensee to sell
wine, heavy beer and beer for consumption only on the premises of a restaurant
that is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public. A limited
service restaurant licensee shall comply with all operational restrictions of
the Act which are applicable to the license.
   B.   Proximity Requirements: No limited service restaurant license shall be
issued unless it satisfies the proximity restrictions of Utah Code Annotated
section 32B-1-202, as amended. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.140: SINGLE EVENT PERMIT:
A single event permit shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic beverage in
conjunction with a single event in temporary nonglass containers not exceeding
one liter (1 L) in size for consumption on the premises as set forth below. A
single event permittee shall comply with all operational restrictions of the
Act which are applicable to the permit.
   A.   Time Limit: A single event permit shall be issued for a specific period
of time but in no event shall it be valid for more than fifteen (15)
consecutive days.
   B.   Barrier Required: Alcoholic beverage shall be sold in an area separated
from the event by a barrier, approved by the City or its designated agent. It
is unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict liability for a Class E
licensee, operator, agent or employee to permit or to allow any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years to be in the separated area.
   C.   Estimate Of Participants; Security: All holders of a single event
permit must provide an estimate of the number of participants attending such
single event, must provide an adequate number of licensed security personnel
for the facility or location and provide the names of such personnel or
security agency to the City or its designated agent at the time of application.
   D.   Removal Of Materials And Refuse; Bond Required: All materials and
refuse accompanying the facility or location must be removed within seven (7)
days after the expiration of the license. Each person seeking a single event
permit shall submit to the City a cash deposit, certificate of deposit or
surety bond acceptable to the City Attorney in the amount specified by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this Code to assure compliance with the provisions of this
subsection, including, but not limited to, the removal of all materials and the
cleaning of the site. In the event the licensee does not comply or remove the
materials or clean the site, the City may do so, or cause the same to be done
by other persons, and the reasonable cost plus an administrative fee shall be
charged against the licensee and his deposit or surety bond. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-
17-2018)
5.24.150: TAVERN:
   A.   Sales: A tavern license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on
draft in containers not to exceed two liters (2 L) in size for consumption on
the premises or in original containers not to exceed two liters (2 L) in size
for consumption on or off the premises. Beer sold for consumption off the
premises must be sold in the original sealed container.
   B.   Presence Of Minors Prohibited: It is unlawful and shall constitute an
offense of strict liability for a tavern licensee, operator, agent or employee
to permit or to allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be
allowed in or about the premises occupied by a tavern license.
   C.   Proximity Requirements: No tavern license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the proximity requirements of section
5.24.190 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.160: PROHIBITION ON ISSUANCE OF NEW OR ADDITIONAL TAVERN LICENSES:
   A.   Specified: The City shall not issue any new or additional tavern
licenses. The City may only renew existing tavern licenses, permit a change of
licensees at licensed premises existing as of the effective date hereof, or
permit tavern licensed premises to move to new locations within the City.
Applicants renewing, changing licensees or moving location must meet the
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the City,
pay applicable license fees, and be approved by the City Manager. Any tavern
licensee whose license is revoked or not renewed, for whatever reason, shall
not be entitled to obtain a new tavern license.
   B.   Moving To New Location; Restrictions: Notwithstanding the fact that a
lessee of a tavern licensed premises is the licensee, for purposes of this
section, the tavern license shall remain with the premises and only the owner
of the premises may move the license to a new location, pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.170: ALCOHOL REGISTRATION CARDS:
   A.   Purpose: Alcohol cannot be served by any person in the City of Holladay
in an establishment governed by this chapter, without first obtaining an
alcohol registration card by following the procedures outlined in this section.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this chapter:
   EMPLOYED: Any person performing any type of work or assistance for or on
behalf of any establishment covered by this chapter, at any establishment
covered by this chapter, during hours such establishment is open to its members
or to the public, whether or not pecuniary compensation is provided or offered
therefor.
   EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed, as defined in this section, by any
establishment covered by this chapter, whether the person is employed on a
contractual basis, by fixed salary, or by any other means.
   EMPLOYER: Any establishment, or the principals thereof, covered by this
chapter.
   C.   Persons And Establishments Which Require Registration Cards: The
persons and establishments covered by this chapter and required to obtain a
registration card shall be as follows:
      1.   All employees of on-premises beer tavern and resort license
establishments;
      2.   Beer-only restaurants which provide live entertainment on the
premises;
      3.   Equity, fraternal, dining, and social clubs which sell, serve and
dispense alcoholic beverages, including those employed as bartenders, waiters,
waitresses, and managers; and
      4.   Those engaged in security, or the checking of identification to
ensure that no person, including performers, enters the establishment who is
not twenty one (21) years of age.
   D.   Procedure For Obtaining Card:
      1.   An employee applying for an alcohol registration card must apply at
the Police Department's Office, provide proof of employment, and be
photographed.
      2.   All applicants shall be required to furnish satisfactory proof of
age via a valid form of identification as determined by the Police Department.
      3.   All applicants shall be required to furnish a current copy of a
criminal background check conducted by the Utah Bureau of Criminal
Identification (BCI).
      4.   The applicant shall pay the associated fees as set forth in the
consolidated fee schedule approved by the City Council and on file with the
licensing official.
   E.   Card Numbers To Be Registered By Employer: All registration card
numbers obtained under the provisions of this chapter are to be registered by
the employer personnel or payroll section, and kept as a part of the record of
the employee.
   F.   Examination Of Employees' Cards:
      1.   The person or persons designated by each establishment as the agent
(s) responsible for hiring and/or checking employees under the provisions of
this chapter shall examine each employee's or prospective employee's
registration card to determine the validity of the card for use in the
particular establishment concerned.
      2.   If the prospective employee's card is found to be invalid as
described above, the employee will be issued a new signed application form,
which must be completed and presented along with the registration card to the
local law enforcement agency's office for validation prior to commencing
employment.
   G.   Period Of Validity: Unless revoked or suspended, each registration card
issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain valid for a period of one year
from the date of original issuance.
   H.   Possession Of Card Required; Cards Not Transferable:
      1.   All persons employed by an establishment governed by this chapter
must have in their possession a valid registration card during times of
employment with the establishment.
      2.   Registration cards are not transferable.
   I.   Denial Conditions; Appeals:
      1.   The UPD Holladay Precinct may revoke or deny, on behalf of the City,
a registration card if the applicant:
         a.   Has been convicted of a felony, or any crime involving moral
turpitude as defined by Utah Administrative Rule R708-2-3;
         b.   Has obtained a registration card by fraud or deceit;
         c.   Has failed to pay required fees;
         d.   Has violated the laws of the State or the ordinances of the
County regulating the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, or a
controlled substance as defined in section 58-37-1, et seq., Utah Code
Annotated (1953), as amended;
         e.   Has an outstanding warrant for his or her arrest.
      2.   Any appeal of the denial of a registration card subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall be heard and decided in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The Council may appoint one or more Hearing Officers.
         b.   Any Hearing Officer acting at the direction of the Council shall
have the power and authority to preside and conduct hearings and decide on
appeal the suspension, revocation or denial of cards issued by the City,
including the power to examine witnesses and receive evidence, compel the
attendance of witnesses, and compel the production of documents.
         c.   The Hearing Officer shall review the City's decision for
correctness.
         d.   Hearing examiners acting at the direction of the Council shall
have the authority to issue findings of fact, conclusions of law and orders,
all based upon the evidence and testimony received.
         e.   The hearing examiner shall provide a record and provide the City
Council with a copy of each decision.
   J.   Suspension And Revocation Conditions And Procedures:
      1.   The City may revoke or suspend registration cards if the holder has
committed any of the offenses outlined in this chapter, or has utilized a
registration card for the purpose of obtaining credit, or as identification for
cashing checks.
      2.   Any appeal of the suspension or revocation of a registration card
subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be heard and decided in
accordance with the provisions set forth above.
   K.   Violation; Penalty: Any person employed in an establishment covered by
this section who provides service without a valid alcohol registration card
shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.180: PREMISES; LIGHT AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict liability for any
person to own or operate any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages without complying with the following lighting and view requirements:
   A.   Lighting: During business hours, a minimum of one candlepower light,
measured at a level of five feet (5') above the floor, shall be maintained,
except in gender segregated restaurants.
   B.   Booths Prohibited: No enclosed booths, blinds or stalls shall be
erected or maintained.
   C.   Access: There shall be a clear and unobstructed access to all portions
of the interior where patrons are permitted or served. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-
2018)
5.24.190: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Information Required: All applications for alcoholic beverage retail
licenses or for renewal or reissuance of alcoholic beverage retail licenses
authorized herein shall be filed and verified with the City License Department
and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, current address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   The age and date of birth of the applicant.
      3.   The social security number of the applicant.
      4.   The State Sales Tax identification number of the applicant.
      5.   The citizenship and/or place of permanent residency of the
applicant.
      6.   All addresses of the applicant for the previous five (5) years.
      7.   All names, addresses and the names of the licensing authorities of
all businesses previously and presently owned or operated by the applicant.
      8.   The type of license desired.
      9.   The location of the premises to be licensed.
      10.   A statement verifying that the applicant meets all the requirements
of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
      11.   A statement verifying that the applicant is of good moral
character.
      12.   Proof of training approved by the State.
      13.   An affirmative statement by the applicant that any employees who
serve or sell beer shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      14.   A sworn statement signed by the applicant that all the facts
included in the application are true.
      15.   Any other information that the City may require.
   B.   Partnerships And Similar Businesses: If the applicant is a firm,
partnership, association, group, corporation or a person with any other
business interest in receiving a license hereunder, the above information shall
be provided with respect to each partner, association member or corporate
officer, director or member provided; however, that the application need only
be signed by a single partner, member, corporate officer or person who is
indicated as an applicant on the application.
   C.   Operator: If the business is to be operated by a person other than the
applicant, said operator must join in the application and file the same
information required of an applicant. It shall be grounds for revocation of the
license for any business required to be licensed by this title, to be operated
by any person who has not filed his operator's information at the time of
renewal of the license, or, if operation is assumed during the license period,
at least ten (10) days prior to assuming operation of the business.
   D.   Statement Under Oath: The application and operator's information must
be subscribed by the applicant and operator who shall state under oath that the
information contained therein is true.
   E.   Referral; Certificate; Information: The City License Department shall
submit copies to the City Planning Commission and the City's relevant contract
providers, including building inspection, Fire Department, Health Department as
provided in section
5.24.200 of this chapter and City's Public Safety Officer as provided in
section
5.24.210 of this chapter, each or any of which may require additional
information to assure compliance with relevant ordinances and laws. Only after
receiving signed, written approval from each of the entities identified herein,
shall the License Department be authorized to prepare a certificate to the City
for the City Manager's approval. The certificate to the City Manager shall
contain the following information:
      1.   The person's name to whom the certificate relates;
      2.   The type of license to be issued;
      3.   The prepaid expiration date of the license;
      4.   The prepaid place of business licensed; and
      5.   A statement that all the entities identified herein have approved
the same. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.200: REFERRAL OF APPLICATION TO HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
All applications filed under section
5.24.190 of this chapter shall be referred to the Salt Lake Valley Health
Department, which shall inspect all the premises to be licensed to assure
sanitary compliance with the laws of the State, the ordinances of the City, and
Health Department rules and regulations on the preparation, storage,
distribution or sale of beer and food. If the Health Department determines that
the premises fulfill all such sanitary requirements, the Health Department
shall issue a permit to the licensee, a copy of which shall be attached to the
application for license. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.210: REFERRAL OF APPLICATION TO PUBLIC SAFETY:
   A.   Referral; Inspection And Report: All applications filed under section
5.24.190 of this chapter shall be referred to the City's Public Safety Officer
or other authorized representative of the City for inspection and report. The
City's Public Safety Officer or other contract provider shall, within ten (10)
days after receiving such application, make report of:
      1.   The general reputation and character of the persons who habitually
frequent such place;
      2.   The nature and the kind of business conducted at such place by the
applicant or by any other person or by the applicant at any other place;
      3.   Whether such place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and
orderly manner;
      4.   The nature and kind of entertainment, if any, at such place;
      5.   Whether gambling is or has been permitted on the premises or by the
applicant at any other place; and
      6.   The proximity of such premises to any school or church.
   B.   Recommendation: The City's Public Safety Officer or other authorized
representative shall also add to such report his recommendation as to whether
or not the application should be granted. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.220: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt of the certificate referred to in section
5.24.190 of this chapter, the City Manager shall consider the application and
if in her or his opinion the license will not be detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City and the applicant has complied
with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, the City Manager may
approve the license and authorize the License Department to issue the specified
type of license to the applicant upon the licensed premises. If the license is
for renewal of an existing wholesale or retail beer license, the same terms and
conditions shall apply. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.230: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Authorized: Licenses may be suspended or revoked for the violation on
the licensed premises or by licensee of any provision of this title, or of any
other applicable ordinances or law relating to alcoholic beverages, or if the
person to whom the license was issued no longer possesses the qualification
required by this title and the Statutes of the State.
   B.   Suspension Prior To Hearing: All licenses issued pursuant to this title
may be suspended and the premises closed by the City's Public Safety Officer
without a prior hearing. At the time of a suspension, notice shall be given to
the licensee of the causes of such suspension and of the licensee's right to
petition the City for a hearing within ten (10) days after the date of such
suspension. If cause for the suspension is established at the hearing, the
suspension order may be continued for up to one year in duration. However, no
license shall be revoked or suspended beyond the initial hearing without first
establishing cause therefor, nor shall any license be revoked without first
giving the licensee an opportunity for a hearing on the causes specified for
revocation.
   C.   Sales Prohibited After Suspension Or Revocation: It is unlawful for any
person to sell alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises during such period
of suspension, or after the revocation of the person's alcoholic beverage
license. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.240: EXPIRATION DATE:
All licenses issued pursuant hereto shall expire one year from date of
issuance, except single event permits, which shall be issued for a period set
forth in the permit. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.250: CITY LICENSE REQUIRES STATE LICENSE:
A license granted hereunder is issued by the City only in conjunction with an
applicable State license, except as specifically provided otherwise. During any
period an applicable State license is not in effect for a given premises,
whether by reason of suspension, revocation or any other reason, the City
license for the premises shall automatically terminate. Upon presentation of
written proof that the commission has reinstated or otherwise revalidated the
applicable State license, the City license shall be deemed to be valid and in
full force and effect. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
prohibit or restrict the City from enforcing State law or City ordinance as
allowed by law regarding alcoholic beverage sales and licensing in the City.
(Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.260: QUALIFICATION OF LICENSEE:
   A.   Specified: No license shall be granted unless the applicant is a lawful
resident of the United States, is age twenty one (21) or over, of good moral
character, a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident of the United
States (alien registration card required) and the applicant satisfies the
qualifications set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 32A-10-203.
   B.   Partnership Or Similar Business: If the applicant is a firm,
partnership, association, group, corporation, limited liability company, or any
other business entity, each partner, association member, corporate officer,
director or any other person having ownership interest in the business that is
applying for a license shall meet all of the foregoing restrictions as if such
individuals were the applicant. The operator or person having management
responsibilities shall also meet all of the foregoing restrictions. (Ord. 2018-
06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.270: FEES AND LATE FEES FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE RETAIL LICENSES:
   A.   Fee Additional: Applications for alcoholic beverage retail licenses
under this chapter shall be accompanied by the special fees specified in title
3,
chapter 3.35 of this Code, which are in addition to the general business
license fees required herein.
   B.   Delinquency: In the event the required fees and application are not
received by the License Department within thirty (30) days after expiration of
the license, in addition to the remedies described in section
5.24.280 of this chapter, the applicant must pay a penalty in the amount of
twenty five percent (25%) of the fees due as part of the reissuance fee and the
issuance of a license. In the event the required fees and application are not
received by the License Department within sixty (60) days after expiration of
the license, in addition to the remedies described in section
5.24.280 of this chapter, the applicant must pay a penalty in the amount of one
hundred percent (100%) of the fees due as part of the reissuance fee and
issuance of a license. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.280: RENEWAL OF EXISTING LICENSES:
All applications for renewal of alcoholic beverage retail licenses, together
with the applicable fee filed by the holders of existing licenses, shall be
filed with the License Department at least thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration date of the then issued license. Any person who fails to file such
application and pay such fee before such deadline shall close his licensed
premises on the expiration date of the then issued license and shall keep the
premises closed for any and all business involving the sale of alcoholic
beverages in the City until the date his new license is issued by the City.
(Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.290: ESTABLISHMENT NAME CHANGE; FEE AND NOTICE TO CITY:
The licensee shall not change the name of the business establishment until the
licensee has given written notice to the License Department ten (10) days prior
to the name change, and has paid a name change fee as specified in the fee
schedule shown in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.300: TRANSFER TO NEW LOCATION; FEE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred to a new property
location upon application and approval by the City, filed with the Offices of
the Community Development Department, and upon the payment of the transfer fee
specified in the fee schedule, which shall be refunded if the application is
denied. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.310: SUBLEASE, TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   No license may be transferred, assigned or subleased in any manner. Any
violations of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license or
refusal to renew the license.
   B.   A person, having been granted a license hereunder, may not sell,
exchange, barter, give, or attempt in any way to dispose of the license,
whether for monetary gain or not. A license granted hereunder has no monetary
value for the purpose of any type of disposition. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.320: FORFEITURE CONDITIONS:
If any licensee under this chapter sells the place of business, together with
the assets of such business, his license shall expire and be forfeited. (Ord.
2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.330: CONFORMANCE WITH CITY LAW REQUIRED:
The licensee shall be responsible for the operation of the business in
conformance with the ordinances of the City, and it shall be grounds for
revocation of the license if a violation of such ordinances occurs through an
act of a licensee, operator, employer, agent or person who is allowed to
perform for patrons of the licensee's business, whether or not such person is
paid by the licensee for the performance, or any person who violates such
ordinance with the consent or knowledge of licensee or his or her agents or
employees or operators of the business. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.340: LOCAL CONSENT:
The issuance of a business license or conditional use permit for any on
premises beer retailer, bar establishment or restaurant liquor licensee shall
constitute local consent for the issuance of that license pursuant to the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. No alcohol retail license issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be effective until the State has issued an alcohol retail
license to the applicant pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord.
2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.350: LIQUOR LICENSE FEE AND LATE FEES:
   A.   Fee Additional: Applications for all club liquor licenses, or all
restaurant liquor licenses shall be accompanied by the special fees specified
in the fee schedule which are in addition to the general business license fees
required herein.
   B.   Delinquency: In the event the required fees and application are not
received by the City's License Department within thirty (30) days after
expiration of the license, in addition to the remedies described in section
5.24.280 of this chapter, the applicant must pay a reissuance penalty in the
amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the total fees due pursuant to the fee
schedule. In the event the required fees and applications are not received by
the License Department within sixty (60) days after expiration of the license,
in addition to the remedies described in section
5.24.280 of this chapter, the applicant must pay a reissuance penalty in the
amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the total fees due pursuant to the fee
schedule. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.360: MINORS IN CLUB LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict liability for minors
to be admitted to an equity or fraternal, dining or social club under any other
circumstances than the following:
   A.   Minors may be permitted on the premises of an equity or fraternal club
as allowed by the bylaws of that club but cannot be in a bar area, or serve,
purchase or consume alcohol.
   B.   Minors may not be on the premises of a dining club unless accompanied
by an individual who is twenty one (21) years of age or older.
   C.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed in or about
the premises of a social club. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.370: CRIMINAL OFFENSE:
   A.   State Provisions Applicable: Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-4-201
through 32B-4-210, regarding the applicability of the Utah Criminal Code,
special burdens of proof, inferences and presumptions, criminal responsibility
for the conduct of another, and prosecutions shall govern the prosecution by
the City of an offense defined in this chapter or in any proceeding brought to
enforce this chapter.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful to:
      1.   Drink an alcoholic beverage in a public building, park or stadium
unless a single event permit or other special permit is issued pursuant
thereto; or
      2.   Be under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or any
substance having the property of releasing toxic vapors to a degree that the
person may endanger themselves or another, if such person is in a public place
or in a private place where the person unreasonably disturbs other persons.
   C.   Release From Custody Authorized: A law enforcement officer may release
from custody an individual arrested under this section, if he believes
imprisonment is unnecessary for the protection of the individual or another; or
a law enforcement officer may take a person arrested under this section to a
detoxification center or other special facility designated by the courts of
Utah or by State law, as an alternative to jail incarceration for such
offenses.
   D.   Alcoholic Beverages In Public Places: No person shall open, possess, or
consume from an open bottle, can or other receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage in an unpermitted public place. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
5.24.380: CIVIL FINE:
In addition to any civil or criminal remedy available to the City to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, a person who violates any provision of this
chapter is subject to a civil fine as required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this Code. A civil fine is due and payable within twenty (20)
days of the date of citation from the City giving notice of the civil fine.
Notice of a civil fine shall be given by personal service or by posting in the
United States mail, postage paid, certified mail, return receipt requested.
Unpaid civil fines are a debt owed to the City and may be the subject of a
civil action filed in any court having legal jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-
2018)
CHAPTER 5.26
AMBULANCES AND INVALID COACHES
SECTION:
5.26.010: Definitions
5.26.020: License Required
5.26.030: License Fees
5.26.040: Operation Without Other Licenses Prohibited
5.26.050: Insurance Or Bond Required
5.26.060: Vehicle Certification
5.26.070: Fares And Charges To Be Filed
5.26.080: Equipment, Maintenance And Operation; Inspection
5.26.090: Identifying Design Required On Vehicles
5.26.100: Vehicle Design Restrictions
5.26.110: Sanitation Regulations In Vehicles
5.26.120: Manifests; Driver Duties
5.26.130: Record Keeping Requirements
5.26.140: Emergency Equipment Prohibited On Invalid Coaches
5.26.150: Operation Of Street Stands By Invalid Coaches Prohibited
5.26.160: Inspection Of Vehicles
5.26.170: Enforcement
5.26.180: Violation; Report To Mayor
5.26.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the respective
meanings hereinafter set forth:
AMBULANCE: A motor vehicle constructed and equipped with facilities to
transport sick or injured persons.
INVALID COACH: Any self-propelled motor vehicle for hire, other than an
ambulance or taxicab, and which is designed, equipped and used for the
transportation of invalid or handicapped persons on a nonemergency basis. Such
vehicles shall require no personnel other than the driver, and shall not be
required to have first aid equipment, flashing red lights or sirens.
LICENSE: Means and shall refer to the authorization granted by the city to
those persons who own or operate an ambulance or invalid coach which they
propose to drive or have driven upon the streets and highways of the city.
LICENSEE: Means and refers to any person holding a license under the provisions
of this title.
MANIFEST: Means and refers to a daily record of all trips, showing the times
and places of origin and destination, the number of passengers, the charge for
each trip, and the general nature of the illness, injury or condition of each
passenger.
PERSON: Means and includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity,
a partnership or unincorporated association, excluding, however, the United
States, the state of Utah, or any political subdivision or instrumentality of
either. (1999 Code)
5.26.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate an ambulance or invalid coach for hire
within the city without having first obtained and having then in force a valid
license. (1999 Code)
5.26.030: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Required; Increase In Number Of Vehicles: The annual fee, payable in
advance, for a license to operate an ambulance or invalid coach shall be as
specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this chapter. Whenever the number of vehicles operated shall be
increased during the year, the licensee shall notify the license official of
such change and shall pay the additional fee.
   B.   Fees Additional; Tags Or Stickers Required: Fees assessed under this
section shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by ordinance, and
the license official shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of
vehicles covered by the license. Such tags or stickers shall be displayed in a
prominent place in each vehicle. (1999 Code)
5.26.040: OPERATION WITHOUT OTHER LICENSES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person who owns or controls an ambulance or invalid
coach to permit it to be driven for hire without the required state and city
licenses. No ambulance or invalid coach licensed by the city shall be driven at
any time unless it is operated by a driver possessing a valid emergency medical
services system license issued by the state. (1999 Code)
5.26.050: INSURANCE OR BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Insurance: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no
operations shall be conducted under any license issued pursuant hereto unless
there is on file with the city a certificate of insurance executed by an
insurance company or association authorized to transact business in this state,
upon a form as prescribed by the city, that there is in full force and effect a
policy of insurance conditioned to pay any final judgment against the licensee
or any settlement entered into by the licensee for bodily injury to or the
death of any person resulting from the negligent operation, maintenance or use
of ambulances or invalid coaches by such licensee, its servants, agents or
employees, or for the loss or damage to the property of others, in the amount
of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per occurrence.
   B.   Coverage; Bond In Lieu Of Insurance: Such policy or policies shall
cover all ambulances and invalid coaches used or to be used by such licensee.
In lieu of this insurance herein provided for, the mayor may, in his
discretion, accept a bond to be approved by it under such rules and regulations
as the mayor may prescribe, with a sufficient corporate surety or not less than
two (2) personal sureties (who shall be residents and freeholders of this
state), conditioned to pay damages as herein provided for. (1999 Code)
5.26.060: VEHICLE CERTIFICATION:
No license shall be issued under this section until the sheriff shall have
found and certified that the ambulance or invalid coach has met all standards
established by the Salt Lake city-county health department and by the other
applicable provisions of this title. (1999 Code)
5.26.070: FARES AND CHARGES TO BE FILED:
Every licensee shall keep on file with the city or its designee, a current
schedule of all fares and charges for its transportation service hereunder, and
no transportation shall be performed or service rendered except in conformity
therewith. This section shall not apply to rates established by agreement with
any public or private school, charitable or nonprofit organization, with the
federal or state governments, or any political subdivision. (1999 Code)
5.26.080: EQUIPMENT, MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION; INSPECTION:
Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle within the city under the
provisions of this chapter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly and carefully
inspected by the sheriff, shall at all times be in a safe condition for the
transportation of sick, injured or handicapped persons, shall be clean, of good
appearance, and well painted, and shall have such equipment as may be required
by the board of health, including, with respect to invalid coaches, but not
limited to, the following:
   A.   Wide Doorways: Doorways wide enough to accommodate a wheelchair;
   B.   Ramps: Ramps or lifting devices for elevating handicapped persons from
the curb or sidewalk into the vehicle, which ramps and lifting devices must be
stored inside the vehicle while it is moving;
   C.   Security And Safety Belts: Adequate means for securing handicapped
persons safely to the inside of the vehicle and safety belts for all
passengers:
   D.   Rear Door: A door, in addition to those provided on such vehicles for
normal ingress and egress, located at the rear, to be used as a method of
escape in case of an emergency; and
   E.   Fire Extinguisher: A fire extinguisher, first aid equipment and such
other supplies as may from time to time be required by the Salt Lake city-
county health department. (1999 Code)
5.26.090: IDENTIFYING DESIGN REQUIRED ON VEHICLES:
   A.   Size: Each ambulance shall bear on the outside of each rear or front
door, in painted letters not less than five-sixteenths inch (5/16") stroke, and
more than two and one-fourth inches (21/4") in height, the name of the licensee
and the company number, which number shall also be painted on the rear of the
vehicle and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the city.
   B.   Content: Each invalid coach shall bear on the outside of each rear or
front door in painted letters not less than five-sixteenths inch (5/16") stroke
and more than two and one-fourth inches (21/4") in height either the words
"special transportation" or "invalid coach", the name of the licensee and the
company number, which name and number shall also be painted on the rear of such
vehicle and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the city.
(1999 Code)
5.26.100: VEHICLE DESIGN RESTRICTIONS:
No vehicle covered by this chapter shall be licensed if the color scheme,
identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the
opinion of the mayor, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying
design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating
under this chapter. If, after a license has been issued, the color scheme,
identifying design, monogram or insignia is changed so as to be, in the opinion
of the mayor, in conflict with or in imitation of those used by any other
person, owner or operator, the license for such vehicle shall be suspended or
revoked. (1999 Code)
5.26.110: SANITATION REGULATIONS IN VEHICLES:
Every ambulance or invalid coach operating under the provisions of this chapter
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Salt Lake city-county health department. (1999
Code)
5.26.120: MANIFESTS; DRIVER DUTIES:
   A.   Required: Every driver shall maintain a daily "manifest", as defined in
section
5.26.010 of this chapter. All manifests shall be returned to the licensee by
the driver at the conclusion of his working day. The sheriff's office shall be
notified by the driver of an ambulance licensed hereunder of all cases where
beating, knifing, poisoning, shooting, suicide or homicide may possibly have
occurred.
   B.   Form: The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by
the licensee and shall be of a character approved by the city.
   C.   Retention: Every licensee shall retain and preserve all driver
manifests in a safe place for at least one calendar year after the year in
which such manifests are made. Manifests so retained shall be available to the
sheriff or license official or their designees at any time upon request. (1999
Code)
5.26.130: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Type Of Records Retained: Every licensee shall keep accurate records of
all receipts from operations, including operating and other expenses, capital
expenditures, and such other operating information as may be required by the
city. Records so retained shall be made available to the sheriff for inspection
upon request.
   B.   Accessibility: Every licensee shall maintain all records required by
this section at a place readily accessible for examination by the city council.
(1999 Code)
5.26.140: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED ON INVALID COACHES:
No invalid coach shall be equipped with a siren or permitted to operate as an
emergency vehicle or permitted to carry oxygen. (1999 Code)
5.26.150: OPERATION OF STREET STANDS BY INVALID COACHES PROHIBITED:
Licensees of invalid coaches shall not operate street stands or accept
passengers except on orders received at the licensee's dispatching office or by
appointment or contract. (1999 Code)
5.26.160: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
Every ambulance or invalid coach shall be inspected every six (6) months by the
sheriff's office and shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the
Salt Lake city-county health department. (1999 Code)
5.26.170: ENFORCEMENT:
The sheriff or license official are authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.26.180: VIOLATION; REPORT TO MAYOR:
Upon the discovery of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
sheriff shall, in addition to the institution of criminal proceedings, report
the same to the mayor, which shall make such order respecting the licenses of
those persons involved as the mayor deems appropriate. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.28
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, BILLIARD HALLS, POOL HALLS, BAGATELLE HALLS, BOWLING ALLEYS
AND CARD AND GAME ROOMS
SECTION:
5.28.010: Definitions
5.28.020: Amusement Devices; License Required; Fees
5.28.030: Distributor's Fees
5.28.040: Issuance Conditions
5.28.050: Devices To Be Kept In Plain View
5.28.060: Inspection Of Premises And Devices
5.28.070: Gambling Devices Not Authorized
5.28.080: Billiard, Pool And Bagatelle Halls; License Required
5.28.090: License Fees For Billiard, Pool And Bagatelle Tables
5.28.100: Hours Of Operation For Billiard, Pool And Bagatelle Tables
5.28.110: Visibility Of Interior Of Billiard, Pool And Bagatelle Tables
5.28.120: Operation Restrictions Concerning Minors
5.28.130: Bowling Alleys; License Required
5.28.140: License Fee For Bowling Alleys
5.28.150: Separation Of Bowling And Lounge Areas
5.28.160: Card And Game Rooms; Individual License Requirements
5.28.170: Club License Requirements
5.28.180: License Application For Clubs; Contents
5.28.190: Investigation By Sheriff
5.28.200: License Fee For Card And Game Rooms Or Tables
5.28.210: Premises; Periodic Inspections
5.28.220: License Revocation
5.28.230: Hours Of Operation For Card And Game Rooms
5.28.240: Unobstructed View Of Tables
5.28.250: Locked Doors And Alarm Devices Prohibited
5.28.260: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
5.28.270: Playing For Money Prohibited
5.28.280: Persons Under Twenty One Prohibited
5.28.290: Known Gamblers Prohibited
5.28.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, whether mechanically or electronically operated,
that upon insertion of a coin, trade token, slug or similar object, or upon
payment of money or other consideration through use of a metered or similar
device, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement,
of any kind or description, and that contains no automatic payoff for the
return of money or trade tokens, or that makes no provision whatever for the
return of money to the player. An "amusement device" is further defined as any
machine, apparatus or contrivance that is used or that may be used as a game of
skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player initiates, employs or directs
any force generated by the machine, but specifically excludes a "musical
mechanical amusement device", as hereinafter defined.
DISTRIBUTOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets
up for operation by another, leases, rents, sells, distributes, or in any way
provides for the purpose of operation any amusement device, whether for a fixed
charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such
devices, or otherwise.
MUSICAL MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Means and includes each machine vending
recorded music, or a period of radio or television entertainment in return for
the insertion or deposit therein of a coin, trade token, slug, or similar
object; provided, however, that this does not include coin operated radios or
television sets in private quarters. (1999 Code)
5.28.020: AMUSEMENT DEVICES; LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to install, operate or
maintain for public patronage or operation of an amusement device or musical
mechanical amusement device without having first obtained a license therefor.
Applications shall be made to the license official.
   B.   Fee: The fee for such license shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.28.030: DISTRIBUTOR'S FEES:
The license fee for each distributor shall be as specified on the fee schedule.
All distributors license fees shall be payable annually in advance; provided,
that where application is made after the expiration of any portion of any
license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of
a proportionate part of the annual fee. (1999 Code)
5.28.040: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
No license shall be issued except to a person of good character, approved by
the mayor. Upon approval of the applicant and the payment of the license fee,
the license official shall issue a stamp bearing a notation: "city of Holladay
for the twelve months ending            ,      ." One license shall be issued
for each device licensed, and it shall be placed in a conspicuous place and so
affixed that it cannot be transferred from one machine to another. (1999 Code)
5.28.050: DEVICES TO BE KEPT IN PLAIN VIEW:
All such devices shall at all times be kept in plain view of any person or
persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are
kept or used. (1999 Code)
5.28.060: INSPECTION OF PREMISES AND DEVICES:
The sheriff shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in
which any such device or devices are operated or set up for operation, and
shall periodically inspect, investigate and test such devices. (1999 Code)
5.28.070: GAMBLING DEVICES NOT AUTHORIZED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any
gambling device of any nature whatsoever. (1999 Code)
5.28.080: BILLIARD, POOL AND BAGATELLE HALLS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle hall
open to the public without having first obtained a license therefor as is
required in this chapter. All applications for such licenses shall state
thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of tables
to be used therein. (1999 Code)
5.28.090: LICENSE FEES FOR BILLIARD, POOL AND BAGATELLE TABLES:
The annual license fee for billiard, pool and bagatelle tables shall be as
specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.28.100: HOURS OF OPERATION FOR BILLIARD, POOL AND BAGATELLE TABLES:
No billiard, pool or bagatelle hall shall operate between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. If alcoholic beverages are sold
on the premises, the hours of operation shall be further limited (but not
extended) to the times specified in this title. (1999 Code)
5.28.110: VISIBILITY OF INTERIOR OF BILLIARD, POOL AND BAGATELLE TABLES:
A clear, unobstructed view from the entrance of the entire interior of the
billiard, pool or bagatelle hall, excluding the restroom, shall be maintained
by the licensee at all times. The licensee shall not erect or maintain any
enclosed booths, blinds or stalls within the interior of the licensed premises.
(1999 Code)
5.28.120: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
In billiard, pool and bagatelle halls serving minors, no alcoholic beverages or
cigarettes shall be sold, dispensed or consumed on or about the premises, which
includes the parking lot. Further, it is unlawful for licensees of billiard,
pool or bagatelle halls to operate the same in contravention of the curfew
provisions outlined in this code. (1999 Code)
5.28.130: BOWLING ALLEYS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open
to the public without having first secured a license therefor as is required in
this chapter. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the license
official and shall be in writing and state thereon the intended location of the
place of business and the number of alleys to be used. (1999 Code)
5.28.140: LICENSE FEE FOR BOWLING ALLEYS:
The annual license fee for a bowling alley shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.28.150: SEPARATION OF BOWLING AND LOUNGE AREAS:
It is unlawful to carry any mixer, setup, alcoholic beverage or beer into the
area where bowling is taking place. The above mentioned beverages shall be
strictly confined to the lounge area of the bowling alley. (1999 Code)
5.28.160: CARD AND GAME ROOMS; INDIVIDUAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate in the city any room
where there is played any bingo, backgammon, cards, checkers, or other games of
similar nature, or any game played with beans, buttons, dice or similar
devices, or to keep, maintain or operate in the city any table on which such
games are played, where a charge is made for the use of the room, use of the
tables, or for the privilege of playing on such tables or in such room, without
first obtaining a license. (1999 Code)
5.28.170: CLUB LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any club, group or association within the city, whether
incorporated or not, to maintain a regular club or meeting room, or any table
within such room, for the purpose of providing members, guests or other persons
with a place to play any of the games set forth in the preceding section,
without first obtaining a license therefor. (1999 Code)
5.28.180: LICENSE APPLICATION FOR CLUBS; CONTENTS:
Applications shall be made to the license official and shall include a sworn
statement by the applicant showing the street and house number of the place
where it is proposed to maintain such room or table, the name of the place of
business and of any club, association or corporation operating the premises,
the number of tables used or intended to be used for playing games, and the
names and addresses of all officers of such organizations responsible for the
operation of the rooms or tables. (1999 Code)
5.28.190: INVESTIGATION BY SHERIFF:
The license official shall refer all applicants and sworn statements of
applicants to the sheriff for an investigation and report. The sheriff shall
report to the mayor, within five (5) days of the receipt of such information,
the general reputation and character of the person making application, of the
place sought to be licensed, and of its patrons. The sheriff shall further
indicate the nature and kind of business conducted at such place or at any
other place by the applicant, and shall note whether gambling of any
description has been carried on or indulged in at the place, whether known
gamblers operate, supervise or play any game, or appear to be employed in or
about the card and game room, and whether the place is or has been previously
conducted in a lawful, orderly manner. The sheriff shall make his
recommendations as to the issuance or denial of the application. (1999 Code)
5.28.200: LICENSE FEE FOR CARD AND GAME ROOMS OR TABLES:
The annual license fee for conducting card and game rooms or tables for the
playing of cards shall be as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.28.210: PREMISES; PERIODIC INSPECTIONS:
The sheriff shall, after license has been issued, make periodic inspections of
the licensed premises in order to ensure strict compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and particularly with such as govern the issuance of a license
in the first instance. Violations shall be promptly reported to the mayor, who
shall take such action with regard to revocation as he deems necessary. (1999
Code)
5.28.220: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The license of any person for the operation of card and game tables may be
revoked by the mayor at any time upon notice and hearing for the violation of
any ordinance of this city, or law of the state, or for any other good and
sufficient reason. (1999 Code)
5.28.230: HOURS OF OPERATION FOR CARD AND GAME ROOMS:
It is unlawful for any licensee or agent thereof to permit the use of card or
game rooms for the playing of games enumerated in this chapter between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the same day.
(1999 Code)
5.28.240: UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF TABLES:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a card room where the view of the
tables from the entrance is blocked or obstructed by partitions or dividers of
any kind. (1999 Code)
5.28.250: LOCKED DOORS AND ALARM DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this
chapter to permit any game to be played behind locked, barred or barricaded
doors, or in such a place as is not readily accessible to law enforcement
officers.
   B.   No person shall keep upon such premises any lookout, signal, buzzer,
alarm or other device of any kind capable of use for the purpose of warning
occupants of the presence of law enforcement officers.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to play any game behind a locked, barred
or barricaded door, or under any conditions herein above specified in this
chapter. (1999 Code)
5.28.260: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or allow to be consumed
alcoholic beverages on the premises of any card room. (1999 Code)
5.28.270: PLAYING FOR MONEY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to play cards and games for money or anything of value, or to
engage in any kind of gaming or gambling. (1999 Code)
5.28.280: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person or the agent, manager or representative of such
licensee, licensed under the provisions of this chapter, to permit or allow
persons under the age of twenty one (21) years to visit, frequent or remain in
any room where the games enumerated herein are being played or operated. (1999
Code)
5.28.290: KNOWN GAMBLERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or
the agent, manager or representative of such licensee, knowingly to employ any
known gambler, to conduct any of the games enumerated in this chapter, or to
work in or about licensed premises. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.30
AUCTIONS
SECTION:
5.30.010: Definitions
5.30.020: Compliance With Chapter Requirements
5.30.030: Applicability; Exemptions
5.30.040: Auctioneer's License Required
5.30.050: Application For Auctioneer's License
5.30.060: Inventory Of Sale Articles
5.30.070: Issuance Conditions For Auctioneer's License
5.30.080: Fee For Auctioneer's License
5.30.090: Auctioneer's License Bond
5.30.100: Auctioneer's License Not Transferable
5.30.110: Denial Or Revocation Conditions Of Auctioneer's License
5.30.120: Denial Or Revocation; Notice Of Hearing
5.30.130: Auction House License Required
5.30.140: Auction House License Fee
5.30.150: Transient Auction House License Required; When; Term
5.30.160: Transient Auction House License Fee
5.30.170: Auction House Licenses; Bond Requirements
5.30.180: Conformity With Other Laws
5.30.190: Sales To Be On Successive Days
5.30.200: Licensee's Continuous Attendance Required
5.30.210: Merchandise To Be Labeled
5.30.220: Merchandise To Be In State For Fifteen Days
5.30.230: Truthful Representation Of Merchandise
5.30.240: Reserved Right Of Seller To Bid
5.30.250: Seller Bidding At Sale Without Reserve Prohibited
5.30.260: Receipts For Merchandise; Commissions
5.30.270: Record Keeping Requirements; Generally
5.30.280: Record Keeping Requirements; Valuable Articles
5.30.290: Purchaser's Right To Return Merchandise For Full Refund
5.30.300: Valuable Articles Defined; When Sale Of Valuable Articles Prohibited
5.30.310: Unlawful Activities Designated
5.30.320: By-Bidders Prohibited
5.30.330: False Representations Prohibited
5.30.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
AUCTION HOUSE: A place of business where auctions are conducted and personal
property sold at auction.
AUCTIONEER: Any person who conducts a public, competitive sale of property by
outcry to the highest bidder.
TRANSIENT AUCTION HOUSE: Any place, whether indoors or outdoors, located within
the city, where any goods, wares, merchandise or articles of value are offered
for sale at auction, and which is neither the permanent place of business for
auction sales nor a permanent business that has an auction sale to dispose of
its inventory, furnishings and business equipment as it goes out of business.
(1999 Code)
5.30.020: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS:
No personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) shall be sold at auction in
the city, except in compliance with this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.30.030: APPLICABILITY; EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to auction sales
conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators,
receivers or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the
sale of real property at auction, nor shall it apply to any auction held for
charitable or benevolent purposes or for any church, fair, festival or bazaar,
nor to an auction wherein the general public is not invited nor permitted to
participate as bidders, and where the bidding is restricted to wholesalers or
retailers purchasing for resale. (1999 Code)
5.30.040: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to sell or cause to permit to be sold at auction any personal
property (goods, wares or merchandise) in the city unless such sale is
conducted by an individual who has applied for and obtained an auctioneer's
license from the city. (1999 Code)
5.30.050: APPLICATION FOR AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE:
The form on which application shall be made for an auctioneer's license shall
require the following information:
   A.   Name of the applicant;
   B.   Residence and business address of the applicant;
   C.   The length of time for which an auctioneer's license is desired;
   D.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant holds, or has held, an
auctioneer's license from any state, municipality, governing body or licensing
authority; a list of such licenses and a statement of the time, place, and by
whom issued; a statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body
or licensing authority has ever refused to issue or renew an auctioneer's
license to the applicant, together with a full and accurate statement as to the
reasons for any such refusal; and a statement as to whether any state,
municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever revoked an
auctioneer's license held by the applicant, together with a full and accurate
statement as to the reasons for any such revocation;
   E.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime involving moral turpitude and the nature of the offense, and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
   F.   A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two
inches by two inches (2" x 2"), showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and distinguishing manner; and
   G.   The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two (2)
reliable property owners of the city, who will certify as to the applicant's
good moral character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of
references, any other available evidence as to the good moral character and
business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate his moral character and business responsibility. The license
official may waive this requirement with respect to an application for renewal
of an auctioneer's license by an individual holding an unexpired auctioneer's
license issued under this section who has in a previous application under this
chapter complied with this requirement. (1999 Code)
5.30.060: INVENTORY OF SALE ARTICLES:
   A.   Filing Of Inventory Required: At least fifteen (15) days prior to every
auction, a true and correct inventory of items to be sold shall be filed with
the city license official. Such inventory shall:
      1.   List the articles proposed to be sold at sale by auction;
      2.   Give any identifying numbers or marks which may be upon the articles
to be sold;
      3.   Indicate opposite the description of each article whether the same
is new or used; and
      4.   List each of the articles described in the inventory with a number;
provided, however, that no article need be listed in the inventory that has a
retail value of less than five dollars ($5.00).
   B.   Investigation By Sheriff: Upon the license official's receipt of the
inventory, he shall immediately forward it to the sheriff for investigation
and/or inspection of inventory to establish, insofar as possible, that the
property thereon listed is not contraband or otherwise illegally for sale.
After the investigation, the sheriff shall issue a written report to the
license official within ten (10) days after receipt of the inventory, and no
auction may be held until the report is received by the official, the auction
is approved by the mayor, and the appropriate license issued by the city.
   C.   Sales Prohibited Without Inventory: It is unlawful to sell at auction
any item not listed on the inventory as set forth above. (1999 Code)
5.30.070: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS FOR AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE:
Before issuing an auctioneer's license, the license official shall refer the
application to the sheriff, who shall cause to be made such investigation of
the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good, except that the license
official may waive this requirement with respect to an application for renewal
of an auctioneer's license by any individual holding an unexpired auctioneer's
license issued under this chapter if an investigation of such applicant's moral
character and business responsibility has been made under this section in
connection with a prior application for an auctioneer's license under this
chapter. The sheriff shall cause the investigation herein provided for to be
made within a reasonable time, and shall certify to the license official
whether or not the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant
are satisfactory. (1999 Code)
5.30.080: FEE FOR AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE:
The fee for an auctioneer's license shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.30.090: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE BOND:
   A.   Required; Amount: Every applicant for an auctioneer's license shall
file with the city a cash bond or letter of credit as specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code in a form acceptable to the city attorney,
conditioned that the applicant, if issued a license hereunder, will comply
fully with all city ordinances and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations, will render true and strict accounts of all his sales to any
person or persons employing him to make the same, will not practice any fraud
or deceit, and will pay all damages that may be sustained by any person by
reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence or other wrongful act on the part of
the licensee, his agents or employees in the conduct of any auction or in the
exercise of the calling of auctioneer. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-
2010)
   B.   Liability Insurance Policy In Lieu Of Bond: A liability insurance
policy that conforms to the above requirements and is issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in Utah may be permitted by the city
attorney, in his discretion, in lieu of a bond.
   C.   Auctioneer Employed By Auction House: An auctioneer employed by one
holding an auction house license or a transient auction house license, in lieu
of filing a bond as set forth in subsection A of this section, or certificate
of insurance, may file a notarized affidavit from the license holder that
affirms that the applicant is an employee, that the license holder is
responsible for all actions of his employee, and that the employee is covered
by a valid bond as above required.
   D.   Direct Supervision Required If Under Employment: It is unlawful for any
auctioneer who files a certificate of employment with an auction house licensee
or transient auction house licensee to conduct an auction except under the
direct supervision of such licensee. (1999 Code)
5.30.100: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Neither the license nor the permit granted under the provisions of this section
shall be transferable, nor shall the same be loaned or used by any other
person. (1999 Code)
5.30.110: DENIAL OR REVOCATION CONDITIONS OF AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE:
An auctioneer's license may be revoked by the mayor upon recommendation of the
city's license official. An application for issuance or renewal of such license
may be refused by the mayor if, after notice and hearing, he determines that:
   A.   The applicant or license holder is not an individual of good moral
character and business responsibility; or
   B.   The application of the applicant or license holder contains any false,
fraudulent or misleading material statements; or
   C.   The applicant or license holder has made any false, fraudulent or
misleading material statement in the course of conducting an auction sale of,
or in offering for sale at auction, any real or personal property (goods, wares
or merchandise) in the city; or
   D.   The applicant or license holder has perpetrated a fraud upon any
person, whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the conduct of any auction
in the city; or
   E.   The applicant or license holder has violated any of the statutes of the
state relating to auctions or auctioneers; or
   F.   The applicant or license holder has been convicted of any crime or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   G.   The applicant or license holder has conducted an auction sale, or
offered for sale at auction, any real or personal property (goods, wares or
merchandise) in the city in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public. (1999 Code)
5.30.120: DENIAL OR REVOCATION; NOTICE OF HEARING:
Notice of the hearing provided for in section
5.30.110 of this chapter shall be given in writing to the applicant or license
holder, as the case may be. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the applicant or license holder, as the case may be, at his last known address
at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. The applicant or
license holder shall have the right to be represented at such hearing by
counsel. (1999 Code)
5.30.130: AUCTION HOUSE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of, or keep, conduct or
operate an auction house in the city, without first obtaining a license to do
so. (1999 Code)
5.30.140: AUCTION HOUSE LICENSE FEE:
The fee for an auction house license shall be as specified on the fee schedule.
(1999 Code)
5.30.150: TRANSIENT AUCTION HOUSE LICENSE REQUIRED; WHEN; TERM:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a transient auction
house without applying for and obtaining a transient auction house license from
the license official. No such licensee shall be relieved from the provisions of
this chapter by reason of temporary association with any licensed dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such temporary or
transient business in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any
other licensed dealer, trader or merchant auctioneer. (1999 Code)
5.30.160: TRANSIENT AUCTION HOUSE LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for engaging in business as a transient auction house shall be
as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.30.170: AUCTION HOUSE LICENSES; BOND REQUIREMENTS:
The applicant for a license for an auction house or a transient auction house
shall file with the city a cashier's check or irrevocable letter of credit
acceptable to and approved by the city attorney as specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, which shall indemnify the city and any person
injured or damaged through dealing with the licensee or their employees or
agents, and be in full force and effect for the year in which the license is
issued. It shall be conditioned on the fact that if the applicant is issued
such license, the licensee will fully comply with all provisions of the
ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning
auctions and auctioneers, will render true and strict accounts of all auction
sales to any person or persons employing such auctioneer to make the same, will
not practice any fraud, deceit, or make any material misrepresentations of fact
with reference to property from any auction sale conducted under the license,
and will pay all damages which may be sustained by any person by reason of any
fraud, deceit, negligence or wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his
agents or employees, and the conduct of the auctioneer in the exercise of the
call of auctioneer. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.30.180: CONFORMITY WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to exempt any auction house or
auctioneer, or the seller of any goods sold at auction, from any license, tax
or other ordinance of the city, nor from any of the laws of the state to which
any of them may be subject. (1999 Code)
5.30.190: SALES TO BE ON SUCCESSIVE DAYS:
All auction sales shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted. (1999 Code)
5.30.200: LICENSEE'S CONTINUOUS ATTENDANCE REQUIRED:
The licensee or, if a corporation or other business entity, one of the officers
of the licensee, shall remain in continuous attendance at any auction conducted
by the licensee. (1999 Code)
5.30.210: MERCHANDISE TO BE LABELED:
   A.   Before any sale is made at auction, the licensee must attach to each
article to be sold that has a retail value of five dollars ($5.00) or more a
card with the number of the article endorsed thereon, so that the number
corresponds to the article as it is described in the inventory on file with the
license official.
   B.   No article that has a retail value of five dollars ($5.00) or more
shall be sold at auction other than the merchandise described and set forth in
the inventory on file with the license official. (1999 Code)
5.30.220: MERCHANDISE TO BE IN STATE FOR FIFTEEN DAYS:
It is unlawful for anyone to sell or offer for sale at auction any merchandise
unless the merchandise shall have been within the state at least fifteen (15)
days immediately prior to the sale or offer for sale. However, livestock shall
only be required to be within the state for at least two (2) days prior to said
auction. (1999 Code)
5.30.230: TRUTHFUL REPRESENTATION OF MERCHANDISE:
All sales and all persons participating in sales must truly and correctly
represent at all times to the public attending such auction the facts in
respect to quality of the sale merchandise. (1999 Code)
5.30.240: RESERVED RIGHT OF SELLER TO BID:
The right to bid may be reserved expressly by, or on behalf of the seller.
Notice of such reservation shall be posted, and shall remain posted throughout
the auction sale in a prominent and conspicuous place where the sale is being
conducted, in letters large enough to be reasonably visible to any person with
normal vision who may attend the sale, reading substantially as follows: Seller
reserves the right to bid on any article at any time. (1999 Code)
5.30.250: SELLER BIDDING AT SALE WITHOUT RESERVE PROHIBITED:
Where notice has not been given that a sale by auction is subject to a right to
bid on behalf of the seller, it shall not be lawful for the seller to bid
himself, or to employ or induce any person to bid at such sale or on his
behalf, or for the auctioneer to employ or induce any person to bid at such
sale on behalf of the seller or knowingly to take any bid from the seller or
any person employed by him. Any sale contravening this rule may be treated as
fraudulent by the buyer. (1999 Code)
5.30.260: RECEIPTS FOR MERCHANDISE; COMMISSIONS:
It shall be the duty of all licensed auctioneers to receive all articles that
may be offered for sale at auction and give receipts therefor. At the close of
any sale, which must be made as the owner directs, the auctioneer shall deliver
a fair account of such sale and pay the amount received for such articles to
the person entitled thereto, deducting therefrom a commission not to exceed ten
percent (10%) on the amount of the sale. (1999 Code)
5.30.270: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY:
In every case where an article is sold for five dollars ($5.00) or more, the
licensee shall keep a complete record of all such sales made at an auction,
showing the name and address of each purchaser, a description of each such
article sold, including the number thereof, corresponding with the numbers
shown upon the inventory on file with the license official, and the date of
each sale. The record shall be open at all times to inspection by the license
official. (1999 Code)
5.30.280: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS; VALUABLE ARTICLES:
Any auction house licensee providing auction house facilities for auctioneers
of "valuable articles", as that term is defined in section
5.30.300 of this chapter shall, within a period of ten (10) days following the
final day of auction of such valuable articles, provide the license official
with complete records of all sales of valuable articles, including:
   A.   Purchaser Information: The names and addresses of all purchasers of all
valuable articles at such auction, and the date upon which such purchase was
made;
   B.   Description: A description of the valuable article purchased, and the
purchase price paid for such article;
   C.   Auctioneer Information: The name and address of the auctioneer selling
such article, and the name and address of the responsible person or entity on
whose behalf the auctioneer made such sale; and
   D.   Auction House Information: The name and address of the auction house
licensee. (1999 Code)
5.30.290: PURCHASER'S RIGHT TO RETURN MERCHANDISE FOR FULL REFUND:
   A.   Time Limited: Purchasers at auctions of "valuable articles", as that
term is defined in section
5.30.300 of this chapter, may return such articles for a period of ninety (90)
days to the auction house licensee responsible, and receive from the licensee
full refund upon tender of the merchandise with proof of purchase. Failure of
the auction house licensee to provide a refund within a period of five (5) days
after presentation of the merchandise and demand for refund shall result in
loss of the auction house license and forfeiture of the posted bond to the
extent necessary to satisfy the demand of claimants under this section. To the
extent that an auction house licensee fails to meet such claims, or the amount
of the posted bond required under section
5.30.170 of this chapter is insufficient to meet the claims of purchasers
returning merchandise under the provisions of this section, then the auction
house licensee shall be liable to such purchasers directly.
   B.   Notice Posted: All auction houses shall post a notice in a prominent,
conspicuous place wherein any auction sales are being conducted, in letters
large enough to be visible to any person with normal vision who may attend such
sale, reading substantially as follows: Purchasers of merchandise acquired at
this auction may, for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of purchase,
return such merchandise to (the auction house licensee) and receive the full
refund of any amounts paid for such merchandise. (1999 Code)
5.30.300: VALUABLE ARTICLES DEFINED; WHEN SALE OF VALUABLE ARTICLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to offer for sale at auction or sell at auction any valuable
article, defined as gold, silver plated ware, clocks, watches, oriental rugs or
rugs purported to be from the middle east or eastern part of the world,
diamonds or other precious or semiprecious stones or any imitation thereof,
glassware, china, linens or jewelry, or any article purporting to be or
represented as any of the above articles, between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the following day. (1999 Code)
5.30.310: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES DESIGNATED:
All auctioneers are forbidden to conduct their sales in such manner as to cause
people to gather in crowds on the sidewalks so as to obstruct the same; nor
shall they use immoral or indecent language in crying their sales, or make or
cause to be made noisy acclamations such as ringing of bells, blowing of
whistles, or otherwise, though not enumerated here, through the streets in
advertising their sales; and no bellman or crier, drum or fife or other musical
instrument or noisemaking means of attracting the attention of passersby,
except the customary auctioneer's flags, shall be employed or suffered to be
used at or near any place of sale or at or near any auction room, or near any
auction whatsoever. (1999 Code)
5.30.320: BY-BIDDERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to act at any sale by auction as a by-bidder or
booster, to buy in behalf of the auctioneer or owner, or to increase the price
of the article to be sold, or to make any false bid. (1999 Code)
5.30.330: FALSE REPRESENTATIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any auctioneer, when selling or offering for sale at public
auction any goods, wares or merchandise under the provisions of this chapter,
to describe the goods, wares or merchandise in any fraudulent, misleading,
untruthful or unwarranted manner tending to mislead bidders. It shall be
unlawful for any auctioneer or any person associated with him to substitute an
article sold for another. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.32
AUTO WRECKERS
SECTION:
5.32.010: Automobile Wrecking Establishment Defined
5.32.020: License Requirements And Fee
5.32.030: Recordkeeping Requirements
5.32.040: Purchases From Persons Under Eighteen
5.32.010: AUTOMOBILE WRECKING ESTABLISHMENT DEFINED:
"Automobile wrecking establishment" means any establishment, building or other
place where the business is carried on of wrecking old, used or secondhand
automobiles or other motor vehicles, and adding or employing the accessories or
parts thereof in equipping, repairing or rebuilding motor vehicles, or storing,
selling or otherwise disposing of such accessories or parts. (1999 Code)
5.32.020: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND FEE:
   A.   Character Of Licensee; Application; Fee: No automobile wrecking
establishment license shall be issued to any person who is not of good moral
character. Application must be made in writing to the license official under
oath, and must show compliance with the provisions of this section. The annual
license to operate an automobile wrecking establishment shall be as specified
on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
   B.   Check Or Letter Of Credit: Prior to issuing a business license to an
automobile wrecking establishment, the applicant must file with the city a
cashier's check or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to and approved by
the city attorney as specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code for any one accident and maintain the same throughout
the term of the business license. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.32.030: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Records Required; Content: Each licensee under this section shall keep
in such form as the city may prescribe, and written in ink or indelible pencil,
a daily record in the English language of articles purchased, including an
adequate description of the name and residence of the person from whom the
article was purchased and the name of the employer of such person, if any, also
the day and hour of such purchase and the price paid. The records shall at all
reasonable times be open to the inspection of any law enforcement officer,
commissioner or other person duly authorized in writing for such purpose by the
sheriff. No entry shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.
   B.   Copy Delivered To Sheriff: It shall be the duty of each licensee under
this section to deliver or cause to be delivered to the sheriff, at least once
a week, a copy of the records required to be kept as provided in this section,
and such other information as the sheriff may require of the secondhand motor
vehicles, parts and accessories acquired, wrecked, or left in the possession of
the licensee. (1999 Code)
5.32.040: PURCHASES FROM PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN:
A licensee under this section shall not purchase or receive from minors under
the age of eighteen (18) years any article whatsoever without the written
consent of a parent or guardian. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.34
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
SECTION:
5.34.010: Financial Institutions Defined
5.34.020: License Required
5.34.030: License Fee
5.34.040: Compliance With Statutes And Regulations
5.34.010: FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS DEFINED:
"Financial institution" means any bank, credit union, savings and loan
association, savings bank, industrial loan corporation or other institution
that holds or receives deposits, savings, or share accounts, or issues
depository accounts that are subject to withdrawal by check, draft, electronic
means or otherwise. (1999 Code)
5.34.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of a
financial institution in the city without first obtaining a license as required
in this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.34.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a financial institution shall be as specified on the
fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.34.040: COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTES AND REGULATIONS:
Financial institutions shall comply with all other applicable state and federal
statutes, rules and regulations. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.36
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE LICENSES
SECTION:
5.36.010: License Required
5.36.020: License Fees
5.36.030: Sticker Attached To Vehicles
5.36.040: License Exemption
5.36.050: Unlawful Operation; Penalty
5.36.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any commercial type vehicle used
for business to be driven or moved upon any street in the city without first
paying the fees herein provided and obtaining a license therefor. No such
license shall be issued by the city until commercial license plates registered
with the state of Utah motor vehicle division have been obtained. (1999 Code)
5.36.020: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for commercial vehicles, except for taxicabs and
ambulances, shall be as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.36.030: STICKER ATTACHED TO VEHICLES:
Every vehicle required to be licensed under this section shall have a sticker
provided by the city affixed to the front windshield so that it may be plainly
seen. The sticker is not transferable to any other vehicle. (1999 Code)
5.36.040: LICENSE EXEMPTION:
The license fee required by this section is not required for vehicles which:
   A.   Merely pass through the city.
   B.   Are used exclusively in interstate commerce. (1999 Code)
5.36.050: UNLAWFUL OPERATION; PENALTY:
Any person operating a vehicle on city streets is required to be licensed under
this section and pay the proper licensing fee. Any person failing to obtain the
requisite license and to pay the proper license fee may be assessed a penalty
as provided by this title. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to remove
or affect any other penalties otherwise imposed by the provisions of this
title. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.38
DANCE HALLS; PUBLIC, TEENAGE OR CLUBS
SECTION:
5.38.010: Definitions
5.38.020: License Required; Exemptions
5.38.030: License Application; Issuance Conditions
5.38.040: Investigation
5.38.050: License Fees; Exempt Activities
5.38.060: Hours Of Operation
5.38.070: Exit And Lighting Requirements
5.38.080: Unlawful Conduct
5.38.090: Teenage Dance Halls; Definitions
5.38.100: License Required
5.38.110: License Exemptions
5.38.120: License Issuance Conditions
5.38.130: License Fee
5.38.140: Hours Of Operation
5.38.150: Supervision During Operation
5.38.160: Admittance; Age Restrictions
5.38.170: Proof Of Age To Be Shown
5.38.180: Pass Out And Return Checks Prohibited
5.38.190: Lighting Of Premises And Parking Area
5.38.200: Unlawful Activities Designated
5.38.210: Alcoholic Beverages And Tobacco Prohibited
5.38.220: Sheriff's Department; Access For Inspection
5.38.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance to which the public generally may gain admission, with
or without the payment of a fee, but shall not include any dance conducted on
or in any public park, street or public grounds by permission of the city.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL: Any room, place or space in which a public dance is held or
in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is given for
hire. (1999 Code)
5.38.020: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
It is unlawful to operate a public dance hall or conduct a public dance in the
city without having first obtained a license therefor as required in this
chapter; provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to churches or
charitable organizations where the returns or proceeds are used entirely for
religious or charitable purposes. (1999 Code)
5.38.030: LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Information Required: Application for such licenses shall specify the
location of the proposed dances and the person or organization sponsoring the
same.
   B.   Character Of Applicant: No license shall be issued to a person not of
good moral character, or to a corporation or other organization which is not
represented by a person of good moral character. (1999 Code)
5.38.040: INVESTIGATION:
It shall be the duty of the sheriff to make or cause to be made an
investigation into the character of each applicant for license and report the
results of such investigation to the city. (1999 Code)
5.38.050: LICENSE FEES; EXEMPT ACTIVITIES:
The annual license fee for a public dance hall shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title; provided, that any bar, cabaret or other business
licensed elsewhere under this title where dining is permitted shall be deemed
exempt from the licensing requirements of this section. Except for bars,
cabarets or other business licenses deemed exempt hereunder, the fee imposed
hereunder is in addition to any other license fees. (1999 Code)
5.38.060: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a public dance or, having charge or
control thereof, to allow or permit any such dance or dancing to be held
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.,
local time, of the same day, or between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., local time, of the same day when daylight
savings time is in effect by law in the city; except that on New Year's day,
dancing shall not be allowed or permitted between the hours of three o'clock
(3:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., local time, of the same day. (1999
Code)
5.38.070: EXIT AND LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to conduct a public dance in any hall or place which is not
equipped with at least a minimum of two (2) exits of four feet (4') or more in
width, and any such hall or place shall maintain throughout such premises and
during business hours a constant minimum of one candlepower light, measured at
a level of five feet (5') above the floor. (1999 Code)
5.38.080: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
It shall be grounds for license revocation to indulge in or permit any unlawful
conduct at any public dance or in any public dance hall. (1999 Code)
5.38.090: TEENAGE DANCE HALLS; DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ESTABLISHMENT: Will be regarded to be designed or intended to attract or appeal
to a teenage clientele with its name and decor, the type of music provided, and
the form and content of its advertising, together with any other pertinent
factors indicate such attraction or appeal is the intent or the actual result
thereof.
PUBLIC TEENAGE DANCE HALL OR CLUB: Any room, house, building, structure or
place where dancing is permitted and public dancing is held, or in which
classes in dancing are held and instruction is given for hire and which is
designed or intended to attract or appeal to a teenage clientele, and to which
admittance may be gained by teenage persons, with or without payment or
admission.
TEENAGE PERSON: Persons between the ages of fifteen (15) and nineteen (19),
inclusive. (1999 Code)
5.38.100: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate a public teenage dance hall or club in the city
unless such hall or club is duly licensed as provided in this section. Any
establishment seeking to obtain or maintain a license under the provisions of
this section shall conform with all standards hereinafter enumerated. (1999
Code)
5.38.110: LICENSE EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dances, dance halls or clubs
conducted or sponsored by private or public schools, or by churches, for
students or members or invited guests thereof, even though an admission fee is
charged. All dances conducted in private homes on a private basis shall
likewise be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.38.120: LICENSE ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
The sheriff shall examine and investigate all applicants and the premises to be
licensed under this chapter. Following such initial examination, the
recommendations of the sheriff shall be made in writing to the license
official. (1999 Code)
5.38.130: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a teenage dance hall or club shall be as specified in the
fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.38.140: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be open
later than eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M., nor later than ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. on Sunday through Thursday during the scheduled school year. (1999
Code)
5.38.150: SUPERVISION DURING OPERATION:
All establishments required to be licensed under this chapter must be
maintained under the direct control and supervision of responsible adults
furnished by and at the expense of the management, such supervision to include
not only the dancing area but all anterooms and parking lots of the
establishment. There shall be at least one adult supervisor for every fifty
(50) persons or fractional part thereof in attendance. (1999 Code)
5.38.160: ADMITTANCE; AGE RESTRICTIONS:
Admittance to dances held in the establishments licensed hereunder must be
limited to those teenage persons, exclusive of supervisory personnel, between
fifteen (15) and nineteen (19) years of age, inclusive. (1999 Code)
5.38.170: PROOF OF AGE TO BE SHOWN:
The age of any person seeking admittance to a public teenage dance hall or club
shall be established by a showing of either a valid high school activity card
or a driver's license, indicating the age of the owner to be within the
provisions of section
5.38.160 of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.38.180: PASS OUT AND RETURN CHECKS PROHIBITED:
No pass out or return checks shall be issued for use by persons who leave the
dance premises or any rooms thereof, and all persons leaving the dance premises
or any rooms thereof must be required to pay the regular admission fee before
being permitted to reenter the dance premises. (1999 Code)
5.38.190: LIGHTING OF PREMISES AND PARKING AREA:
All persons licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain throughout the
licensed premises and during all hours of operation, a constant minimum of one
candlepower of light, measured at a level of five feet (5') above the floor,
and shall, in addition, provide for the adequate lighting of any parking area
adjacent to the licensed premises. (1999 Code)
5.38.200: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES DESIGNATED:
It is unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of this chapter to allow
or permit on the licensed premises any lewd dress or act, or any conduct of a
gross, violent or vulgar character. (1999 Code)
5.38.210: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO PROHIBITED:
There shall be no liquor, beer or tobacco sold, used or allowed to be consumed
on the licensed premises, or in its parking lot during operating hours. (1999
Code)
5.38.220: SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT; ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
The sheriff shall be permitted reasonable access to all premises licensed or
applying for a license under this chapter, shall make periodic inspections of
the premises after the licensing thereof, and shall report its findings to the
license official. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.40
EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
SECTION:
5.40.010: Employment Agent Defined; License Required
5.40.020: Exemptions
5.40.030: License Fee
5.40.040: License Application; State License Required
5.40.050: Bond
5.40.060: Certificate To Be Displayed
5.40.070: Regulations To Be Posted
5.40.080: Employer's Register To Be Kept
5.40.090: Labor Applicants' Register To Be Kept
5.40.100: Order For Work Required; Contents
5.40.110: Payments Before Assistance Is Furnished Prohibited
5.40.120: When Payments To Be Returned To Applicant
5.40.130: Limitations On Payments Generally
5.40.140: Dividing Payments With Employers Prohibited
5.40.150: Sending Workers To Certain Places Prohibited
5.40.160: Claims And Suits Against Employment Agents
5.40.170: Revocation Conditions
5.40.010: EMPLOYMENT AGENT DEFINED; LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to open, establish or
operate within the city any employment office for the purpose of procuring or
obtaining, for money or other valuable consideration, either directly or
indirectly, any work, employment or occupation for persons seeking the same, or
otherwise to engage in the business, or in any way to act as a broker or go
between for employers and persons seeking work, without first having obtained a
license to do so.
   B.   Definition: Any person performing any of the foregoing enumerated
services shall be deemed to be an "employment agent" within the meaning hereof.
(1999 Code)
5.40.020: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any religious or
charitable association that may assist in procuring employment for persons
seeking the same, or the state industrial commission, to obtain a license to do
so. (1999 Code)
5.40.030: LICENSE FEE:
All persons required to have a license, as provided herein, shall pay to the
city an annual license fee as specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.40.040: LICENSE APPLICATION; STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person applying for a license under the provisions hereof shall make
application to and pay the fee to the licensing official, and shall also file
with the application a duplicate copy of the license issued to such person by
the state industrial commission. No license shall be issued by the city until
the state license has been granted and a copy of the same filed with the
license official. (1999 Code)
5.40.050: BOND:
Each applicant for license under this chapter shall file with the city a
cashier's check or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to and approved by
the city attorney as specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. Each such check or letter of credit shall be made
payable to the city; shall be conditioned that the person applying for the
license will comply with all laws and ordinances regulating employment agencies
and all lawful requirements made by the state industrial commission; and shall
pay all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any misstatement,
misrepresentation, fraud or deceit of the licensed person, his agent or
employee, or that may result from any other violation of law or ordinance in
carrying on the business licensed hereunder. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-
9-2010)
5.40.060: CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED:
It shall be the duty of each person licensed under these provisions to keep his
city license publicly exposed to view in a conspicuous place in his office or
place of business. (1999 Code)
5.40.070: REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED:
The keeper of each employment office shall cause two (2) copies of these
provisions, printed in type of sufficient size to be legible and easily read,
to be conspicuously posted in each room used or occupied for the purposes of
such employment office. (1999 Code)
5.40.080: EMPLOYER'S REGISTER TO BE KEPT:
Each employment agent duly licensed as provided herein shall enter upon a
register to be kept for that purpose, and to be known as an "employer's
register", every order received from any corporation, company or individual
desiring the service of any persons seeking work or employment, the name and
the address of the corporation, company or individual from whom such order was
received, the number of persons wanted, nature of the work or employment, the
town or city, street and number, if any, where the work or employment is to be
furnished, and the wages to be paid. (1999 Code)
5.40.090: LABOR APPLICANTS' REGISTER TO BE KEPT:
   A.   Information Required: Each employment agent shall keep a register, to
be known as "labor applicants' register", which shall show:
      1.   The name of each person to whom information or assistance is
furnished, as is described in section
5.40.100 of this chapter and the amount of commission received in each case
therefor;
      2.   The name of each person who, having received and paid for, as herein
contemplated, information or assistance such as is described in section
5.40.100 of this chapter fails to secure the employment regarding which such
information or assistance is furnished, together with the reason why employment
was not secured by that person; and
      3.   The name of each person to whom return is made in accordance with
these provisions, together with the amount of money or the value of
consideration returned.
   B.   Open For Inspection: The registers required by these provisions shall
be open at all reasonable hours to the inspection of the sheriff, the license
official or an agent of the state industrial commission. (1999 Code)
5.40.100: ORDER FOR WORK REQUIRED; CONTENTS:
   A.   Contents Of Work Order: It is unlawful for any employment agent, by
himself, agent or employee, to furnish any workman to any employer of labor
without having a bona fide order for the same from the employer, and without
having secured from the employer the following information:
      1.   The name of the prospective employer;
      2.   The place of employment;
      3.   The kind of labor to be performed;
      4.   The wages to be paid;
      5.   The length of time of employment, if definite, or if not definite,
so stated;
      6.   The date of paydays, whether weekly, semimonthly or monthly;
      7.   The eating and sleeping accommodations and cost thereof, whether
such accommodations are conducted by the employer or by others under contract,
or other arrangements;
      8.   The cost of transportation to the place of employment, and whether
or not the same is advanced by the employer, definitely stating the terms and
conditions under which the same are to be repaid;
      9.   Where and to whom the employee is to report;
      10.   Any information that will give the employee a full and
comprehensive knowledge of the conditions under which he will be expected to
work; and
      11.   Whether or not a strike or lockout is in progress among the
employees of the employer.
   B.   Form Of Ticket: The above information shall be set out in detail on a
ticket, the form of which may be prescribed by the state industrial commission,
and which ticket, when issued to workmen or prospective employees, shall be
signed by the employment agent issuing the same and by the prospective employee
receiving the same.
   C.   Distribution Of Copies: One copy of such ticket shall be retained by
the prospective employee and one delivered by him to the employer, and a full
copy of the same shall be retained by the employment agent.
   D.   Commission, Fee Stated: The ticket shall also show the amount of
commission or fee paid by the employee. (1999 Code)
5.40.110: PAYMENTS BEFORE ASSISTANCE IS FURNISHED PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any employment agent to receive, directly or indirectly, any
money or other valuable consideration from any person seeking employment for
any information or assistance furnished or to be furnished by the agent to such
person enabling or tending to enable the person to secure employment, prior to
the time the information or assistance is actually furnished. (1999 Code)
5.40.120: WHEN PAYMENTS TO BE RETURNED TO APPLICANT:
It is unlawful for any employment agent to retain, directly or indirectly, any
money or any other valuable consideration received for any information or
assistance described in section
5.40.100 of this chapter if the person for whom the information or assistance
is furnished fails, through no neglect or delay of his own, to secure the
employment regarding which the information or assistance is furnished; the
money or consideration shall be forthwith returned by the agent to the payer
upon demand therefor by the payer or his agent. (1999 Code)
5.40.130: LIMITATIONS ON PAYMENTS GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any employment agent to receive as commission, directly or
indirectly, for any information or assistance described in section
5.40.100 of this chapter any money or other consideration that is in excess of
twenty five percent (25%) of the amount actually earned in the employment
during the first thirty (30) days if such employment was ended during a thirty
(30) day period. (1999 Code)
5.40.140: DIVIDING PAYMENTS WITH EMPLOYERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any employment agent sending out help to contractors or
other employers of labor to divide the fees collected from any workman, or to
pay any part of the fee to the employer to whom such labor is sent, or any
foreman or other person in the employ of such employer. (1999 Code)
5.40.150: SENDING WORKERS TO CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any employment agent, by himself, agent or employee,
knowingly to send any help to any house of assignation or to any other house or
place kept for immoral purposes. (1999 Code)
5.40.160: CLAIMS AND SUITS AGAINST EMPLOYMENT AGENTS:
All claims or suits brought in any court against any employment agent may be
brought in the name of the party injured upon bond deposited with the city by
the employment agent, as provided herein. (1999 Code)
5.40.170: REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
The city council may revoke any license upon proof of violation of any
provisions of this section, or for any other good and sufficient cause,
including, but not limited to, a recommendation by the state industrial
commission that the license should be revoked, after notice to the licensee and
opportunity to be heard by the mayor. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.42
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
SECTION:
5.42.010: Excavation Defined
5.42.020: Operations; Distance From Residential Zones
5.42.030: Operations; Reduction In Distance Permitted When
5.42.040: Exemptions; Commercial Disposal Of Materials
5.42.050: Exemptions; Topographical Or Other Conditions
5.42.060: Exemptions; Removal Of Less Than One Thousand Cubic Yards
5.42.070: Exemptions; Removal Of Sod
5.42.080: Exemptions; Removal Of Topsoil
5.42.090: Hours Of Operation; Designated
5.42.100: Hours Of Operation; Modifications
5.42.110: Restrictions, Limitations And Controls Generally
5.42.120: Removal Of Temporary Structures And Materials
5.42.130: Excavation And Backfilling
5.42.140: Rehabilitation Requirements
5.42.150: Enforcement; Development License Official Authority
5.42.160: Inspection And Stop Work Orders
5.42.170: Existing Operations; Compliance Required
5.42.180: Violation; Penalty; Violation Of Stop Work Orders
5.42.010: EXCAVATION DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, "excavation" means the removal of clay, soil,
granite, flagstone, slate, shale, limestone, sandstone, sand or gravel from the
earth by excavating, stripping, leveling or any other process, together with
all other types of mining operations where material is removed from the earth.
(1999 Code)
5.42.020: OPERATIONS; DISTANCE FROM RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Subject to any modifications permitted in this chapter, no part of an
excavation operation or access road, parking area, office building or crushing,
screening, washing, mixing or other type of processing operation, shall be
permitted closer than two hundred feet (200') to a residential zone boundary or
a subdivision, or within fifty feet (50') of a public highway right of way,
except for accessory access roads. (1999 Code)
5.42.030: OPERATIONS; REDUCTION IN DISTANCE PERMITTED WHEN:
Relating to existing operations, the city shall, consistent with the intent of
these regulations and where the character of the terrain, of ownership of land,
of surrounding development, or other special conditions would justify such
modification, permit a reduction in the required yard as specified in section
5.42.050 of this chapter, so as not to impose unreasonable requirements;
however, in no case shall the required distances for any excavation or
accessory structure be less than fifty feet (50') from a residential zone.
(1999 Code)
5.42.040: EXEMPTIONS; COMMERCIAL DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any operation that is
incident to the legitimate use of the premises. However, when such operation
involves the commercial disposal of the material removed, such operation shall
be limited to a maximum period of six (6) months. (1999 Code)
5.42.050: EXEMPTIONS; TOPOGRAPHICAL OR OTHER CONDITIONS:
In cases where unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions exist,
variations and exemptions from this chapter may be made by the mayor after
recommendation by the city planning commission. (1999 Code)
5.42.060: EXEMPTIONS; REMOVAL OF LESS THAN ONE THOUSAND CUBIC YARDS:
Excavation over a six (6) month period of less than one thousand (1,000) cubic
yards from a single parcel of land, as recorded in the office of the city
recorder, is not subject to the requirements of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.42.070: EXEMPTIONS; REMOVAL OF SOD:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the removal of sod. (1999
Code)
5.42.080: EXEMPTIONS; REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the removal of topsoil,
providing the operation is not closer than ten feet (10') to any property line
or to a depth in excess of eighteen inches (18"), or such as to adversely
affect the drainage of the area. (1999 Code)
5.42.090: HOURS OF OPERATION; DESIGNATED:
Excavation operations shall not begin before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
shall not continue after the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M., and no operation
shall take place on Sunday or legal holidays. During periods of national or
unusual emergency, time and hours of operation may be altered at the discretion
of the mayor. (1999 Code)
5.42.100: HOURS OF OPERATION; MODIFICATIONS:
The mayor may, consistent with the intent of these regulations, modify the
provisions relative to permitted hours of operation of an excavation operation
after notice to interested parties and the holding of a hearing on the matter.
(1999 Code)
5.42.110: RESTRICTIONS, LIMITATIONS AND CONTROLS GENERALLY:
All excavation operations conducted or carried on in the city are subject to
the limitations, restrictions and controls specified below:
   A.   Use Of Equipment; Road Maintenance: All equipment and machinery used on
the site of an excavation operation shall be constructed, maintained and
operated in such a manner as to reduce dust, noise, vibration, smoke, welding
lights, and odor to a minimum. Access and haulage roads on the site shall be
maintained in a dust free condition by surfacing or other treatment.
   B.   Fencing And Barriers: Fencing or other suitable barriers shall be
created and maintained on the excavation site where such fencing is practicable
and necessary because of dangerous conditions created by the excavation. (1999
Code)
   C.   Manufacturing Processes: The manufacture of concrete building blocks or
other similar blocks, the production or manufacture of lime products, the
production of ready mixed concrete, the production of asphalt mixes, and any
similar production or manufacturing processes that might be related to the
excavation operation shall not be permitted except as otherwise provided in the
city land use ordinance. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Washing Of Sand And Gravel: The washing of sand and gravel shall be
done so as to prevent the discharge of wastewater directly into adjacent
natural watercourses, or onto any public or private roads or any private
property without the consent of the owner. (1999 Code)
5.42.120: REMOVAL OF TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND MATERIALS:
Within one year after the cessation of the operation, all temporary structures
(except fences), equipment, rock piles, rubble heaps or other debris shall be
removed or backfilled into the excavation so as to leave the premises in a neat
and orderly condition. (1999 Code)
5.42.130: EXCAVATION AND BACKFILLING:
   A.   Backfilling: Where backfilling is required, the excavation shall be
graded or backfilled with nontoxic, nonflammable, noncombustible solids. The
materials used or the method of fill shall not be such as to create a health
hazard, nor shall they be objectionable because of odor or unsightliness.
   B.   Stagnant Water: Stagnant water shall not be allowed to collect and
remain on the graded or backfilled area.
   C.   Topography: The peaks and depressions of the excavation area shall be
reduced to a surface which will result in level or gently sloping topography in
substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding, and which will
minimize erosion due to rainfall.
   D.   Slope: In any rehabilitation procedure that takes place in sand and
gravel pits or on other sites where material is of loose or friable nature, no
slope shall be left that exceeds thirty degrees (30o) or the normal angle of
repose of the material involved, whichever is less. (1999 Code)
5.42.140: REHABILITATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Rehabilitation Plan: In order to ensure that the area of excavation
operation shall be rehabilitated, the owner or operator shall, prior to the
commencement of excavation, submit to the city four (4) copies of a plan for
such rehabilitation that shall provide, among other things, acceptable bonding.
The plan for rehabilitation shall be in the form of the following:
      1.   A description of all phases of the contemplated operation and the
specific mention of the type of machinery and equipment that will or might be
necessary to the performance of the operation. When the excavation operation
shall include the washing of sand and gravel, the estimated daily quantity of
water required, its source and disposition, shall be made a part of the
description;
      2.   A legal description of the proposed site, with a map showing its
location with indications of private access roads, existing or proposed, and of
public highways adjacent to the site which will be affected by the operation;
      3.   A topographic map of the area at a minimum contour interval of five
feet (5'), extending beyond the site to the nearest public street or highway or
to a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') on all sides; and
      4.   A physical rehabilitation plan showing the proposed contours after
rehabilitation and other special features of rehabilitation, and the method by
which such rehabilitation is to be accomplished. When the excavation site is
greater than ten (10) acres, such plans shall, in addition to the foregoing,
show each ten (10) acre section or portion thereof exceeding the first ten (10)
acre section. Upon completion of excavation of the first ten (10) acre section,
the owner or operator shall commence rehabilitation of the first ten (10) acre
section. Rehabilitation of the first ten (10) acre section must be completed
before excavation may begin on the third ten (10) acre section or portion
thereof. Upon completion of excavation of any subsequent ten (10) acre section,
rehabilitation of such section shall be commenced and completed in the same
manner and sequence as rehabilitation of the first ten (10) acre section; that
is, rehabilitation of the second ten (10) acre section shall be commenced upon
completion of excavation of such section and shall be completed before
excavation may begin on the fourth ten (10) acre section, and so forth.
   B.   Modification Of Plan: At any stage during the rehabilitation, the plan
may be modified by the submission and subsequent approval of an amended
rehabilitation plan such as that required in the original application.
   C.   Planning Commission Action On Plan: The rehabilitation plan and all
data and information pertaining thereto shall be referred to the city planning
commission within fifteen (15) days after its receipt for report and
recommendation. If approved, the planning commission shall express its written
approval, with whatever conditions are attached, by returning one copy of the
rehabilitation plan signed by the chairperson of the planning commission. If
the plan is disapproved, the planning commission shall, in the same manner and
within three (3) days, indicate its disapproval in writing, and the reasons
therefor. (1999 Code)
5.42.150: ENFORCEMENT; DEVELOPMENT LICENSE OFFICIAL AUTHORITY:
The license official is hereby designated and authorized as the officer charged
with the enforcement of these provisions. (1999 Code)
5.42.160: INSPECTION AND STOP WORK ORDERS:
It shall be the duty of the license official to inspect or cause to be
inspected at regular intervals, as often as necessary, all excavations. Where
it is determined by the license official that any excavation project is not
proceeding in compliance with the provisions of these provisions, the license
official may order, or cause to be ordered, the work on the project stopped by
notice in writing served on any persons engaged in working or causing such work
to be done on the project, and all persons shall forthwith stop such work until
the project is brought into compliance with these provisions and the license
official. In addition, the license official may also pursue appropriate legal
action in the courts. Failure to implement administrative or legal action shall
not legalize any violation of these provisions. (1999 Code)
5.42.170: EXISTING OPERATIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Within ninety (90) days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in these
provisions, existing operations shall comply with all the provisions hereof.
(1999 Code)
5.42.180: VIOLATION; PENALTY; VIOLATION OF STOP WORK ORDERS:
Any person violating any provision or provisions of these provisions shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person violating the terms of a stop work
order issued pursuant to these provisions shall be deemed to be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is
committed, continued or permitted by such person. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.44
EXPRESSMEN AND DRAYMEN
SECTION:
5.44.010: License Required
5.44.020: License Fee
5.44.030: Vehicle Identification
5.44.040: Receiving Or Concealing Stolen Goods
5.44.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct the business of drayman, carter,
trucker or expressman in the city without first having obtained a license
therefor. (1999 Code)
5.44.020: LICENSE FEE:
In addition to the general business license fee, expressmen and draymen shall
pay those annual fees required on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.44.030: VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION:
Every vehicle used for such business shall have printed thereon, in a place
easily visible from the side of the vehicle, the name and address of the owner
in letters legible to one of normal eyesight at a distance of twenty five feet
(25'). (1999 Code)
5.44.040: RECEIVING OR CONCEALING STOLEN GOODS:
It is unlawful for any drayman, expressman, carter or trucker to receive, move
or conceal any goods or articles that he knows or has reason to suspect may be
stolen. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.46
EXTERMINATORS, FUMIGATORS AND PEST CONTROL
SECTION:
5.46.010: Definitions
5.46.020: License Required
5.46.030: License Application; Contents
5.46.040: Investigation
5.46.050: License Fee
5.46.060: Employee Qualifications And Testing
5.46.070: Written Examination Of Employees
5.46.080: Operation Rules And Regulations
5.46.090: Fumigation Limitations; Exceptions
5.46.100: Authority To Refuse Permits
5.46.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section, "exterminator", "fumigator" or "pest control
operator" means any person who uses any toxic, noxious, poisonous or dangerous
substance, gaseous, liquid or otherwise, specified by rules and regulations
adopted by the Salt Lake city-county health department as liable to affect
human beings by causing severe sickness or death, and used for the
extermination of household insects, vermin or rodents. (1999 Code)
5.46.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a fumigator,
exterminator or structural pest control operator in the city without first
obtaining a license to do so. (1999 Code)
5.46.030: LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
Every person desiring a license to engage in the business of a fumigator,
exterminator or structural pest control operator shall make application to the
license official and shall with his application file a sworn statement showing
the experience and training tending to qualify the applicant for the business
of fumigating, exterminating, or pest control operator. (1999 Code)
5.46.040: INVESTIGATION:
The application for such license, together with the statement of the applicant,
shall be investigated within five (5) business days after receiving such
application. The license official then shall make report to the city council as
to the fitness of the applicant to act as a fumigator, exterminator or pest
control operator, and as to his knowledge and experience with poisonous or
noxious gases, chemicals, compounds or products used for fumigating or
exterminating purposes, and shall also report his knowledge and familiarity
with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Salt Lake city-county health
department governing the use for fumigating or exterminating purposes. The
license official shall make his recommendations as to the granting or denying
of the said application. Upon receipt of the report, the mayor shall act upon
the application as it shall deem fair, just and proper, in regard to the
granting or denying of the same. (1999 Code)
5.46.050: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for engaging in the business of a fumigator,
exterminator or pest control operator shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.46.060: EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS AND TESTING:
Each and every employee of the licensee must be qualified to use dangerous
substances and must prove to the license official that he has training and
experience necessary to do the same and will comply with all Salt Lake city-
county health department rules and regulations regulating the same and obtain
all necessary permits. (1999 Code)
5.46.070: WRITTEN EXAMINATION OF EMPLOYEES:
No person shall be engaged by a licensee to work at the occupation of an
exterminator, fumigator or pest control operator employing the use of hydro-
cyanic acid gas and other dangerous gasses or chemicals, compounds or products
used for exterminating purposes without first filing an application and
statement of experience and qualifications with, and receiving approval of, the
Salt Lake city-county health department, and pass an appropriate examination
concerning his qualifications to operate under this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.46.080: OPERATION RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In every building to be fumigated, the following rules and regulations shall
apply:
   A.   Notify the occupant or occupants twenty four (24) hours in advance of
the fumigation and see that all occupants of the building or portion thereof to
be fumigated are vacated, except as set forth hereafter;
   B.   All tenants or persons residing on either side and above or below in
multiple housing units shall be vacated, except that if such building is old or
dilapidated or has been remodeled into apartments, it must be entirely vacated;
   C.   All openings, vents, doors, windows, cracks, breaks, openings around
utility pipes, chimney openings and fireplaces must be sealed airtight before
the commencement of the operation;
   D.   All windows must be securely fastened from the inside and all doors
must be locked and all keys placed in the possession of the operator;
   E.   All liquids and fatty foods in unsealed containers must be removed from
the premises;
   F.   When a permit to fumigate is issued, the health department and the fire
department must be advised of the date of the fumigation, supplying the hour
and the day, the place, and duration of the fumigation;
   G.   When fumigated gases are chemically generated, the container in which
the gas is generated must be either wooden or earthen;
   H.   Prior to leaving the premises upon injecting it with gas, a warning
card approved by the license official must be securely attached to all entrance
ways and doors, and must bear the following message in red on white cards:
      1.   "DANGER" (in letters not less than 2 inches in size).
      2.   "FUMIGATED WITH                     , A DEADLY POISON GAS".
      3.   Display prominently the skull and crossbones.
      4.   All persons are warned to keep away.
      5.   Name and address and telephone number of operator.
   I.   After the fumigation has run its course, the operator must open all
windows, doors and vents, and must, in addition, manipulate bedding,
mattresses, draperies and clothing in congested spaces, to eliminate gas and
gas pockets;
   J.   Tenants shall not reoccupy fumigated premises until twenty four (24)
hours after the premises are opened for airing; and
   K.   Residue from chemical general gas must be disposed of in compliance
with all applicable federal, state and city laws, rules, regulations and
ordinances. (1999 Code)
5.46.090: FUMIGATION LIMITATIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
It is the general policy of the city to strictly limit fumigation, and to deny
permits therefor except in the following instances:
   A.   Industrial plants that are isolated so as not to jeopardize adjacent
properties; and
   B.   Where the problem of control has not responded to other methods, and
then only when considered safe by the city. (1999 Code)
5.46.100: AUTHORITY TO REFUSE PERMITS:
The license official is empowered to refuse to issue any permit and to forbid
fumigation of any building, house, structure or vehicle when in his opinion the
fumigation is not necessary. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.48
FIRE AND DAMAGED GOODS SALES, LIQUIDATION TYPE SALES, SWAP MEETS AND FLEA
MARKETS, SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
5.48.010: Fire And Damaged Goods Defined
5.48.020: Permit Required
5.48.030: Permit Application
5.48.040: Permit Fee
5.48.050: Permit Issuance Conditions; Duration
5.48.060: Permit Renewal
5.48.070: Record Keeping Requirements
5.48.080: Advertising Restrictions
5.48.090: Adding To Original Inventory Prohibited
5.48.100: Unlawful Sales; Each Sale A Separate Offense
5.48.110: Liquidation Type Sales; Definitions
5.48.120: License Required
5.48.130: Exemptions From Chapter Provisions
5.48.140: License Application
5.48.150: License Fee
5.48.160: License Issuance; Year In Business Required When
5.48.170: License Issuance; Conditions And Term
5.48.180: License Display Requirements
5.48.190: License Renewal
5.48.200: License Revocation Conditions
5.48.210: Rules And Regulations For Conduct And Advertising
5.48.220: Record Keeping Requirements
5.48.230: Mingling Of Goods Prohibited
5.48.240: Unlawful Sales; Each Sale A Separate Offense
5.48.250: Swap Meets And Flea Markets; Definitions
5.48.260: License Required
5.48.270: License Application; Investigation
5.48.280: License Fee
5.48.290: Swap Meet Licensee; Right To Issue Daily Business Licenses
5.48.300: Pawnbroker And Secondhand Dealer Restrictions
5.48.310: License Revocation
5.48.320: Posting Of Regulations Concerning Lost Property
5.48.330: Sales Subject To Law; Prohibited Sales Designated
5.48.340: Sellers Licensing Requirements
5.48.350: Time And Procedure For Sales
5.48.360: Liability Of Principal
5.48.370: Record Keeping Requirements Generally
5.48.380: Lists Of Lost Or Stolen Property
5.48.390: Report Of Suspected Lost Or Stolen Goods
5.48.400: Record Keeping; Reports To Sheriff
5.48.410: Violation; Penalty
5.48.420: Secondhand And Junk Dealers; Definitions
5.48.430: Exemptions
5.48.440: License Required
5.48.450: License Application; Issuance Conditions
5.48.460: License Fees
5.48.470: License; Bond Required; Exception
5.48.480: Relocation Of Business; License Required
5.48.490: Reporting Changes In License Information
5.48.500: License Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
5.48.510: Hearing On Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
5.48.520: Record Keeping Requirements Generally
5.48.530: Record Keeping; Legibility And Access For Inspection
5.48.540: Submission Of Certificate Copies
5.48.550: Operation; Regulations To Be Posted
5.48.560: Operation; Hours Of Closure
5.48.570: Property; Holding Period Before Disposition
5.48.580: Property; Redemption After Forfeit
5.48.590: Stolen Goods Reports
5.48.600: Computer Reporting
5.48.610: Premises; Pawnbroker Partition Requirements
5.48.620: Premises; Barriers Required Where
5.48.630: Junkyard Premises Enclosure
5.48.640: Junk Dealer Vehicles
5.48.650: Pawnbroker; Liability Of Licensee
5.48.660: Secondhand Dealer Business Restrictions
5.48.670: Dealing With Minors Prohibited
5.48.010: FIRE AND DAMAGED GOODS DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "fire and damaged goods" means and applies to goods,
wares and merchandise being offered for sale as a result of fire, smoke, water,
wind, earthquakes, acts of God, or other incidents of similar nature, but does
not apply to goods, wares and merchandise damaged in transit or by handling,
dropping, nicking, scratching or other similar damage occurring within or
incident to the regular conduct of business. (1999 Code)
5.48.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Fire and damaged goods shall be sold only in strict compliance with the terms
of a permit to be issued by the license official. (1999 Code)
5.48.030: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Applications shall contain such information as the license official shall from
time to time require, including the following:
   A.   A complete inventory of all goods, wares and merchandise existing at
the place of business immediately after the occurrence of the reason or cause
of damage;
   B.   The items of such inventory that will be the subject of the sale; and
   C.   An affidavit of the correctness of the inventory and the cause of the
damage. (1999 Code)
5.48.040: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for the permit or any renewal required by section
5.48.020 of this chapter shall be as specified on the fee schedule adopted
pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.48.050: PERMIT ISSUANCE CONDITIONS; DURATION:
Upon the filing of the inventory and affidavit referred to in section
5.48.030 of this chapter, the license official shall issue a permit to conduct
a fire and damaged goods sale that shall be effective for a thirty (30) day
period following its issuance. (1999 Code)
5.48.060: PERMIT RENEWAL:
A permit shall be renewed for an additional thirty (30) day period, provided a
sworn affidavit and inventory list showing the unsold goods, wares or
merchandise is furnished to the license official and the official is satisfied
that such items were part of and included in the original inventory. In no
event shall a permit be renewed more than twice. (1999 Code)
5.48.070: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The permittee shall keep complete and suitable records and books of all sale
items that shall be available at all times to inspection by the license
official. The inventory list shall be revised at the close of business each day
by the permittee so that the items disposed of during that day shall be clearly
marked. The records and inventory referred to in this chapter shall be
submitted to the license official upon request. (1999 Code)
5.48.080: ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to advertise a fire and damaged goods sale in
other than a concise and clear manner, so as not to deceive the public. All
advertising shall state that such sale is not a termination of the entire
business, but is a special sale. (1999 Code)
5.48.090: ADDING TO ORIGINAL INVENTORY PROHIBITED:
No permittee shall add, cause to, or permit to be added to the fire and damaged
goods, any items not described in the original inventory. (1999 Code)
5.48.100: UNLAWFUL SALES; EACH SALE A SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each sale of fire and damaged goods made without a permit, or of items not
included in the original inventory and designated therein as the subject of
such sale, shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.48.110: LIQUIDATION TYPE SALES; DEFINITIONS:
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT AND ADVERTISING: Any and all means of
conveying to the public notice of sale, or notice of intention to conduct a
sale.
SALE: A. Any sale of, or any offer to sell to the public or any group, goods,
wares or merchandise on order, in transit, or in stock, in connection with a
declared purpose, as set forth by advertising that such sale is anticipatory to
or for the purpose of termination, liquidation, revision, windup, anticipatory
removal, dissolution or abandonment of the business or that portion of the
business conducted at any location; and
   B.   All sales advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public
the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the
business or that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be
removed, interrupted, discontinued or changed; and
   C.   All sales advertised to be "adjustor's sale", "assignee's sale",
"administrator's sale", "going out of business sale", "insurance salvage sale",
"last days sale", "lease expires sale", "liquidation sale", "reorganization
sale", "removal sale", "quitting business sale", "we quit sale", "wholesale
closing out sale", "fixtures for sale", or advertised by any other expression
or characterization or phrase of similar language that would reasonably convey
to the public that the sale is being conducted as a result of such occurrences
as enumerated above, which are not intended to be all inclusive but refer to
type or class of sales. (1999 Code)
5.48.120: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to publish or conduct any "sale", as defined in
this chapter, without first obtaining a license to do so. This license shall be
in addition to any other license which may be required by any other ordinances.
(1999 Code)
5.48.130: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
The following persons shall be exempt from the scope and operation of this
chapter:
   A.   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction; or
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers, such as the sheriff. (1999 Code)
5.48.140: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for such license shall be in writing, executed by the applicant
under oath, and shall contain the following information:
   A.   Type of sale to be conducted and reason for conducting such sale;
   B.   A description of the place where such sale is to be held;
   C.   An itemized list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for
sale, including those on order and not received;
   D.   Where and from whom such stock was purchased or acquired, and, if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition; and
   E.   Any additional information that the license official may require. (1999
Code)
5.48.150: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for the license required by section
5.48.120 of this chapter shall be as specified in the fee schedule adopted
pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.48.160: LICENSE ISSUANCE; YEAR IN BUSINESS REQUIRED WHEN:
No person, company or corporation shall be eligible for a license, nor shall a
license be issued to any person, company or corporation unless they shall have
been previously licensed to do business at the same location of such closing
sale for the three hundred sixty five (365) day period preceding the beginning
of the sale, except in those instances where a bona fide hardship would be
created, and in such instances proof must be furnished to the license official
that:
   A.   Such hardship exists; and
   B.   At the conclusion of such closing sale all and any business
transactions of that particular applicant will completely and permanently cease
and desist. (1999 Code)
5.48.170: LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS AND TERM:
Upon the filing of an application and a finding by the license official, after
investigation, that the statements contained therein appear to be true and are
not false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect, a license shall
be issued for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, upon the payment of the
fee prescribed in this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.48.180: LICENSE DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS:
Upon the commencement of any sale, and for the duration thereof, the license
therefor shall be conspicuously displayed near the entrance to the premises.
(1999 Code)
5.48.190: LICENSE RENEWAL:
Upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock itemized in the original
application has not been entirely disposed of, the license official shall renew
such license for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days. In no event shall
a license be renewed more than twice. For each renewal, a fee as specified in
title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code shall be collected. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.48.200: LICENSE REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
A license granted pursuant to this section may be revoked by the license
official if:
   A.   The licensee has failed to include in the inventory required by the
provisions of this chapter the goods, wares and merchandise, or any part
thereof, required to be contained in such inventory;
   B.   The licensee has added, caused to be added, or permitted to be added
any goods, wares or merchandise not described in the original inventory; or
   C.   The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or of
the laws pertaining to advertising. (1999 Code)
5.48.210: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CONDUCT AND ADVERTISING:
The license official may make such rules and regulations for the conduct and
advertisement of the "sales" defined in this chapter as may be necessary to
carry out the purposes thereof. Such rules and regulations must be submitted
to, and be approved by, the mayor. (1999 Code)
5.48.220: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The licensee shall keep suitable books and records and make them available at
all times to the license official. (1999 Code)
5.48.230: MINGLING OF GOODS PROHIBITED:
No person contemplating conducting any "sale", as defined in this chapter, or
during the continuance of such sale, shall order any goods, wares or
merchandise for the purpose of selling them at such sale. Any unusual purchase
or addition to the stock of such goods, wares or merchandise within sixty (60)
days before the filing of such application for a license to conduct such sale
shall be presumptive evidence that such purchase or addition was made in
contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling it at such sale.
(1999 Code)
5.48.240: UNLAWFUL SALES; EACH SALE A SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each sale made without a license, and each sale of goods, wares or merchandise
that is not inventoried and described in the original application shall
constitute a separate offense under this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.48.250: SWAP MEETS AND FLEA MARKETS; DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
FLEA MARKET: Means and shall be considered a swap meet.
SWAP MEET LICENSEE: Any person who rents, lends or leases his premises to
temporary sellers for use as a marketplace to barter and exchange goods. (1999
Code)
5.48.260: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or charity to hold a swap meet
or flea market without having first obtained a license therefor as is provided
in this section. The license fee for a charity may be waived by the mayor upon
application. (1999 Code)
5.48.270: LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
Application for a swap meet license shall be made to the license official, and
shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business, and the
number of employees intended to be engaged. The sheriff or any other officer of
the city designated by the city shall investigate each applicant for such
license, and shall report back to the mayor whether or not such applicant is a
person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods,
burglary, larceny, or robbery. The license of any swap meet licensee who is
presently in business and so convicted shall be revoked. (1999 Code)
5.48.280: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a swap meet license shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title, which shall be in addition to the general business
license fee. (1999 Code)
5.48.290: SWAP MEET LICENSEE; RIGHT TO ISSUE DAILY BUSINESS LICENSES:
A swap meet licensee shall have the right to issue daily business licenses to
resident sellers upon receiving the required fees as allowed by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, and the signed, certified license applications
listing the goods to be sold or exchanged. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-
2010)
5.48.300: PAWNBROKER AND SECONDHAND DEALER RESTRICTIONS:
No swap meet licensee shall conduct the business of pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer without having obtained the licenses required for such dealers in
addition to his swap meet license. (1999 Code)
5.48.310: LICENSE REVOCATION:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any swap meet licensee
violating the provisions of this chapter may have his license revoked or
suspended. (1999 Code)
5.48.320: POSTING OF REGULATIONS CONCERNING LOST PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a swap meet unless he shall keep
conspicuously posted in his place of business copies of this section and Utah
Code Annotated section 76-6-407 (or any amendments thereto) dealing with lost
property converted by a finder. (1999 Code)
5.48.330: SALES SUBJECT TO LAW; PROHIBITED SALES DESIGNATED:
All swap meet sales shall be in accordance with law. No sales of firearms,
pyrotechnics, ammunition, explosives, alcoholic beverages or medicines shall be
made by sellers on the swap meet licensee's premises. No seller under the age
of eighteen (18) shall be entitled to sell or dispose of goods at the swap meet
without the written, notarized permission of his parents or legal guardian.
(1999 Code)
5.48.340: SELLERS LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Certification: All sellers shall apply to the swap meet licensee for a
license to sell on the premises of a swap meet licensee. Along with the fee
allowed by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, each seller must furnish to the swap meet licensee a
signed statement containing the required information outlined in section
5.48.140 of this chapter, along with the following certification: (Ord. 2010-
27, 12-9-2010)
I certify that I am the lawful and legal owner of the listed property which is
free and clear from all liens and encumbrances. I further certify that the
property descriptions are true and correct and I am aware that the use of a
fictitious name or furnishing false information on this form is punishable by
law. I am also aware that a copy of this application shall be forwarded to the
sheriff within twenty four (24) hours after it is submitted to the owner or
manager of the premises where the sale is held.
   B.   Issuance; Revocation: Upon receiving the required fee and application
form, the swap meet licensee shall furnish to the seller a daily business
license permit which will allow the seller to sell on the day requested,
subject to revocation by the sheriff for the violation of any provisions of
this chapter. Any seller having his license revoked by the sheriff or license
official may petition the mayor within ten (10) days after the revocation for
review of such revocation. The mayor, upon reviewing the action of the sheriff
or license official, may rescind the revocation or make the revocation
permanent by prohibiting the seller from selling at a swap meet for a period of
up to one year. (1999 Code)
5.48.350: TIME AND PROCEDURE FOR SALES:
   A.   Specified: Resident sellers must apply for a daily business license no
less than seven (7) days in advance of the day they wish to utilize a swap meet
licensee's premises. Nonresident sellers must apply to the detective division
of the sheriff's office for the screening of all goods to be sold on a swap
meet licensee's premises, and the issuance of a nonresident seller's license
prior to the date of the sale. However, if the swap meet licensee employs, at
its own expense, a sheriff's deputy to enforce and administer the licensing
provision of this chapter, then resident sellers may utilize the swap meet
licensee's premises on the same day application is made for daily business
permits.
   B.   Resident Defined: For purposes of this chapter, "resident" means a
person or entity who has a valid Utah driver's license, a Utah university or
college ID containing a resident seller's picture, or a Utah business license.
(1999 Code)
5.48.360: LIABILITY OF PRINCIPAL:
The holder of a swap meet license is liable for any and all acts of his
employees, and for any violation by them of the provisions of this chapter.
(1999 Code)
5.48.370: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
   A.   Specified: Every swap meet licensee doing business in the city shall
keep a record of all sellers wishing to utilize his premises. The record shall
contain:
      1.   A description of the seller, including:
         a.   Name, including middle initial;
         b.   Address;
         c.   Sex;
         d.   Nationality;
         e.   Height;
         f.   Weight;
         g.   Color of hair;
         h.   Color of eyes;
         i.   Driver's license number and state of issue;
         j.   Occupation; and
         k.   Date of birth.
      2.   A description of the seller's vehicle, including:
         a.   Make;
         b.   Model;
         c.   Year;
         d.   Color;
         e.   License number and state; and
         f.   Registered owner if different than person offering articles for
sale or exchange; and
      3.   A description of articles offered for sale, including:
         a.   Name of article;
         b.   Size;
         c.   Color;
         d.   Serial number or ID mark;
         e.   The number of a seller's sales tax permit, if any;
         f.   The number of the seller's daily business license permit; and
         g.   The date the seller applied to sell.
   B.   Used Merchandise: Provided, however, that for used merchandise with no
ID marks, where the value of the goods is under five dollars ($5.00), the
licensee may simply note on the form approved by the sheriff that the seller is
selling the following types of items: clothing, books, dishes, art work,
bedding, toys, produce, bottles, or other types of household items specified on
the form. (1999 Code)
5.48.380: LISTS OF LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY:
The sheriff shall circulate a list of reported lost and stolen property to all
swap meet licensees. (1999 Code)
5.48.390: REPORT OF SUSPECTED LOST OR STOLEN GOODS:
It shall be the duty of every swap meet licensee to report to the sheriff any
article he has reason to believe was stolen, or lost and found by the person
attempting to sell it. (1999 Code)
5.48.400: RECORD KEEPING; REPORTS TO SHERIFF:
It is unlawful for any swap meet licensee to fail to deliver on the date of
application to the sheriff, a legible and accurate copy of the records required
under section
5.48.370 of this chapter, along with the seller's daily business license permit
fee. (1999 Code)
5.48.410: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any person violating the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. No seller shall be
deemed to have substantially complied with these provisions if:
   A.   He fails to list all the property proposed to be sold or exchanged; or
   B.   He fails to list the correct serial number or identifying mark(s) of
such property; and
   C.   He gives false information as to his identity or the property's
identity, even though such information is not specifically required by this
chapter. (1999 Code)
5.48.420: SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS; DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning as
defined in this section:
ANTIQUE DEALER: Any person engaged in the business of selling old or archaic
items which are indicative of an older culture.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS: Any organization, group or church which receives
personal property or secondhand goods from persons, groups or businesses but
does not pay money or any other thing of value in return for received personal
property or secondhand goods. Charitable organizations are not to be licensed
or regulated by this section.
COIN DEALER: Any person who engages in the business of buying or selling coins
having numismatic value. Coin dealers, when purchasing coins having numismatic
value from members of a recognized numismatic society, or customers registered
with the dealer, need not comply with the provisions of sections
5.48.520 or
5.48.570 of this chapter.
DEALER: All businesses or persons licensed under this section.
JUNK COLLECTOR: Any person not having a fixed place of business in the city who
goes from house to house or place to place gathering, collecting, buying,
selling or otherwise dealing in old rags, papers, metals or other articles
commonly known as junk. They shall not be subject to the provisions of sections
5.48.520 or
5.48.570 of this chapter.
JUNK DEALER: Any person who engages in buying or selling old metals (other than
precious metals), glass, rags, rubber, paper or other junk from a fixed place
of business. They shall not be subject to the provisions of sections
5.48.520 or
5.48.570 of this section.
MAJOR APPLIANCES: Common major kitchen and washing appliances, such as
refrigerators, ovens, dishwashers, washers, dryers, etc., excluding microwaves,
stereos, television sets, etc.
PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property, or
deals in the purchase, exchange or possession of personal property on condition
of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or who loans or
advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon
and takes or receives such personal property into his possession, and who sells
the unredeemed pledges, together with such new merchandise as will facilitate
the sale of same.
PROCESSOR: Any person who engages in refining or otherwise altering the form of
precious metal not found in a natural state (i.e., raw ore).
REGISTERED CUSTOMER: Any person who is registered with the dealer and who the
dealer knows to be a reputable person in the community. A registered customer
must complete a registered customer form supplied by the license official or
sheriff and maintained in the dealer's records. The registered customer form
shall have positive identification sections and a section stating that the
registered customer certifies that property he will sell to the dealer meets
the requirements of subsection
5.48.520B1 of this chapter.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person who keeps a store, office or place of business
for the purchase, barter or exchange or sale of any secondhand merchandise of
value, or who engages in the business of dealing in secondhand goods. For the
purpose of this section, a "secondhand dealer" shall not be meant to include
any person who deals in the purchase, barter, exchange or sale of used motor
vehicles and trailers, but shall include any person who buys or sells five (5)
or more firearms per year.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL DEALER/PROCESSOR OR PRECIOUS GEM DEALER: Any person
who engages in buying, selling or processing gold, silver (excluding coins),
platinum, other precious metals, secondhand articles containing any of such
metals, secondhand precious gems, or any articles containing any precious gems.
(1999 Code)
5.48.430: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter are inapplicable to:
      1.   Any merchant or dealer whose principal business is the selling of
new merchandise and secondhand merchandise is taken in as a trade incident to
the sale of new merchandise;
      2.   Any dealer who receives secondhand merchandise in trade for other
secondhand merchandise of a higher value; or
      3.   Any dealer whose principal business is servicing and rebuilding
major appliances, who receives used major appliances and adds value thereto
through refurbishing and repairing the merchandise for resale.
   B.   Any dealer licensed by this section, when dealing with other licensed
dealers, other licensed or registered businesses or persons, or when the dealer
travels to the seller's residence to bid on and subsequently purchase goods
other than gold, silver or precious metals need not comply with the provisions
of sections
5.48.520 or
5.48.570 of this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.48.440: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate as a secondhand dealer, secondhand
precious metal and/or precious gem dealer, junk dealer, junk collector, antique
dealer, coin dealer, processor or pawnbroker, without first obtaining a license
to do so. A separate license shall be required for each location and for the
conduct of the business of a dealer. (1999 Code)
5.48.450: LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Form: Each application for a license shall be made on the form that the
city license official requires, and the applicant shall certify that the
information given is true and correct under the penalties of perjury.
   B.   Information Required: Each application for a dealer's license shall
contain such information as deemed necessary by the license official and the
sheriff.
   C.   Applicants: Only individuals (natural persons) may apply for a dealer's
license. If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license
shall be applied for by and issued to all of the partners who are authorized to
act for the partnership. Where the applicant is a corporation, limited
partnership, LLC or the like, the application shall be made by and issued to
the president of the corporation or members of the limited partnership, LLC or
other entity who are authorized to act for it.
   D.   Responsibilities: Each individual who applies for a dealer's license
under this section assumes, as an individual, all responsibilities of the
dealer and, as an individual, is subject to all conditions, restrictions and
requirements imposed on dealers.
   E.   Investigation: Each individual applying for a pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer or secondhand precious metal/gem dealer license shall not be issued a
license until such time as the sheriff has conducted a background investigation
on the applicant pursuant to section
5.08.070 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.48.460: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for the following occupations shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title: secondhand dealer, secondhand precious metal dealer/
processor and/or gem dealer, antique dealer, junk dealer, junk collector,
pawnbroker, coin dealer. (1999 Code)
5.48.470: LICENSE; BOND REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
Every person licensed under this chapter shall be required as a condition
prerequisite to their obtaining a license or renewing a license provided for
under this section, to deliver to the city a cash bond or letter of credit as
specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, in a form acceptable to the city attorney
conditioned that the applicant, if issued a license hereunder, will comply
fully with all city ordinances and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.48.480: RELOCATION OF BUSINESS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Fixed Permanent Location: A dealer may conduct the licensed business
only from the fixed permanent location as specified in the application for the
license, which shall be other than a motel or hotel room generally used by
transients.
   B.   Removal Or Relocation: A dealer may not remove or relocate the location
specified in the license for the business, or open any additional location
unless the person has applied for and obtained a separate license from the
license official. (1999 Code)
5.48.490: REPORTING CHANGES IN LICENSE INFORMATION:
If, during any license year, there is a change in the information that a person
gave in obtaining or renewing a license under this section, the person shall
report the change to the license official within thirty (30) days after the
change occurs, and certify that the information given is true and correct under
the penalties of perjury. (1999 Code)
5.48.500: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The license official may refuse to grant a license under this chapter to any
individual, and may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license of any
dealer if it finds:
   A.   The dealer has violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of
this section;
   B.   A similar license issued to the dealer has been suspended, revoked or
refused in another jurisdiction for a reason which would justify such action
under this chapter;
   C.   Any officer, manager, agent or employee of the individual or dealer has
violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of this chapter, unless the
person or dealer:
      1.   Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct and in the exercise of
reasonable diligence could not have known of the conduct; and
      2.   Was unable to prevent the violation or attempted violation with the
exercise of reasonable diligence; or
   D.   The person or dealer has been convicted of theft or receiving stolen
property on one or more occasions within the past five (5) years. (1999 Code)
5.48.510: HEARING ON DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Before revoking, suspending or refusing to grant or renew any license, the
applicant, employee or dealer shall be informed of an opportunity to appeal
such decision in accordance with the provisions hereof. (1999 Code)
5.48.520: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
   A.   Book; Information Required: It is unlawful for any person licensed by
this chapter to fail to keep a substantial and well bound book, in a format
specified by the license official or sheriff, in which he shall enter at the
time of purchase, in the English language:
      1.   The name, date of birth, address and physical description of the
person selling the secondhand property;
      2.   The driver's license number or any other positive form of
identification containing a numerical identifier and a photograph of the person
selling the secondhand property;
      3.   The date and time of the transaction;
      4.   The identification of the person making the record entry;
      5.   A description of the item purchased or obtained by the dealer,
including, but not limited to, a description of the metallic composition, any
jewels, stones or glass, and a listing of all numbers, marks, monograms,
trademarks, manufacturer's names, serial numbers, and any other marks of
identification appearing on the item;
      6.   The weight of the item or items, where payment is based on weight;
and
      7.   The consideration paid for the item or, if pawned, the amount of
money loaned or advanced.
   B.   Additional Requirements: In addition to the requirements of subsection
A of this section, a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, antique dealer, coin dealer
and a secondhand precious metal/gem dealer shall also obtain and keep the
following:
      1.   A written certificate, on forms prescribed by the license official
or sheriff, that the person delivering the property has the legal right to sell
such property and produces at least one positive form of identification
containing a numerical identifier and a photograph;
      2.   If the value of the property exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00), the
secondhand dealer, pawnbroker, antique dealer, coin dealer, secondhand precious
metal/gem dealer, or persons receiving said property, shall also require the
seller or person delivering the property, whether known or not, to give a
legible print, preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the certificate
next to his signature; and
      3.   Signature of the purchasing agent who received the property from the
person whose name is on the card as the pawner or seller. (1999 Code)
5.48.530: RECORD KEEPING; LEGIBILITY AND ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   All entries shall be made with ink in a legible manner, and all records
of all dealers defined in this chapter shall be open to inspection by any peace
officer as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 77-1a-1.
   B.   Upon request to do so by any peace officer as defined by Utah Code
Annotated section 77-1a-1, all goods, articles or other things pawned, pledged,
sold or delivered to such dealer must be retained and held until released by a
peace officer or delivered to the peace officer upon consent of the dealer or
pursuant to the terms of any search warrant issued to the peace officer, and
served upon such dealer. (1999 Code)
5.48.540: SUBMISSION OF CERTIFICATE COPIES:
It is unlawful for any person licensed by this chapter to fail to submit the
certificates required to be maintained by subsection
5.48.520B of this chapter to the license official or sheriff on the business
day following the entry, except that the records regarding merchandise
purchased from other dealers need not be so submitted, but shall be retained
for three (3) years by the dealer at his place of business for inspection by
the license official or sheriff or their designees. (1999 Code)
5.48.550: OPERATION; REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact any business licensed
under this chapter unless he shall keep conspicuously posted in his place of
business a copy of these provisions. (1999 Code)
5.48.560: OPERATION; HOURS OF CLOSURE:
It is unlawful for any dealer licensed under this chapter to keep his place of
business open for trade before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless prior written permission is received from the
license official or sheriff. (1999 Code)
5.48.570: PROPERTY; HOLDING PERIOD BEFORE DISPOSITION:
   A.   Specified: It is unlawful for any dealer licensed under this chapter to
sell, melt, change (except for customary testing), take apart, destroy,
obliterate identification marks, or dispose of any secondhand property
purchased or obtained by a dealer until thirty (30) days have elapsed from the
date of compliance with the reporting requirements of sections
5.48.520 and
5.48.530 of this chapter, or for such additional time as to any specific item
or items as may be directed by the license official or sheriff or their
designees. All items being so stored shall be segregated from other items and
shall be identified by a tag attached to the property, numbered in a manner to
correspond with the number of the transaction description in the business
records required to be kept by section
5.48.520 of this chapter. Items purchased in bulk may be tagged in bulk. Items
may be stored at other locations in the city approved by the sheriff. The
dealer shall produce these items at the business location within one hour of a
request to do so by the sheriff or any other category I peace officer. Where
compliance is impossible because of the close of business hours, the item shall
be produced within one hour of the opening of business on the next business
day.
   B.   Exception: The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not
be applicable to any unidentifiable secondhand precious metals which have been
inspected and received written clearance for earlier disposition by the license
official or sheriff or their designees.
   C.   Modification: The sheriff may request that the mayor modify the
recordkeeping or reporting requirements of this section. (1999 Code)
5.48.580: PROPERTY; REDEMPTION AFTER FORFEIT:
It is unlawful in all cases in which an article pledged has been forfeited, for
a sale or other disposition thereof to be made by the dealer within the period
of six (6) months after the forfeiture of the pledge, unless the period of loan
is less than three (3) months, in which case the period of redemption shall be
three (3) months. (1999 Code)
5.48.590: STOLEN GOODS REPORTS:
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker or dealer to report to the sheriff any
article pledged with or sold, or which it is sought to pledge with him, or
sold, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen, or lost
or found by the person attempting to pledge it, or sell it in the case of a
lost article. (1999 Code)
5.48.600: COMPUTER REPORTING:
The sheriff is authorized to transfer the information received pursuant to this
section into a computer information system and to report the information in
such forms as the sheriff may determine is useful for law enforcement purposes.
(1999 Code)
5.48.610: PREMISES; PAWNBROKER PARTITION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to keep or maintain his pawnbroker business
in the same room or rooms with any other business whatsoever unless prior
approval of the license official or sheriff has been first obtained. The
partition walls separating the pawnbroker's business from other places of
business must be of solid material, and all connecting doors or other openings
must be securely closed and locked at all times. Gratings, lattice or similar
openwork or contrivance will not be sufficient partition under this section.
Patrons must enter and take their exit from all pawnbrokers' places of business
through outside doors or entrances. (1999 Code)
5.48.620: PREMISES; BARRIERS REQUIRED WHERE:
Any licensee under this chapter who is the owner of, occupant of or has control
of any lot, yard or any other premises within the city limits, and who keeps,
collects, permits, maintains or stores in the open thereon any metal, glass,
bottles, rags, cans, sacks, rubber, paper or other articles commonly known as
junk, or any articles known as secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, shall
comply with all applicable board of health rules and regulations and city land
use ordinances mandating solid visual barriers enclosing such lot, yard or
premises. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.48.630: JUNKYARD PREMISES ENCLOSURE:
Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a junkyard
shall have not more than two (2) entrances and two (2) exits, each of which
shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in width at the perimeter of the premises.
Such premises, areas, pieces or parcels of land shall be enclosed with either a
solid nontransparent wall or fence, or link weave steel wire or combination
thereof with a minimum height of seven feet (7') from the ground level,
excepting entrances and exits. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster
or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee not exceeding one
hundred (100) square feet in size. (1999 Code)
5.48.640: JUNK DEALER VEHICLES:
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear
thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and
proprietor thereof. (1999 Code)
5.48.650: PAWNBROKER; LIABILITY OF LICENSEE:
The holder of a pawnbroker's or dealer's license is liable for any and all acts
of his employees for any violation by them of any of the provisions of this
chapter. (1999 Code)
5.48.660: SECONDHAND DEALER BUSINESS RESTRICTIONS:
No person licensed under this chapter as a secondhand dealer shall purchase,
barter, exchange or sell any secondhand merchandise other than that of the same
type and character which comprise his principal business. (1999 Code)
5.48.670: DEALING WITH MINORS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any licensee under this chapter, by himself, his agents or
servants, to purchase or receive any personal property, or any articles
whatsoever, from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.50
FIREWORKS SALES
SECTION:
5.50.010: Temporary Use
5.50.020: Dates When Sale And Use Of Fireworks Are Permitted
5.50.030: Sales; License Required
5.50.040: License Application
5.50.050: License Fees
5.50.060: Sales; Rules And Regulations
5.50.070: Indoor Fireworks Sales Restrictions
5.50.080: Discharge Restrictions
5.50.090: Emergency Authority Of City Manager To Prohibit Discharge Of
Fireworks
5.50.010: TEMPORARY USE:
For the purposes of this chapter, a fireworks stand shall be considered a
temporary use and in addition to the regulations of this chapter shall also
comply with the regulations of
chapter 5.14 of this title. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.020: DATES WHEN SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS ARE PERMITTED:
   A.   Sales: "Fireworks", as defined by and authorized pursuant to the Utah
fireworks act, Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-220 et seq., may be sold within
the city each year beginning June 26 and ending on July 26; beginning December
26 and ending on January 1; and three (3) days before and on the Chinese New
Year.
   B.   Use: Fireworks may be discharged beginning on June 26 and ending on
July 26; on January 1 and December 31 and on the Chinese New Year. (Ord. 2011-
12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.030: SALES; LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as provided in this title, no person shall offer for sale or sell at
retail any fireworks without first having applied for and received a license
from the city to do so for each location at which the fireworks are sold or
offered for sale. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.040: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Applications for a license to sell fireworks shall comply with the requirements
of section
5.14.035 of this title and shall be accompanied by:
   A.   Public Liability Insurance: Certificates evidencing public liability
insurance coverage in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars/four hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00/$400,000.00), and property damage insurance
coverage in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Such
certificates shall designate the city as an additional insured;
   B.   Products Liability Insurance: Certificates evidencing products
liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence;
   C.   Statement Of Compliance: A statement that the applicant agrees to
comply strictly with the terms of this chapter, the laws of the state, the city
and this license as granted; and
   D.   State Sales Tax Permit: Evidence of a current sales tax permit issued
by the state. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.050: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a license to sell fireworks shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.060: SALES; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following shall be general requirements which must be followed by all
persons selling fireworks within the city:
   A.   Clearance Of Combustible Materials: All weeds and combustible materials
shall be cleared from any fireworks sales location, including a distance of at
least twenty five feet (25') surrounding the sales location;
   B.   Discharge Prohibited Signage: A sign bearing the message "discharge of
fireworks prohibited within 100 feet of this location" in letters at least
three inches (3") tall, shall be conspicuously displayed at each fireworks
sales location;
   C.   Supervisor: There shall be at least one supervisor, no younger than
eighteen (18) years of age, on duty at all times when the sale of fireworks is
in progress. Such supervisor shall remain near the sales location at all times
unless suitable locking devices are provided to prevent the unauthorized access
to the merchandise by others, or unless the merchandise is removed;
   D.   Self-Service: Any fireworks shall be effectively kept away from any
kind of self-service by the public unless the fireworks are prepackaged and
kept in the original package;
   E.   Display Of Licenses: The license authorizing the sale of fireworks and
a copy of the sales tax permit used by the licensee shall be available for
inspection by public safety personnel;
   F.   Sales To Minors: Fireworks shall not be sold to any person under the
age of sixteen (16) years, unless such person is accompanied by an adult;
   G.   Storage: The storage of fireworks for sale shall not be located in
residential areas;
   H.   Discharge Authorized; Signage: A sign indicating the legal dates for
the discharge of fireworks shall be posted at all fireworks sales locations in
such a position as to be clearly visible to the general public;
   I.   Hazardous Conditions: No amount of retail storage or retail sales of
fireworks shall, by its presence, create a distinct hazard to any person or
property;
   J.   Exits: Each fireworks stand up to twenty four feet (24') in length must
have at least two (2) exits. Each fireworks stand in excess of twenty four feet
(24') in length must have at least three (3) exits. All exits shall be spaced
at approximately equal distances apart. Exit locking devices, if any, shall be
easily released from the inside without special knowledge, key or effort;
   K.   Fire Extinguishers: Each fireworks stand shall maintain a two and one-
half (21/2) gallon 2A rated water pressure type fire extinguisher or an ABC
minimum 2A:10BC rated fire extinguisher near each exit, and such extinguishers
shall be kept in good working order and shall be easily accessible for use;
   L.   Smoking; Signage: Two (2) signs, each sign bearing the message "no
smoking within 50 feet of this stand" in letters at least three inches (3")
tall, shall be displayed on each and every side of a fireworks stand;
   M.   Aisle: Each temporary stand shall have a minimum three foot (3') wide,
unobstructed aisle running the length of the stand, inside and behind the sales
counter;
   N.   Pass-Through Openings: Any pass-through openings for the sales of
fireworks in temporary stands shall be arranged to permit the customer to view
the merchandise for sale, but shall prevent the touching or handling of
nonprepackaged fireworks by the customer;
   O.   Overnight Storage; Locking Device: In the event that the temporary
stand is used for the overnight storage of fireworks, it shall be equipped with
suitable locking devices to prevent unauthorized entry; and
   P.   Sleeping Prohibited: No person shall sleep in a temporary fireworks
stand. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.070: INDOOR FIREWORKS SALES RESTRICTIONS:
The following requirements shall be specifically applied to any indoor
fireworks sales locations:
   A.   Distance To Flammable Materials: In all retail sales locations in
permanent structures where fireworks are sold, the area where fireworks are
displayed or stored shall be at least fifty feet (50') from any flammable
liquid or gas, or from any other highly combustible material. Fireworks shall
not be stored, including stock for sale, near any exit doorways, stairways, or
in any location that would impede egress;
   B.   Original Packaging Required: Fireworks shall be stored, handled,
displayed and sold only as units in their original packaging; and
   C.   Display Inside Buildings: Fireworks inside buildings shall be displayed
with regard to the following restrictions:
      1.   Up to two hundred fifty (250) pounds of fireworks: Display of
fireworks is unrestricted;
      2.   From two hundred fifty one (251) pounds to five hundred (500) pounds
of fireworks: Display of fireworks must be within constant visual supervision
of sales personnel; and
      3.   In excess of five hundred (500) pounds of fireworks: Display of
fireworks must be constantly attended by a salesperson. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-
2011)
5.50.080: DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Sales Locations: Discharge a firework within one hundred feet (100') of
any fireworks sales location;
   B.   Abutting Properties: Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use,
or permit the ignition, explosion or projection of any fireworks upon or over
or onto the property of another; and
   C.   Dwellings: Ignite, explode or otherwise make use of any fireworks
within twenty feet (20') of any residence, dwelling or other structure. (Ord.
2011-12, 6-16-2011)
5.50.090: EMERGENCY AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER TO PROHIBIT DISCHARGE OF
FIREWORKS:
   A.   Authority: The city manager is hereby authorized to issue temporary
regulations (not to exceed 60 days) and restrictions pertaining to the
discharge of fireworks as defined by this chapter in order to preserve the
health, welfare, and safety of individuals and property within the city.
   B.   Limitation: This grant of authority is limited to issuing restrictions
based upon climatic conditions which may or have created an unreasonable risk
of damage to persons and/or property.
   C.   Penalty: Any person who is guilty of discharging a firework contrary to
any order issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
CHAPTER 5.52
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL HANDLERS
SECTION:
5.52.010: Flammable Combustible Material Handler Defined
5.52.020: License Required
5.52.030: License Fee
5.52.040: Compliance With Laws
5.52.010: FLAMMABLE COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL HANDLER DEFINED:
"Flammable combustible material handler" means any person carrying on the
business of buying, selling, manufacturing or transporting oil, gasoline,
naphtha, liquefied petroleum gases, oxygen, or other combustible materials,
motor fuels or lubricants, in quantities of ten (10) gallons or more. (1999
Code)
5.52.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, deal in, sell, transport or
handle flammable combustible materials without first obtaining a license. (1999
Code)
5.52.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a handler of flammable combustible materials shall
be as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.52.040: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
Flammable combustible material handlers must comply with all applicable
provisions of the state fire code, and all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations regulating the handling, manufacture and sale of flammable
combustible materials. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.53
FOOD OR GROCERY STORES
SECTION:
5.53.010: Food Or Grocery Store Defined
5.53.020: License Required
5.53.030: License Fee
5.53.040: Application; Referral To Health Department
5.53.050: License Revocation Conditions
5.53.060: Compliance With Health Ordinances Required
5.53.010: FOOD OR GROCERY STORE DEFINED:
"Food or grocery store" means any place where food or drink is sold at retail
for human consumption. (1999 Code)
5.53.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be engaged in the operation of a
food or grocery store without first obtaining a license. (1999 Code)
5.53.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a food or grocery store shall be as specified on the
fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.53.040: APPLICATION; REFERRAL TO HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be referred to the
health department for investigation and recommendations in accordance with
health ordinances of the city. (1999 Code)
5.53.050: LICENSE REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
The license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the mayor at any time
upon notice and hearing for any violation of any ordinances of the city or laws
of the state. (1999 Code)
5.53.060: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH ORDINANCES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operations of a
food or grocery store in the city without complying strictly with the health
ordinances of the city. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.54
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
5.54.010: Home Occupations Defined
5.54.010: HOME OCCUPATIONS DEFINED:
   A.   Defined: "Home occupation" means any use conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by one person residing in the dwelling unit, which use
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character of the dwelling or property for
residential purposes, and in connection with which there is no display of stock
in trade; "stock in trade" being any item offered for sale which was not
produced on the premises.
   B.   Sales: The home occupation shall not include the sale of commodities
except those produced on the premises; provided, however, that original or
reproductions of works of art designed or created by the artist operating a
home occupation may be stored and sold on the premises. "Reproductions of works
of art" includes, but is not limited to, printed reproduction, casting, and
sound recordings.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 3-21-2024)
CHAPTER 5.56
HOUSE MOVERS
SECTION:
5.56.010: License Required
5.56.020: License Fees
5.56.030: License; Bond Requirements
5.56.040: Compliance With Regulations
5.56.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to engage in the business of house moving, raising or shoring
without first having obtained a license therefor. Applications for such license
shall be made in writing to the license official. (1999 Code)
5.56.020: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a house mover's license shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.56.030: LICENSE; BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall file with the city a
cash bond or a letter of credit as specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, in a form acceptable to the city attorney
conditioned that the applicant, if issued a license hereunder, will comply
fully with all city ordinances and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.56.040: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Persons licensed under this chapter must comply with the applicable ordinance
provisions for moving, raising or shoring buildings, and acquire any necessary
wide load moving or building permits. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.58
LAUNDRIES, DRY CLEANERS AND AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES
SECTION:
5.58.010: License Required
5.58.020: License Fees
5.58.030: Sanitation Of Premises; Employee Health
5.58.040: Inspection For Compliance
5.58.050: Dry Cleaning Defined
5.58.060: Dry Cleaning Business; License Required
5.58.070: Dry Cleaning Business; License Fee
5.58.080: Collectors; License Requirements
5.58.090: Changes In Solvents; Permission Required
5.58.100: Fire Extinguishing Equipment Required
5.58.110: Automatic Dry Cleaning Machine Defined
5.58.120: Compliance With Regulations
5.58.130: Permit And License Requirements
5.58.140: Installation Specifications
5.58.150: Operation Regulations
5.58.160: Inspection And Enforcement
5.58.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or conduct a laundry in the city, where service or self
service facilities are available to the general public for washing or drying
clothes, draperies or other materials, without first obtaining a license. (1999
Code)
5.58.020: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a laundry license shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. In addition to this general business license fee, the
licensee shall pay those fees required in section
5.36.020 of this title for any vehicle used to collect or deliver clothes,
draperies or other materials to and from such businesses. (1999 Code)
5.58.030: SANITATION OF PREMISES; EMPLOYEE HEALTH:
   A.   Sanitation Of Premises: Premises used for laundries must be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to
accumulate, and premises must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin.
   B.   Employee Health: It is unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a
venereal or any contagious disease in a laundry. (1999 Code)
5.58.040: INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE:
It shall be the duty of the license official or his designee to inspect or
cause to be inspected every establishment licensed under these provisions at
least once every six (6) months. Any violation under the terms of these
provisions which are discovered shall be reported to the mayor. (1999 Code)
5.58.050: DRY CLEANING DEFINED:
"Dry cleaning" means the process of removing dirt, grease, paint and other
stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs, etc., by the use of
nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable, and it shall include the
process of dyeing clothes or other fabrics or textiles in a solution of dye
colors and nonaqueous liquid solvents. (1999 Code)
5.58.060: DRY CLEANING BUSINESS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of dry cleaning in the city without a
license. (1999 Code)
5.58.070: DRY CLEANING BUSINESS; LICENSE FEE:
The dry cleaning licensee shall pay those fees specified in the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to 5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.58.080: COLLECTORS; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to manage, conduct or carry on the business of
collecting any garment, fabric, substance or article for delivery to a plant,
factory or establishment without first obtaining a license so to do. The
license fee shall be as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.58.090: CHANGES IN SOLVENTS; PERMISSION REQUIRED:
No change shall be made in the solvent that results in or produces a solvent in
a more hazardous class, unless permission for such change shall first have been
obtained from the city and the fire department. (1999 Code)
5.58.100: FIRE EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
Adequate first aid fire appliances of a type suitable for fighting fires
involving flammable liquids shall be provided at each entrance to every room or
area where flammable liquids are stored or used. (1999 Code)
5.58.110: AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINE DEFINED:
"Automatic dry cleaning machine" means and includes any device or apparatus for
the cleaning of clothes or fabrics, designed to be used by the general public,
which apparatus or device makes use of or contains perchlorethylene or any
other chemical solvent or substance that may cause harm to human beings by
reason of inhalation or contact. (1999 Code)
5.58.120: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful to install, operate or maintain any automatic dry cleaning
machine except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to operate
the same in violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the city, the Salt
Lake city-county health department or the fire department relating thereto.
(1999 Code)
5.58.130: PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Installation: It is unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning
machine without first having secured a permit from the city and the fire
department to use hazardous flammable materials. Applications for such permit
shall contain full information as to the mechanical equipment of such machines,
and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in which the
machine will be located.
   B.   Engaging In Business: It is also unlawful to engage in the business of
maintaining any automatic dry cleaning machine for use by the public upon
payment of a fee, without having first secured a license therefor and without
having paid the business license fee required on the fee schedule adopted
pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.58.140: INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Enclosure; Vent: Each automatic dry cleaning machine shall be
completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with intake at the top and
the outlet at or near the bottom. Groups of machines may be entirely enclosed
or supported on all sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vent provided for
each individual machine.
   B.   Exhaust System: The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one
hundred cubic feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever
the door is open.
   C.   Machine Door: Each automatic dry cleaning machine must be so
constructed as to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal
cycle of operation. Each such machine shall be equipped with a transparent door
or port to allow visual examination of the status of the cleaning cycle.
   D.   Water Connection: Any connection of an automatic dry cleaning machine
with the water supply system must be equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker
in the line upstream from the condenser, with no control valves downstream from
such gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be discharged through an air gap.
   E.   Ventilation:
      1.   The room in which the automatic dry cleaning machine is installed
shall be ventilated so that there shall be a minimum flow of air per machine
from the area to which the public is admitted of at least:
         a.   Five hundred (500) cubic feet per minute in a room where there
are no more than three (3) machines installed;
         b.   Four hundred (400) cubic feet per minute where there are no more
than eight (8) machines installed;
         c.   Three hundred seventy five (375) cubic feet per minute where
there are no more than sixteen (16) machines installed; and
         d.   Three hundred sixty (360) cubic feet per minute where there are
more than seventeen (17) machines installed.
      2.   For this purpose, each cleaning cell shall be considered as one
machine.
   F.   Leakage Prohibited: Each automatic dry cleaning machine must be so
designed, constructed and maintained so as to prevent the leakage of liquids,
gas or vapors. (1999 Code)
5.58.150: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Equipment Installation And Condition: No automatic dry cleaning machine
shall be operated unless all the equipment described in the foregoing section
is properly installed and in good working condition.
   B.   Person In Charge: No establishment for which a license is required
under this section shall be open for business, and it is unlawful to admit
public or customers into the room where such machines are located, unless there
is on duty in the establishment at all times a competent person in charge of
the establishment, and in charge of the operation of the machines. There shall
be warning signs posted in places of easy observation warning of the dangers in
the event leakage of liquids, gas or vapors occurs.
   C.   Residue; Containers: It is unlawful to permit any residue containing
solvent to flow into the sewer system of the city; tightly covered metal
containers may be used for temporary storage of such waste outside the
building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the contents and dangers
involved in handling and shall be locked if in an unenclosed space.
   D.   Identification Sign: At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a
place available to customers giving the name, address and phone number of the
owner of the establishment, and of the service department or agency responsible
for the proper maintenance of such machine.
   E.   Compliance With Laws: Each licensee shall comply with all applicable
federal, state and city laws, rules, regulations and ordinances regarding
handling, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. (1999 Code)
5.58.160: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the fire department to make such inspections as are
necessary for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.60
LODGINGS; HOTELS, MOTELS AND OTHER
SECTION:
5.60.010: Register To Be Kept By Certain Businesses; Contents
5.60.020: Inspection Of Premises
5.60.030: Hotels/Motels; License Requirements
5.60.040: No Fugitives
5.60.050: Premises; Cleanliness And Lighting
5.60.060: Premises; Sanitary Facilities
5.60.070: Premises; Exits
5.60.080: Inspection For Compliance
5.60.010: REGISTER TO BE KEPT BY CERTAIN BUSINESSES; CONTENTS:
   A.   Register Required: Every person maintaining or operating a hotel,
boarding house or rooming house, auto court, motel, tourist home or trailer
camp in the city shall keep a register in which each guest shall be required to
write his name, residence, next destination, and the make and state
registration license number of his vehicle or trailer. Such persons shall not
fail to enter in such register opposite the name of each guest the designation
of the room, cabin, trailer or camping space assigned.
   B.   Inspection: The register shall be open for inspection by the public and
the sheriff. (1999 Code)
5.60.020: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The license official or sheriff may periodically investigate, examine and
inspect all hotels, auto courts, trailer camps, tourist homes and rooming
houses and boarding houses licensed under the provisions of this chapter and
shall report to the mayor where it appears that the general reputation of the
keeper or of anyone residing or boarding therein is questionable, or that such
boarding house is not operated in a quiet, lawful or peaceful manner. (1999
Code)
5.60.030: HOTELS/MOTELS; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to conduct or operate a hotel, motel or a building or part
thereof used or held out to the public, where sleeping accommodations are
furnished for twenty (20) or more persons for a period of one day or more,
without first having obtained a license therefor. The annual fee for such
license shall be as specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. Such fee shall be in addition to the general business
license fee. (1999 Code)
5.60.040: NO FUGITIVES:
It is unlawful to knowingly permit any fugitive from justice to stay in any
hotel or motel. (1999 Code)
5.60.050: PREMISES; CLEANLINESS AND LIGHTING:
All premises used for hotel or motel purposes shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. All portions of such premises that are open for use by all
guests or by the public shall be kept lighted at all times they are so open to
use. (1999 Code)
5.60.060: PREMISES; SANITARY FACILITIES:
Water closets and lavatories shall be available to all guests using any hotel
or motel, and there shall be at least one bathroom equipped with water closet,
shower or tub, and lavatory facilities for each room. (1999 Code)
5.60.070: PREMISES; EXITS:
   A.   Exists Required: No building shall be used for a hotel unless it is
furnished with the number of exits and fire escapes required by the building
ordinances of the city for the construction of a new hotel or motel.
   B.   Blocking Prohibited: It is unlawful to block or permit the blocking of
any exit from any premises used for a hotel. (1999 Code)
5.60.080: INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE:
It shall be the duty of the license official or sheriff to inspect or cause to
be inspected every hotel or motel operated in the city as frequently as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.62
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.62.010: Definitions
5.62.020: License Required
5.62.030: License Fees
5.62.040: License Application And Issuance Restrictions
5.62.050: License Display Required
5.62.060: Investigation Of Applicant And Premises
5.62.070: Unlawful Conduct And Activities
5.62.080: Exemptions
5.62.090: License Revocation
5.62.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section:
MASSAGE: The practice whereby a person, either by the hands or with a
mechanical or electrical apparatus, administers to another person effleurage
(stroking), friction (rubbing), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion),
and vibration (shaking or trembling), or variations of these, and the use of
rehabilitative procedures involving the muscles by nonintrusive means and
without spinal manipulation. The practice of massage may include the use of
oil, rubs, heat lamps, saltglose, hot and cold packs, or tub, shower, steam, or
cabinet baths.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS: Any place where a massage technician conducts or
carries on the business of the practice of massage for a fee, gratuity or free
demonstration.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: A person who is licensed by the state of Utah to engage in
or to teach the practice of massage for a fee, for a gratuity, or for a free
demonstration. (1999 Code)
5.62.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, or carry on or maintain a
massage establishment in the city without first obtaining a business license
from the city. (1999 Code)
5.62.030: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a massage establishment shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. This fee is in addition to the general license fee.
(1999 Code)
5.62.040: LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS:
Each individual desiring a massage establishment license or massage technician
license shall:
   A.   State License: Submit with the license application a certificate from
the state of Utah signifying the applicant is a licensed massage technician by
the state.
      1.   It is the position of the city that to the extent that Reiki is used
as a "spiritual healing art" and does not involve the methods outlined in the
scope of practice of massage therapy, then Reiki is not a modality of massage.
      2.   However, should a Reiki practitioner while performing the "spiritual
healing art" involve the use of any of the methods outlined in the scope of
practice of massage therapy, then the Reiki practitioner must be licensed as a
massage therapist.
      3.   "Reiki" is defined as a "spiritual healing art" that is performed on
an individual by a Reiki practitioner by "transmitting healing life force
energy" through the hands.
   B.   Background Check: Submit with the license application a criminal
background check completed within sixty (60) days of the license application.
   C.   Location: Submit the location, including the street, building and room
number of the place where the applicant proposes to operate a massage
establishment. (Ord. 2011-06, 4-28-2011)
5.62.050: LICENSE DISPLAY REQUIRED:
   A.   Establishment: Every massage establishment licensed under this chapter
shall display its massage establishment license in a conspicuous place on the
premises.
   B.   Technician: Every massage technician employed by a licensed massage
establishment shall maintain in his possession or immediate presence, his state
massage technician license. (1999 Code)
5.62.060: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT AND PREMISES:
All applications for massage establishment licenses shall be referred to the
license official for land use approval and sanitary condition and compliance
with applicable state of Utah division of professional licensing Salt Lake
Valley health department regulations governing the same, the law enforcement
for criminal background investigation, and the fire department for inspection
to determine compliance with the provisions of the fire code. A license shall
be granted upon a recommendation from each of the foregoing that a license be
issued. Each licensee and/or employee shall be issued a "work card" containing
the following information:
Name,
Address,
Date of birth, and
Copy of massage therapist license issued by the state of Utah.
(Ord. 2010-07, 6-3-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.62.070: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person who is not licensed as
a massage technician by the state to practice or engage in or attempt to engage
in massage or to falsely advertise or represent himself to be authorized to
practice or engage in massage when not licensed by the state to do so.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages: It is unlawful to serve, store, or allow to be
served or allow to be consumed, any alcoholic beverages on the premises of any
massage establishment.
   C.   Conduct: It is unlawful for a massage technician, massage apprentice,
or any other employee of a massage establishment to touch or offer to touch or
massage the genitalia of customers.
   D.   Patron Log: It shall be unlawful to not maintain a legible log of all
patrons of the establishment. Such log shall be maintained for a continuous
rolling six (6) month period of time. Such log shall contain the date of
massage, name and signature of the patron. The log shall be available for
inspection during business hours.
   E.   Hours Of Operation: It shall be unlawful to operate the business other
than from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of the same day.
   F.   Display Of Specified Areas: It is unlawful for a massage technician,
massage apprentice, or any customer or employee of a massage establishment to
engage in any unlawful activities as defined in
chapter 5.82 of this title while on the premises of the massage establishment.
(Ord. 2010-07, 6-3-2010)
5.62.080: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those individuals listed in
Utah Code Annotated section 58-47a-9 or any successor statute. (1999 Code)
5.62.090: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Upon a showing that a massage establishment has been operated or maintained or
that any employee of a massage establishment has performed massage contrary to
state statute or city ordinance, contrary to the public health or the health of
the patrons or customers of the establishment or without due regard to proper
sanitation or hygiene shall be grounds for the revocation of the
establishment's license in accordance with the procedures established by the
city. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.63
HOME-BASED MICROSCHOOLS AND MICRO-EDUCATION ENTITIES
SECTION:
5.63.010: Regulations On The Location That Are Necessary To Avoid Risks To
Health Or Safety
5.63.010: REGULATIONS ON THE LOCATION THAT ARE NECESSARY TO AVOID RISKS TO
HEALTH OR SAFETY:
While a home-based microschool or micro-education entity is considered a
permitted use in all zoning districts within the city, some locations may have
risks to health or safety.
   A.   Certain designated zones within the city allow for a sexually oriented
business or a business which sells alcohol. A charter school or a micro-
education entity may be prohibited from a location which would otherwise defeat
the purpose for the zone unless the charter school or micro-education entity
provides a waiver. (Ord. 2025-03, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 5.64
MOBILE HOME PARKS, TRAILER PARKS AND AUTO COURTS
SECTION:
5.64.010: License Required; Applications
5.64.020: Exceptions
5.64.030: License Fee
5.64.040: License Issuance Restrictions
5.64.050: Compliance With Other Laws
5.64.060: Mobile Homes; Permanent Use Outside Mobile Home Parks Or Mobile Home
Subdivisions
5.64.070: Mobile Homes; Construction And Location Restrictions
5.64.080: Mobile Homes; Alteration Restrictions
5.64.090: Mobile Homes Meeting Federal Standards
5.64.100: Land Use Ordinances Regulating Mobile Homes
5.64.010: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS:
It is unlawful to establish, maintain or operate in the city any "mobile home
park", as defined in building and construction ordinances, or any trailer park
or auto court without first having obtained a license therefor. Applications
for such licenses shall be made in writing to the license official in
compliance with ordinances relating to license applications, and shall contain
the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed park, and the number of
mobile homes, trailers or automobiles to be accommodated. (1999 Code)
5.64.020: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the storage of any
mobile home for any length of time when it is not used for living or sleeping
purposes. (1999 Code)
5.64.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for the license required herein shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. Such fee shall be in addition to the general business
license fee. (1999 Code)
5.64.040: LICENSE ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Applicant Character: No such license shall be issued to any but an
individual of good character, nor to any corporation or other business entity
if any owner or officer of such is not an individual of good character.
   B.   Manager Character: It is unlawful to hire or keep as manager,
superintendent or person in charge of a mobile home park, trailer park or auto
court any individual who is not a person of good character, or any person who
has been convicted of a felony. (1999 Code)
5.64.050: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
All mobile home parks licensed under this chapter shall comply with provisions
governing the same in this code and with all other applicable laws. (1999 Code)
5.64.060: MOBILE HOMES; PERMANENT USE OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS OR MOBILE HOME
SUBDIVISIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain any mobile home, used for human
habitation, upon any plot of ground in the city except as provided in land use
ordinances, or in a licensed mobile home park or an approved mobile home
subdivision. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.64.070: MOBILE HOMES; CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residential purposes any mobile
home that has been rendered immobile by the removal of wheels or placing the
same on a foundation or on the ground, unless such mobile home in construction
and location complies with the ordinances relating to the construction, wiring,
plumbing, sewer facilities, and other regulations applicable to single-family
dwellings. (1999 Code)
5.64.080: MOBILE HOMES; ALTERATION RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other transporting device
from any mobile home or otherwise to affix such mobile home permanently to the
ground so as to prevent ready removal of such mobile home unless a permit to do
so is obtained as required for the construction of a new building. Any such
alteration shall be construed as converting the mobile home into a building and
subject to the requirements of the city's land use and building ordinances.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.64.090: MOBILE HOMES MEETING FEDERAL STANDARDS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, no mobile
or manufactured home certified as in conformance with federal standards for
mobile homes by the application of the label required under CFR 3282.362 shall
be required to meet city construction and safety requirements covered by such
federal standards. (1999 Code)
5.64.100: LAND USE ORDINANCES REGULATING MOBILE HOMES:
No provision of this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to
authorize a mobile or manufactured home (regardless of whether the wheels have
been removed or it has been placed on the ground or a foundation) to be located
on a parcel of ground outside of a mobile home park or subdivision in violation
of land use ordinances. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 5.66
MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
SECTION:
5.66.010: License Required
5.66.020: License Application
5.66.030: License Fees
5.66.040: Activities On Unlicensed Premises; Fee
5.66.050: Building Code Requirements
5.66.060: Nonflammable Scenery Required
5.66.070: Crowding Limitations
5.66.080: Exits; Obstruction Prohibited
5.66.090: Compliance With Laws
5.66.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion picture or theatrical,
for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting performances given solely
for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious, educational or
charitable organization, without having first secured a license therefor as is
provided in this chapter. (1999 Code)
5.66.020: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall state, in addition to any other
information required, the place of the intended performance and the seating
capacity thereof. (1999 Code)
5.66.030: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures or
theatricals, naming a specific place, building or auditorium/theater within a
building housing more than one auditorium/theater where the performances are to
be presented, may present therein any number of performances, including
theatricals, during the year for which the license was secured, upon payment of
the required fees.
   B.   In addition to the general license fee, the license fee for the license
required in this chapter shall be based upon the number of movie screens at the
place of amusement pursuant to the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.66.040: ACTIVITIES ON UNLICENSED PREMISES; FEE:
For motion pictures and theatricals that are to be presented in premises that
are not covered by such license fee, the fee to be paid shall be as specified
in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code; provided, that no such motion picture or theatrical
shall be presented in or on any premises or building that does not fully comply
with the requirements of this code relating to public gatherings and to the
maintenance of buildings used for these purposes. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
5.66.050: BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to present any public motion picture in any building or
structure which does not contain the number of exits required by the
international building code adopted by reference in this code, or by the
statutes of the state, concerning buildings or places intended for motion
picture performances, or in premises in which the electrical wiring does not
fully comply with these ordinances. All places used for the exhibition of
theatricals must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance, and for
so long a time as the audience remains therein. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 02-02, 1-
3-2002)
5.66.060: NONFLAMMABLE SCENERY REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than nonflammable
scenery or such as shall have been rendered nonflammable by the application of
fire preventive coatings. (1999 Code)
5.66.070: CROWDING LIMITATIONS:
It is unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater
employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is
presented during the time of such performance; and it is unlawful to admit to
any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements
of the premises. (1999 Code)
5.66.080: EXITS; OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors
or exits leading from the room or enclosure in which a motion picture
performance or theatrical is being given, or in which an audience for such a
performance is gathered. (1999 Code)
5.66.090: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
All owners and operators of motion picture theaters shall comply with the
applicable city ordinances and state criminal statutes governing the
distribution, sale, exhibition or showing of pornographic films or other
literature. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.68
MULTIPLE RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
5.68.010: Definitions
5.68.020: License Required
5.68.030: Exception
5.68.040: Penalty
5.68.050: License Fees
5.68.010: DEFINITIONS:
Refer to
Chapter 13.04 Definitions for any terms herein. (Ord. 03-02, 1-23-2003; amd.
Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021)
5.68.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License; Fee: Every owner of a multiple family dwelling unit of three
(3) or more rental dwelling units shall obtain and maintain a current business
license and pay the general business license fee and the special fees as set
forth on the Fee Schedule at the time of application or renewal of license.
   B.   Multiple Owners: If there is more than one owner, including purchases
under contract, each owner shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the
business license fee.
   C.   Accessory Dwelling Unit: Every owner of an accessory dwelling unit
being rented shall obtain and maintain a current license and pay an annual
license fee as set forth by the City of Holladay Fee Schedule at the time of
application or renewal of license. (Ord. 03-02, 1-23-2003; amd. Ord. 2021-24,
9-9-2021)
5.68.030: EXCEPTION:
Every owner of less than three (3) rental dwelling units shall be exempt from
licensing under this title. (1999 Code)
5.68.040: PENALTY:
Any person or party who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021)
5.68.050: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Required: Owners of multiple family dwelling units or rental dwelling
units shall pay the general business license fee and the special fees set forth
in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title.
   B.   Time Of Payment: The base business license fee shall be paid at the
time of application for a new or renewal license.
   C.   Failure: Failure to timely make a payment required pursuant to a
payment plan as described above may result in the suspension or revocation of
the license and the imposition of penalty fees as set forth in this title.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.70
NURSING AND CONVALESCENT HOMES
SECTION:
5.70.010: Nursing Or Convalescent Home Defined
5.70.020: License Required
5.70.030: Exemptions
5.70.040: License Application; Contents
5.70.050: License Application; Investigations
5.70.060: License Fee
5.70.070: Compliance With Laws
5.70.010: NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME DEFINED:
"Nursing home" or "convalescent home" means any institution used for the
reception or care of persons who are dependent or not capable of properly
caring for themselves, and shall be understood to include homes for the aged or
infirm, refuges, and shelters. (1999 Code)
5.70.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct a
nursing or convalescent home without first obtaining a general business
license. (1999 Code)
5.70.030: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to care given to relatives in the homes of
parents, legal guardians, grandparents, brothers, sisters, children, uncles,
aunts, or daycare centers, or as part of the program of an educational
institution regulated by the boards of education of the state, or as part of
the program of a parochial or other private institution. (1999 Code)
5.70.040: LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
Each application for a license under this chapter shall state the location or
proposed location of the home, the purpose for which it is to be operated,
maintained or conducted, the accommodations for the patients thereof, the
nature and kind of care, instructions or benefits given therein, the names and
addresses of the officials conducting, managing or maintaining the home, the
name of the superintendent or person in charge of the home, the name and
address of the chief physician or surgeon, or the names and addresses of the
board of physicians or surgeons attending therein if such a board exists. (1999
Code)
5.70.050: LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATIONS:
Applications for a license under this chapter shall be referred to the fire
department and shall comply with applicable rules and regulations of the Salt
Lake city-county health department. Findings shall then be forwarded, along
with recommendations, to the license official for referral to the mayor. (1999
Code)
5.70.060: LICENSE FEE:
In addition to the general license fee, nursing and convalescent homes that
provide twenty four (24) hour care shall pay an annual regulatory fee as
specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.70.070: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
All persons operating nursing and convalescent homes shall comply with all
applicable city, state and federal health and fire regulations governing their
operation. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.72
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
SECTION:
5.72.010: Prohibition
5.72.020: Definitions
5.72.030: Penalty For Noncompliance
5.72.040: Costs
5.72.050: Existing Billboards
5.72.060: Severability
5.72.010: PROHIBITION:
All billboards are prohibited within the city. (1999 Code)
5.72.020: DEFINITIONS:
BILLBOARD: Any freestanding ground sign that is designed or intended to direct
attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity that is
not sold, offered, or existing on the property where the sign is located. Each
billboard shall be considered a separate business for which a separate business
license must be obtained upon payment of the general business license fee and
all other applicable fees and charges under this code.
EXISTING, NONCONFORMING BILLBOARD: A billboard physically constructed, in place
and being used for advertising purposes as of the city's incorporation on
November 30, 1999. The term does not include a prospective or anticipated
billboard for which Salt Lake County has issued a permit on or prior to the
city's incorporation on November 30, 1999. Each existing, nonconforming
billboard shall be considered a separate business for which a separate business
license must be obtained upon payment of the general business license fee and
all other applicable fees and charges under this code. (1999 Code)
5.72.030: PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity, whether acting as owner
or occupant of the premises involved, or contractor, or otherwise, who violates
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine and to a term of imprisonment to the maximum amount
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-703. A separate offense shall be
deemed to be committed on each day an offense occurs or continues. (1999 Code)
5.72.040: COSTS:
Costs incurred by the city in removing any billboard erected in violation of
this chapter shall be charged to the owner or the entity having charge, control
or benefit of the billboard. (1999 Code)
5.72.050: EXISTING BILLBOARDS:
Existing, nonconforming billboards are exempt from the prohibition on
billboards in section
5.72.010 of this chapter; provided, however, that any existing, nonconforming
billboard located on premises owned by a third party lessor, licensor or the
like shall be exempt from the prohibition on billboards in section
5.72.010 of this chapter only until expiration of the term for which such
premises were leased or licensed for billboard purposes. In no event may the
use of any existing, nonconforming billboard be expanded, increased or extended
in any way, including, without limitation, by increasing the height or size of
such billboard. Further, the term of any such lease or license shall not be
extended beyond the original term unless one or more options to extend the
original term are specified in a written agreement for the lease or license of
such premises actually in existence as of the city's incorporation on November
30, 1999 and such option was formally exercised as required by such preexisting
lease or license agreement prior to the city's incorporation on November 30,
1999. If any such option to extend the original term of any such preexisting
lease or license agreement was so exercised prior to the city's incorporation
on November 30, 1999, then the existing, nonconforming billboard in question
shall be exempt from the prohibition on billboards in this chapter only until
expiration of the term of such lease or license agreement, as so extended.
(1999 Code)
5.72.060: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person, entity or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect any other sections, provisions, clauses or application hereof which can
be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application. To this
end, the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.74
PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES; PARKING OR STORAGE
SECTION:
5.74.010: License Required
5.74.020: License Fee
5.74.030: Operation; Premises Location Restrictions
5.74.040: Changing Identification Marks Or License Tags
5.74.050: Inspection For Compliance
5.74.060: Parking Lot Defined
5.74.070: License Requirements
5.74.080: Conduct Of Other Business On Same Premises
5.74.090: Rates And Hours To Be Posted
5.74.100: Building Construction Regulations
5.74.110: Fire Protection Requirements
5.74.120: Driveways
5.74.130: Trash And Refuse Containers
5.74.140: Intoxicating Liquor Restrictions
5.74.150: Abandoned, Junked And Other Vehicles Prohibited
5.74.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a public garage in the
city without having first obtained a license therefor as is provided in this
chapter. (1999 Code)
5.74.020: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for license to operate or maintain a public garage shall be as
specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.74.030: OPERATION; PREMISES LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage in a frame building, or
in any building or structure used for school, church or theater purposes, or in
any building that does not conform to the requirements of the building
ordinances. The premises of every garage must be kept clean and free from
flammable waste material. (1999 Code)
5.74.040: CHANGING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OR LICENSE TAGS:
It is unlawful for any person to change the identification marks on the engine
of any car or automobile in any public garage. It is also unlawful to change
the license tags on cars, excepting in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Utah department of motor vehicles. (1999 Code)
5.74.050: INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE:
It shall be the duty of the sheriff and the fire department to make or cause to
be made inspections of public garages as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of these provisions. Any law enforcement officer shall be
permitted at any reasonable time to view every car stored or kept in any public
garage, and it is unlawful to hinder any such inspection or to conceal any
motorcar or motor vehicle from such inspection. (1999 Code)
5.74.060: PARKING LOT DEFINED:
"Parking lot", as used herein, means and includes any place maintained for the
outdoor parking of cars, where such parking is permitted upon payment or
compensation, or is made available solely to the patrons or customers of any
place of business. "Parking lot" does not include any public place. (1999 Code)
5.74.070: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to operate a parking lot without having first obtained a license
therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the license
official and shall contain all necessary information to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this section, including a description of the location and
size of the lot, the number of cars to be accommodated, and a statement of any
services, other than parking, and of any articles or commodities for sale,
offered to patrons of the parking lot. The annual fee for such license shall be
as prescribed in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.74.080: CONDUCT OF OTHER BUSINESS ON SAME PREMISES:
If any business, other than that of parking lot, is conducted on the same
premises with a parking lot, such business shall be conducted in full
compliance with all ordinances pertinent thereto, and any license required for
the operation of such business must be procured and the fee required therefor
must be paid. (1999 Code)
5.74.090: RATES AND HOURS TO BE POSTED:
At the entrance of each parking lot there shall be posted, in words and figures
large enough to be read by prospective patrons, a statement of the rates to be
charged and the closing hours. (1999 Code)
5.74.100: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
Any buildings constructed on a parking lot shall be constructed in full
compliance with all applicable ordinances, and shall have exterior walls of
nonflammable material; however, any structure used or to be used for office
purposes only may have less than the minimum area requirements prescribed for
residences or commercial buildings. (1999 Code)
5.74.110: FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to operate any parking lot unless there are available on the
premises adequate fire extinguishers and personnel competent to use the same.
There shall be maintained on each parking lot at least one hand chemical fire
extinguisher having a capacity of one quart of liquid or two and one-half (21/
2) pounds of carbon dioxide for each ten (10) cars for which accommodations are
offered, which extinguisher shall always be maintained in good order and in
accessible places. Where accommodations are provided for more than one hundred
(100) cars, there shall be maintained, in addition to the hand extinguishers
required, at least one portable chemical fire extinguisher having a capacity of
two and one-half (21/2) gallons of liquid or fifteen (15) pounds of carbon
dioxide. (1999 Code)
5.74.120: DRIVEWAYS:
No driveway to a parking lot shall be constructed except in full compliance
with the ordinances relative to the issuance of permits for driveways. It shall
be the duty of the operator of each parking lot to maintain the sidewalk and
parkway over which such driveway passes in good condition. (1999 Code)
5.74.130: TRASH AND REFUSE CONTAINERS:
If a parking lot is maintained in connection with a licensed establishment
serving food for consumption on the premises, and food or drinks are served to
the occupants of cars, adequate containers must be maintained for all trash and
refuse, all refuse must be kept cleaned up, and the premises otherwise must be
kept thoroughly cleaned by the proprietor. (1999 Code)
5.74.140: INTOXICATING LIQUOR RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to serve intoxicating liquor for consumption in any car parked
in a parking lot or to consume any intoxicating liquor while therein. (1999
Code)
5.74.150: ABANDONED, JUNKED AND OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to park or store in any parking lot any vehicle that is not in a
condition ready for use, or to permit the parking in such lot of any abandoned,
junked or partially disabled vehicle. It is unlawful to use any parking lot for
storage or parking of any vehicle for the purpose of displaying the same for
sale. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.76
PRIVATE DETECTIVES
SECTION:
5.76.010: License Required
5.76.020: Exemptions
5.76.030: License Fee
5.76.040: License; Applicant Eligibility
5.76.050: License; Investigation Of Applications
5.76.060: License; Bond Required
5.76.070: License; Display Requirements
5.76.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of private detective or
investigator for a fee or reward unless such person is first licensed by the
city. (1999 Code)
5.76.020: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in these provisions shall be construed to require a license by any
detective or investigator regularly employed by a firm or business to patrol
the premises owned by such firm or business. (1999 Code)
5.76.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.76.040: LICENSE; APPLICANT ELIGIBILITY:
Applicants must be at least twenty one (21) years of age and be licensed by the
state department of public safety. No license shall be issued to any person who
has been convicted of a felony by the courts of this or any other state, or who
has been convicted anywhere of any act which, if done in this state, would
constitute an assault, theft, larceny, unlawful entry, extortion, buying or
receiving stolen property, unlawful use or possession of weapons or burglar's
tools, escape from lawful custody, or a crime involving moral turpitude. Every
applicant shall file with the sheriff a recent photograph and shall permit his
fingerprints to be taken in order to assist the sheriff in his investigative
function. (1999 Code)
5.76.050: LICENSE; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS:
Applications shall be referred by the license official to the sheriff, who
shall make or cause to be made an investigation as to the applicant's
experience and qualifications to engage in such business, and may interview the
applicant. The sheriff's findings shall be referred by the license official to
the mayor, which shall approve or deny the application. (1999 Code)
5.76.060: LICENSE; BOND REQUIRED:
Applications shall be accompanied by a cash bond or letter of credit as
specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, in a form acceptable to the city attorney,
conditioned that the applicant, if issued a license hereunder, will comply
fully with all city ordinances and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations; and further, that applicant shall pay all damages occasioned by
any person by reason of any misstatement, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit of
the licensee, his agent, or employees. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-
2010)
5.76.070: LICENSE; DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS:
No license granted under these provisions shall be transferable, and every
licensee shall, at all times where practical, carry on his person a card issued
by the license official, certifying such person to be duly licensed to engage
in the business of private detective. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.77
RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
5.77.010: Restaurant Defined
5.77.020: License Required
5.77.030: License Fee
5.77.040: Applications; Referral To Health Department
5.77.050: License Revocation Conditions
5.77.060: Compliance With Health Ordinances Required
5.77.070: Employees Circulating Among Guests; Restrictions
5.77.080: Entertainment; Hours When Restricted
5.77.090: Offensive Behavior Prohibited
5.77.010: RESTAURANT DEFINED:
"Restaurant" means any place where food is prepared or served for sale or sold
for human consumption on or off the premises. (1999 Code)
5.77.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operations of a
restaurant in the city without first obtaining a license as required in this
chapter. (1999 Code)
5.77.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a restaurant shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.77.040: APPLICATIONS; REFERRAL TO HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be referred to the
health department for investigation and recommendation in accordance with the
health ordinances of the city. (1999 Code)
5.77.050: LICENSE REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
The license granted by this chapter may be revoked by the mayor at any time
upon notice and hearing, for violation of any ordinance of the city or law of
the state. (1999 Code)
5.77.060: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH ORDINANCES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of a
restaurant in the city without complying strictly with the health ordinances of
the city. (1999 Code)
5.77.070: EMPLOYEES CIRCULATING AMONG GUESTS; RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to permit any
employee to circulate among the patrons or guests of such place of business
except to take or serve orders, or to permit any employee to sit down at any
table, counter or other place in such place of business with any patron or
guest. It is unlawful for any employee of such place of business to circulate
among the patrons or guests, or for any employee to sit down at any table,
counter or any other place in such place of business with any patron or guest.
(1999 Code)
5.77.080: ENTERTAINMENT; HOURS WHEN RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for the keeper, manager or person in charge of any restaurant to
permit any singing, dancing, playing of musical instruments or any other form
of amusement or entertainment to be carried on in such restaurant or public
dining room, or in any room, booth or other place connected therewith on or
after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the same
day. (1999 Code)
5.77.090: OFFENSIVE BEHAVIOR PROHIBITED:
   A.   Person In Charge: It is unlawful for the keeper, manager or the person
in charge of any restaurant to permit any person to conduct himself or herself,
by word or act therein, or in any room, booth or other place connected
therewith, in such manner as to constitute disturbing the peace, disorderly
conduct, or a public nuisance under this code.
   B.   Nudity: It is unlawful to permit any dancer, entertainer or other
person to appear in or on such place of business in a state of "nudity", as
defined in
chapter 5.82 of this title. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.78
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
5.78.010: License Required; Fee
5.78.020: License Application
5.78.030: Reports From Licensee Required
5.78.040: Section Provisions Supplementary
5.78.050: Vehicles To Be Covered
5.78.060: Refuse Disposal Restrictions
5.78.010: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenging, or
collecting or disposing of animal or vegetable refuse or offal, without first
having secured a license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be as
specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.78.020: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the license official, and shall
be referred by him to the mayor. No such permit shall be issued except on order
of the mayor. (1999 Code)
5.78.030: REPORTS FROM LICENSEE REQUIRED:
Every person granted a license under the provisions of this chapter to collect
garbage, trade waste or market waste must report to the Salt Lake city-county
health department the names and addresses of all places of business or
individuals from which collection of any such materials is made by such
licensed collector. Report must be made as required by the health department.
(1999 Code)
5.78.040: SECTION PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTARY:
The provisions of this section shall supplement and be in addition to those
provisions found under the rules and regulations of the health department.
(1999 Code)
5.78.050: VEHICLES TO BE COVERED:
Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be equipped with
covers for such portions as are used for the transportation of refuse. (1999
Code)
5.78.060: REFUSE DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse in any place
in the city limits or within one mile thereof except in such areas as are
approved for such disposal or storage. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.80
SERVICE STATIONS
SECTION:
5.80.010: Definitions
5.80.020: License Required
5.80.030: License Fee
5.80.040: License Issuance Conditions
5.80.050: Coin Or Credit Operated Stations
5.80.060: Nonbusiness Filling Stations
5.80.070: Food And Beverage Sales
5.80.010: DEFINITIONS:
SERVICE STATION: A. A place of business where gasoline or any highly volatile
fuels for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines are sold or offered for
sale at retail and dispensed into the fuel tanks of such motor vehicles.
   B.   "Service station" also means and includes a private storage tank where
such products are dispensed for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines.
SERVICE STATION WITH CONVENIENCE STORE: A service station that sells at retail
prepackaged or ready to eat food and/or beverages in conjunction with such
business' sale at retail of gasoline and other volatile fuels; provided, that
the gross annual revenue realized by such food and/or beverage sales do not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of that business' total gross annual revenue.
(1999 Code)
5.80.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to conduct or operate any service station or service station
with convenience store in the city without having first obtained a license
therefor; provided, that no license shall be issued to an individual until the
necessary inspection permits have been acquired from the fire department. (1999
Code)
5.80.030: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for operating a service station or a service station with
convenience store shall be as specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this title. Such fee shall be in lieu of the flammable combustible
handlers' fee. (1999 Code)
5.80.040: LICENSE ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
No such license shall be issued unless the location and equipment to be used
fully comply with all the ordinances of the city and the fire prevention code
of the national fire prevention association governing the storage and handling
of combustible liquids. (1999 Code)
5.80.050: COIN OR CREDIT OPERATED STATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain any credit or
coin operated service station without the services of an attendant on duty at
all times. (1999 Code)
5.80.060: NONBUSINESS FILLING STATIONS:
Any person, firm or corporation maintaining or operating any fuel storage tank
for the use of automobiles of the owner, lessee, employees or agents of such
person, firm or corporation shall comply with all the provisions of applicable
city ordinances except the payment of a fee provision. (1999 Code)
5.80.070: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES:
No food or beverages shall be served, sold or allowed to be consumed on the
premises of a service station or a service station with convenience store
without the licensee first acquiring the necessary food handling permits and
licenses required by the ordinances of the city. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.82
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING
SECTION:
5.82.010: Title
5.82.020: Purpose
5.82.030: General Applicability
5.82.040: Obscenity
5.82.050: Definitions
5.82.060: Zoning
5.82.070: Sexually Oriented Business; Additional Location Requirements
5.82.080: Method Of Measurement
5.82.090: Single Location And Name
5.82.100: Moving Of Business Location
5.82.110: Business Categories
5.82.120: Hours Of Operation
5.82.130: Business License Required
5.82.140: Business License Application; Disclosure
5.82.150: License And Work Permit Fees
5.82.160: Business License Term
5.82.170: License Display
5.82.180: Issuance Of Business License For Sexually Oriented Business
5.82.190: Transfer Of Ownership Of Business License Prohibited
5.82.200: Change In Information
5.82.210: Regulations Pertaining To Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or
Videos
5.82.220: Stage Requirements
5.82.230: Employee Work Permit Required
5.82.240: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Work Permits
5.82.250: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Work Permit Application;
Disclosure
5.82.260: State Licensing Exemption
5.82.270: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Work Permit Issuance And Term
5.82.280: Change In Employee Information
5.82.290: License Fees
5.82.300: License Display
5.82.310: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Conduct
5.82.320: Activities Of Patrons
5.82.340: Injunctions
5.82.350: Suspension
5.82.360: Revocation
5.82.370: Hearing, Revocation, License Denial, Suspension; Appeal
5.82.380: Violation; Penalty
5.82.390: Severability
5.82.010: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
THE SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 02-21,
9-5-2002)
5.82.020: PURPOSE:
It is the objective of this chapter that the city establish reasonable and
uniform regulations governing the operation of sexually oriented businesses and
their employees in the city. This chapter shall be construed by the city to
protect the governmental interests recognized by this chapter in a manner
consistent with constitutional protection provided by the United States and
Utah constitutions. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.030: GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances. (Ord.
02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.040: OBSCENITY:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any material which
is contrary to the provisions of the city code, or other applicable federal or
state statutes prohibiting obscenity. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.050: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displaced are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter exhibiting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues, or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of
the following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas";
   B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant bottle club, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
   A.   Persons who appear seminude;
   B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or
   C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which offers
public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which regularly provides
patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and which
advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means
of a sign visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television; and offers a sleeping room for rent for a period
of time less than ten (10) hours; or allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the
sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly
shown for any form of consideration.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear live in a state of seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities".
BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL: The city business license officer or his designee.
CONTROLLING INTEREST: The power, directly or indirectly, to direct the
operation, management or policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty
percent (20%) or more of any class of voting securities of a business. The
ownership, control, or power to vote twenty percent (20%) or more of any class
of voting securities of a business shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to
be the power to direct the management, operation or policies of the business.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS ON: The dominant or principal
theme of the object described by such a phrase. For instance, when the phrase
refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on"
the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas". The films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or description of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full
time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is designated an
employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises or similar type of
function.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Establish or establishment shall mean and include
any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business.
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
HEARING OFFICER: The mayor of the city of Holladay or a designee of the mayor.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In case
of an "employee", it shall mean the person in whose name the employee license
has been issued.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering,
or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
any part of the nipple.
OPAQUE: Impervious, having capacity to block out or obstruct the visual image
of an object.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO OPERATE: To cause to function or to put or keep in a state
of doing business. "Operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of
the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner,
or licensee of the business.
PARK: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational
activities, including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails,
swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land
within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the
city park and recreation authorities.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, profit,
reward, or any other form of consideration.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
PLACE OPEN TO PUBLIC VIEW: An area capable of observance by persons from the
general community, where an expectation for privacy is not reasonably
justified, and includes a dedicated roadway, sidewalk, a parking lot, any
public way, a theater, a restaurant, a movie theater, any room in a hotel or
motel other than a guest room, or any other place where an expectation for
privacy is not reasonably justified.
PROTECTED USES: Churches, public libraries, public parks or parkways, public
recreation centers, public and private schools, and any residence or
residential district.
REGULARLY FEATURED OR REGULARLY SHOWN: A consistent or substantial course of
conduct such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial
portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business
of the sexually oriented business.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which any opaque clothing covers no more than the
genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, adult
cabaret, and adult motel.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Human male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal; or
   B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered buttocks, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage, male or female genitals, or a female breast.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: A. Any of the following offenses as they are
defined by applicable Utah state statute: prostitution or promotion of
prostitution; dissemination of obscenity or illegal pornographic materials;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual abuse;
sexual abuse of a child; sexual exploitation of children; sexual performance by
a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; sexual battery; rape;
indecent exposure; indecency with a child; the crimes of criminal pandering,
tax violations, embezzlement, or racketeering, if such crimes are directly
related to the operation of a sexually oriented business; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or distribution of a controlled substance; criminal
attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or
offenses involving the same elements from any jurisdiction if the offenses were
committed in the state of Utah, regardless of the exact title of the offense,
for which:
      1.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
      2.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
      3.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any twenty four (24) month period.
   B.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY: Acts of, or simulating:
   A.   Masturbation;
   B.   Sexual intercourse;
   C.   Sexual copulation with a person or a beast;
   D.   Fellatio;
   E.   Cunnilingus;
   F.   Bestiality;
   G.   Pederasty;
   H.   Buggery;
   I.   Sodomy;
   J.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A through I of this definition.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the
following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
VIEWING ROOM: The room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, video cassette
or other video production. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.060: ZONING:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any
location within the city not zoned for such business. Businesses regulated by
this chapter shall not be located closer than six hundred feet (600') to each
other and not closer than six hundred feet (600') to protected uses. (Ord. 02-
21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.070: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS; ADDITIONAL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business licensed as a sexually oriented business to be
located within six hundred feet (600') of a business licensed for the
consumption of alcohol or liquor. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.080: METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
The six hundred foot (600') limitation is measured from the nearest property
line of the business regulated by this chapter to the nearest property line of
the other sexually oriented business or business licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol, or area of protected use. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.090: SINGLE LOCATION AND NAME:
   A.   Licensed Premises: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license
issued pursuant to this chapter at any location other than the licensed
premises.
   B.   Name Of Business: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to
do business in the city under any name other than the business name specified
in the application. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.100: MOVING OF BUSINESS LOCATION:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business, as regulated herein, to
relocate or otherwise move its location or area of operation. A sexually
oriented business wishing to relocate must submit the appropriate application
for a license as required under this chapter. Such application shall be
reviewed under the terms and conditions of this chapter and applicable city
ordinances. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.110: BUSINESS CATEGORIES:
The categories of sexually oriented business are:
   A.   Adult arcade;
   B.   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store;
   C.   Adult cabaret;
   D.   Adult motel;
   E.   Adult motion picture theater
   F.   Adult theater. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.120: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All premises licensed to operate a sexually oriented business shall only
operate between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. of the following day. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.130: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful:
   A.   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a
person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business
without having secured a sexually oriented business work permit pursuant to
this chapter.
   D.   Sexually oriented business licenses will be limited to one for each six
thousand (6,000) residents of the city. Any available license will be issued on
a first come, first serve basis. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.140: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION; DISCLOSURE:
   A.   Signature Required: If a person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license
as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, the application shall include the full legal name,
address, and state of incorporation of the business. Each officer, director,
general partner, or other person who owns a controlling interest in the
business, or who will participate directly in decisions relating to management
and control of the business, shall sign the license application as an
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this ordinance and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   B.   Temporary License: Upon filing a completed application for a sexually
oriented business license or sexually oriented business work permit, the
business license official shall issue a temporary license to the applicant,
which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to
deny or grant the license.
   C.   Information Required For Complete Application: An application shall be
considered complete when it contains the information required in subsections C1
through C5 of this section as follows:
      1.   The full legal name and any other names or aliases used by the
applicant;
      2.   The applicant's date and place of birth;
      3.   Present business address and telephone number;
      4.   Identification issued by a federal or state governmental agency with
the individual's colored photograph, signature, and physical description;
      5.   Fingerprints on a form provided by a public safety department;
      6.   The identity of each individual authorized by the corporation
partnership or noncorporate entity to receive service of process. If the
application is for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6").
   D.   Statement Of Convictions: Each applicant must provide a statement of
whether the applicant has been convicted of, or has pled guilty or nolo
contendere to, a "specified criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, and
if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each.
   E.   Nonowner Applicant Of Property: In the event the applicant is not the
owner of record of the real property upon which the business or proposed
business is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a
notarized statement from the legal or equitable owner of the possessory
interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of business for
which the applicant seeks a license to operate a sexually oriented business on
the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant
shall furnish the name, address, and phone number of the owner of record of the
property, as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to
the premises on which the service is or will be located. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.150: LICENSE AND WORK PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Required: Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall
be required to pay a regulatory license fee as set forth in the consolidated
fee schedule as adopted from time to time by the city council.
   B.   Fee Additional: This fee shall be in addition to the other licenses and
fees required to do business in the city. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.160: BUSINESS LICENSE TERM:
A license shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. All
sexually oriented business licenses shall expire on december 31 of each year
regardless of when issued. The license fees required shall not be prorated for
any portion of the year. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.170: LICENSE DISPLAY:
Any sexually oriented business location within the boundaries of the city must
display the license granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent public
location within the business premises. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.180: ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
   A.   Time Limit; Conditions For Nonissuance: Under no circumstances shall
the total time for the city to issue a license or issue a written intent to
deny an application for a license exceed thirty (30) days from the receipt of a
completed application. The business license official shall issue a license to
the applicant unless the official finds one or more of the following to be true
by a preponderance of the evidence:
      1.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age or any higher age,
if the license sought requires a higher age.
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant
in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request
for information specifically authorized by this chapter.
      4.   The license fees required by this chapter have not been paid.
      5.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
      6.   Each applicant must provide a statement of whether the applicant has
been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a "specified
criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each. The fact
that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification pursuant to this section.
   B.   Content Of License: The license, if granted, shall state on its face
the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the
license issued to the licensee, the expiration date, and, if the license is for
a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business.
The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.190: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESS LICENSE PROHIBITED:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be
transferable. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.200: CHANGE IN INFORMATION:
The licensee shall submit, in writing, any change in the information required
to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business work permit to the business license
official within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.210: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR
VIDEOS:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of
less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films, video
cassettes, or other video reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the
display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall
comply with the following requirements. It shall be unlawful for a person
having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
   A.   Diagram Of Premises: Each application for a sexually oriented business
license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all
manager's stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras
and monitors installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall
designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall
also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The business license official may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram
that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
   B.   Sworn Application: The application shall be sworn to be true and
correct by the applicant.
   C.   Alterations Require Approval: No alteration in the configuration or
location of a manager's station or viewing room may be made without the prior
approval of the business license official.
   D.   Prohibited Areas To Patrons: It shall be the duty of the operator, and
of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection A of this section.
   E.   Lighting: The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-
candle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by
patrons or open for business.
   F.   Sexual Activity: It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in
or on the licensed premises.
   G.   Viewing Room Limited To One Person: It shall be the duty of the
operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that not more
than one person is present in a viewing room at any time. No person shall enter
a viewing room that is occupied by another person.
   H.   Openings In Viewing Rooms: It shall be the duty of the operator, and of
any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind
exist between viewing rooms. No person shall make an attempt to make an opening
of any kind between viewing rooms.
   I.   Violators Removed: It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any
employee who discovers two or more patrons in a viewing room, or discovers any
person making or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing
rooms, to immediately escort such persons from the premises.
   J.   Openings Secured: It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any
employee who discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to
immediately secure such rooms, and prevent entry into them by any patron until
such time as the wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the
opening. Removal and repairing openings between viewing rooms shall be in a
manner that is as structurally substantial as the original wall construction.
   K.   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the operator, at least once each
business day, to inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any
kind.
   L.   Signage Required: It shall be the duty of the operator to post
conspicuous signs in well lighted entry areas of the business stating all of
the following:
      1.   No loitering is permitted in viewing rooms.
      2.   The occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person.
      3.   Sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
      4.   The making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited.
      5.   Violators will be required to leave the premises.
      6.   Violations of subsections L2 through L4 of this section are
unlawful.
   M.   Floor Coverings: It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that
floor coverings in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with
no rugs or carpeting.
   N.   Wall Surfaces And Seating: It shall be the duty of the operator to
ensure that all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing rooms are
constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable
material.
   O.   Sanitation; Cleaning Procedures: It shall be the duty of the operator
to ensure that premises are clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if
the operator complies with the following cleaning procedures:
      1.   The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at least
two (2) cleanings per day, documented by appropriate logs.
      2.   The operator shall provide an employee to check all areas for
garbage, trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas
with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be
collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal
facility at least once each week. Prior to collection solid waste shall be
stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and
which will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
      3.   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any room providing
patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include
floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras, and windows and other
surfaces.
   P.   Unobstructed Views: The interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises in which patrons are permitted, including the
interior of each viewing room, but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose. A manager's station shall not exceed forty
(40) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's
stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of
the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct
line of sight from the manager's station. It is the duty of the operator to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty
of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the
premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this subsection remains
unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the
premises. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.220: STAGE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of seminudity
unless the employee is at least three feet (3') from patrons and customers and
on a stage at least two feet (2') from the floor. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.230: EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to act as a sexually oriented business employee,
without first obtaining a sexually oriented business work permit, as specified
in section
5.82.240 et seq., of this chapter. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.240: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE WORK PERMITS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ, or for any
individual to be employed as a sexually oriented business employee unless that
employee first obtains a sexually oriented business employee work permit. (Ord.
02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.250: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT APPLICATION;
DISCLOSURE:
   A.   Temporary License; Information Required For Complete Application: Upon
the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee
work permit, the business license official shall issue a temporary license to
the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of
the city to deny or grant the work permit. An application shall be considered
complete when it contains the information required in subsections A1 through A5
of this section as follows:
      1.   The correct legal name of each applicant;
      2.   Present business address and telephone number;
      3.   Identification issued by a federal or state governmental agency with
the individual's date of birth, colored photograph, signature, and physical
description;
      4.   The individual's fingerprints on a form provided by a public safety
department;
      5.   Each applicant must provide a statement of whether the applicant has
been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a "specified
criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each. The fact
that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification pursuant to this section. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
   B.   License Additional: A license or permit required by this chapter is in
addition to any other licenses or permits required by the city, county, or
state to engage in the business or occupation. Persons engaged in the operation
of an adult oriented business or in employment in an adult oriented business
shall comply with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws,
ordinances, and statutes, including land use ordinances, as may be required.
(Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   C.   Confidentiality: The information provided by an applicant in connection
with an application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the
city on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed
only to law enforcement agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public
safety function, or as may be required by governing law or court order. The
information provided by a sexually oriented business license applicant in
connection with the application for a license under this chapter shall be
maintained by the business license official. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.260: STATE LICENSING EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar
individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or
counseling, a licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist, or
psychologist while providing professional services for which they are licensed,
nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for activities in the
classroom. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.270: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT ISSUANCE AND TERM:
   A.   Time Limit; Conditions For Nonissuance: Within thirty (30) days of the
initial filing date of the receipt of a completed application, the business
license official shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of
intent to deny a license to the applicant. The business license official shall
approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found
by a preponderance of evidence to be true:
      1.   The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The applicant has failed to provide information as required by
subsection A4 of this section for issuance of a license or has falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form.
      3.   The license application fee required by this section has not been
paid.
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity",
as defined in this chapter, or has been shown to have committed two (2) or more
violations of section
5.82.310 of this chapter within the previous year.
   B.   Term: Sexually oriented business employee work permits may be obtained
at any time throughout the year. All employee work permits will expire on the
last day of the twelfth month following issuance.
   C.   Renewal: Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented
business employee work permits may be renewed only by making application and
payment of a fee as provided for in this chapter. Application for renewal
should be made at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of said
licenses and work permits, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license or work permit will not be
affected. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.280: CHANGE IN EMPLOYEE INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for a
sexually oriented business work permit will be given, in writing, to the
business license official within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord.
02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.290: LICENSE FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business employee work permit shall be
required to pay yearly regulatory license fees pursuant to the consolidated fee
schedule as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.300: LICENSE DISPLAY:
A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's work permit on
his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working and
shall, while working on the sexually oriented business premises, produce such
work permit for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other
city official performing functions connected with the enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.310: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business licensee or sexually oriented
business employee to knowingly or intentionally:
   A.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, or the age of
twenty one (21) years if required by any applicable alcohol ordinance, on the
business premises;
   B.   Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the business premises;
   C.   Allow, offer or agree to the illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
   D.   Permit, commit, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or commit activities harmful to the minor
to occur on the licensed premises;
   E.   Permit, commit, offer or agree to permit any live "specified sexual
activity", as defined by city ordinances or state statutes in the presence of
any customer or patron;
   F.   Permit, offer or agree to a patron or customer to masturbate within or
upon the premises of a sexually oriented business;
   G.   Appear in a state of nudity before a patron on the premises of a
sexually oriented business;
   H.   Refuse to permit officers or agents of the city who are performing
functions connected with the enforcement of this chapter to inspect the
portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are
permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any
time the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or open for
business. A licensee's knowing or intentional refusal to permit such an
inspection shall constitute a violation of this section. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being
rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. (Ord. 02-
21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.320: ACTIVITIES OF PATRONS:
It is unlawful for any patron to knowingly or intentionally:
   A.   Touch in any manner a sexually oriented business employee while the
sexually oriented business employee is seminude;
   B.   Place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any
sexually oriented business employee while the sexually oriented business
employee is seminude; or
   C.   Appear in a state of nudity before another person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.340: INJUNCTIONS:
An entity or individual who, without a valid license, operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, without a valid license, or who employs
or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates
such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil
and criminal violations provided in this chapter, and any other remedy
available at law or in equity. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.350: SUSPENSION:
The city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented
business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it is
determined that the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated
this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this chapter. The
city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented
business employee work permit if it is determined that the employee has
knowingly violated this chapter. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.360: REVOCATION:
   A.   Cause Of Suspension: The business license official shall issue a
written intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee work permit if a cause of suspension in section
5.82.370 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   Conditions For Revocation: The business license official shall issue a
written intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee work permit if the official determines that a
licensee or an employee, with the knowledge of the licensee:
      1.   Knowingly gave false or misleading information in the application or
in any document or diagram related to the operation of the sexually oriented
business.
      2.   Knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances
on the premises.
      3.   Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.
      4.   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of
time when the licensee's license was suspended.
      5.   A licensee has been convicted, pled guilty, or pled nolo contendere
to a "specified criminal activity", as defined in this chapter.
      6.   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual
activity to occur in or on the licensed premises.
      7.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes or fees
related to the sexually oriented business.
   C.   Appeal No Effect On Revocation: The fact that any conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
   D.   Acts Of Employees: For the purposes of this chapter, an act by a
sexually oriented business employee that constitutes grounds for revocation of
that employee's work permit shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business
for purposes of denial, suspension, or revocation proceedings only if the
hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that an officer,
director, or general partner, or an employee who managed, supervised, or
controlled the operation of the business, knowingly allowed such act to occur
on the sexually oriented business premises.
   E.   Nature Of Revocation: When, after the notice and hearing procedure
described in this chapter, the business license official revokes a license, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation
becomes effective; provided, that if the conditions of section
5.82.380 of this chapter are met, a provisional license will be granted
pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the enforcement officer
finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections B1, B4 and B7 of
this section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a
license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective. If the license was revoked under subsections B2, B3, B5 and
B6 of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under this chapter has elapsed. (Ord. 02-
21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.370: HEARING, REVOCATION, LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION; APPEAL:
   A.   Notice; Hearing: If the business license official determines that facts
exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter,
the city shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the
city's intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds
therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail.
      1.   The notification shall be directed to the most current business
address or other mailing address on file with the business license official for
the respondent. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of such notice, the
respondent may provide to the business license official a written response that
shall include a statement of reasons why the respondent believes the license
should not be denied, suspended, or revoked.
      2.   Within five (5) days of the receipt of respondent's written
response, the business license official shall notify respondent in writing of
the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response,
the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the
opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by
counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross examine
any of the city's witnesses. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2)
days, unless extended to meet the requirements of due process and proper
administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written opinion
within five (5) days after the hearing. If a court action challenging the
city's decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court
a transcript of the hearing within ten (10) days after the issuance of the
hearing officer's written opinion.
      3.   If a written response from respondent is not received by the
business license official within the time stated in subsection A1 of this
section or, if after a hearing, the hearing officer concludes that grounds as
specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the
license, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five
(5) days after the hearing officer sends, by certified mail, written notice to
the respondent that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such
notice shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal
such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer
finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license,
then within five (5) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall
immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and
shall notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. The
hearing officer shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the
applicant.
   B.   Appeal: An applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application
for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked
shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge,
restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension,
or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a
provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to
continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment
as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry
of a judgment on the aggrieved party's appeal or other action to restrain or
otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement.
   C.   Application During Temporary License Or Provisional License Periods:
Sexually oriented businesses or sexually oriented business employees operating
or working under temporary licenses, provisional licenses, or de facto
temporary licenses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.380: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license as provided in this
chapter, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a class B
misdemeanor. Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate offense.
The prosecuting agency shall have the discretion to charge any offense under
this chapter as an infraction. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
5.82.390: SEVERABILITY:
This chapter and each section and provision of said chapter thereunder, are
hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not
withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to
be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said chapter,
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid,
the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and
provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held
invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such
sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or
provision so known to be invalid. (Ord. 02-21, 9-5-2002)
CHAPTER 5.84
SHOOTING GALLERIES
SECTION:
5.84.010: License Required
5.84.020: License Fees
5.84.030: Premises To Be Kept Clean
5.84.040: Targets And Safety Precautions
5.84.050: Conduct Regulations
5.84.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct a
shooting gallery of any kind in the city without having obtained a license
therefor. (1999 Code)
5.84.020: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for such galleries shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. Such fee shall be in addition to the general business
license fee. (1999 Code)
5.84.030: PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
Premises used for shooting galleries shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. (1999 Code)
5.84.040: TARGETS AND SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Targets shall be placed before a backstop of steel or other material
sufficiently thick to prevent any bullet or arrow from piercing it, and so
arranged that there will be no danger from ricocheting or deflected pieces of
bullet. All shooting galleries shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations regarding lead contamination. (1999 Code)
5.84.050: CONDUCT REGULATIONS:
All persons present in any shooting gallery shall conduct themselves in an
orderly manner, and shall not make or cause to be made any loud or unnecessary
noise. It is unlawful to gamble or bet in any such place. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.86
SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND PEDDLERS
SECTION:
5.86.005: Purpose
5.86.010: Definitions
5.86.020: Solicitation Prohibited
5.86.030: Exception For Invited Solicitor
5.86.040: Exemptions From Chapter
5.86.050: Charitable Exception
5.86.060: Registration Of Solicitors
5.86.070: Application For Certificate, Fees, Review, Issuance, Denial
5.86.080: Proof Of Identification Required
5.86.090: Registration Complete With Issuance
5.86.100: Form Of Certificate And Badge
5.86.110: Maintenance Of Registry
5.86.120: Renewal Of Certificate
5.86.130: Nontransferability
5.86.140: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
5.86.150: Revocation Of Certificate
5.86.160: Appeal
5.86.170: "No Soliciting" Notice
5.86.180: Duties Of Solicitors
5.86.190: Time Of Day Restrictions
5.86.200: Street Use Restrictions
5.86.210: Noise Prohibited
5.86.220: Sales Near Churches, Schools And Playgrounds
5.86.230: Fees
5.86.240: Penalties
5.86.005: PURPOSE:
The city has an interest in protecting the well being, tranquility, and privacy
of the home. The privacy includes an ability to avoid unwelcome intrusions, and
the city has a responsibility to protect citizens from such intrusions. The
city also has an interest in protecting consumers from inappropriate or
fraudulent practices and to protect its citizens from criminal activity such as
disorderly conduct, theft, trespass and assault. The city has a responsibility
to protect its citizens from actual harm as well as to protect them from
potential harm, which may result in unregulated door to door solicitation.
There must be a balance of these legitimate interests of the city and the
effect of the regulations on the rights of those who are regulated. Based upon
the information which the city has considered and the experience of its
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, the
city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this chapter
are tailored narrowly to preserve and protect the city interests reflected
herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those regulated. (Ord.
05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: A consumer cash sale or credit sale of goods or
services in which the seller or a person acting for him engages in a face to
face solicitation of the sale at a residence or place of employment of the
buyer and the buyer's agreement or offer to purchase is there given to the
seller or a person acting for him. It does not include a sale made pursuant to
preexisting open end accounts, or a sale made between the parties at a business
establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or
exhibited for sale.
REGISTRANT OR REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who is subject to this chapter
who has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the licensing
department of the city.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is
occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the land use laws of the
city.
SOLICITING OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities designed or
intended to seek, obtain, promote or facilitate home solicitation sale:
   A.   Seeking or attempting to obtain orders for the sale or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of
remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
   B.   Seeking or attempting to obtain prospective customers to apply for or
to purchase insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
   C.   Seeking or attempting to obtain contributions of money or any other
thing of value for the benefit of any association, organization, corporation,
or program;
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services;
   E.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
"soliciting".
SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person or persons engaged in the activities defined
as "soliciting". (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
5.86.020: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless authorized or permitted pursuant to the terms and provisions of this
chapter, the practice of being in and upon private residential property within
the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient
vendors of merchandise and/or services for the purpose of home solicitation
sales, soliciting, or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise and/or services, and/or for the purpose of disposing and/or
peddling or hawking, the same is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.030: EXCEPTION FOR INVITED SOLICITOR:
The prohibition under section
5.86.020 of this chapter shall not apply if the owner or occupant of the
private residential property has previously and specifically invited the
solicitor to the private residential property. Such invitation shall not
relieve the solicitor from complying with all other terms and provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.040: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER:
The terms and provisions of this chapter do not apply to persons engaged in
noncommercial distribution of religious tracts and information, the door to
door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of ideas
or engaged in political activities as a candidate or on behalf of a candidate
in a recognized federal, state or local election. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.050: CHARITABLE EXCEPTION:
The prohibition under section
5.86.020 of this chapter shall not apply if the solicitor is working on behalf
of a charitable organization recognized as such under regulations issued by the
IRS pursuant to its authority created by the terms of 26 USC section 501. Any
solicitor claiming such exception shall provide written verification to the
city license officer and receive approval from such officer prior to engaging
in any soliciting within the city. Such approval shall be evidenced by such
documentation as determined appropriate by the license officer. The charitable
exception shall apply generally to persons making solicitations for a church,
religious organization or charitable organization recognized by the IRS as a
nonprofit corporation, and shall include any unincorporated association or
corporation under the supervision and control of any church, charitable
organization or religious organization, if the church or organization is tax
exempt under IRS regulations. The charitable exception shall apply to students
soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic,
scientific or cultural programs, provided that the solicitation has been
approved by the school principal or superintendent of schools and such approval
has been filed in writing with the city license officer; provided, however,
that no such solicitation is permitted if the occupant of the residence has
complied with the "No Soliciting" provisions of section
5.86.170 of this chapter. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.060: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
All persons not exempted as provided in this chapter desiring to engage in
soliciting within the city shall, prior to doing so, apply to the city license
officer for an annual certificate of registration. The certificate executed by
the license officer or designee shall be maintained by the license officer and
a legal copy shall be carried by the registrant at all times while soliciting.
Upon request for inspection by an owner or occupant of a residence or a city
police officer while engaged in soliciting, the registrant shall show proof of
such registration. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.070: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE, FEES, REVIEW, ISSUANCE, DENIAL:
   A.   The city license officer shall provide a standard form for use for
registration of solicitors. The applicant shall pay a registration fee as set
by the city council. The registration fee shall not exceed the actual cost to
the city of processing the application and issuing the certificate of
registration. The applicant shall state upon oath or affirmation that the
information is truthfully provided to the best of the knowledge and belief of
the applicant. The applicant shall supply the following information and any
such additional information that the license officer may include upon the
application form:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases;
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of any and all organizations
for which applicant will be soliciting;
      3.   The applicant's home address and applicant's headquarters or place
or organization contact;
      4.   The names and addresses of applicant's immediate supervisor and
company officers and managers, if any;
      5.   The purpose for which soliciting will be done;
      6.   Whether a permit, license or certificate of registration in
connection with soliciting has ever been revoked by any jurisdiction,
explaining the circumstances;
      7.   The applicant shall also apply to the state bureau of criminal
identification for a criminal background check, and as a condition precedent to
issuance of a certificate of registration, the applicant shall provide to the
license officer a certified report from the bureau of criminal identification,
dated within thirty (30) days of the date of application, showing the criminal
history, if any, of the applicant; and
      8.   The applicant shall supply two (2) recent passport sized photographs
of him or herself.
   B.   Upon filing of a complete application by the applicant, and the payment
of the application fee, the license officer shall issue a temporary certificate
to the applicant which shall entitle the applicant to immediately proceed with
solicitation within the city. The license officer shall conduct a review and
investigation of the applicant's application as he or she finds necessary and
shall within thirty (30) days either issue the applicant a certificate of
registration or a written reason for denying the certificate of registration.
   C.   Upon review the license officer may refuse to issue a certificate of
registration to the applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The applicant falsified information on the application;
      2.   No application shall be approved for an applicant: a) with a felony
conviction within ten (10) years; b) who has been incarcerated in federal or
state prison within the past ten (10) years; c) who has ever been convicted of
a crime involving abuse of a child; d) who is on parole or probation to any
court or penal institution; e) who has received a conviction of any crime
involving moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years or a violation
involving trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against
person or property, such conviction being entered within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application;
      3.   The applicant is a person against whom a judgment, based upon fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation, has been entered within the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
      4.   The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the
immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction
of the license officer the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist.
(Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.080: PROOF OF IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
No temporary certificate of registration shall be issued to any applicant until
the applicant establishes proof of identification. The license officer shall
verify an applicant's true identity by use of any of the following that bear a
photograph of said applicant:
   A.   A valid driver's license or identification card issued by any state;
   B.   A valid United States uniformed service identification card;
   C.   A valid passport of the United States; or
   D.   Other equivalent identification. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.090: REGISTRATION COMPLETE WITH ISSUANCE:
Registration shall be complete when the license officer issues the final
certificate of registration. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.100: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND BADGE:
   A.   Each certificate shall be numbered, shall list the name of the
individual solicitor and of any organization on whose behalf the solicitor is
authorized to solicit, the date on which the certificate expires and shall be
dated and signed by the license officer or designee.
   B.   Each registered solicitor shall wear prominently on his or her person a
badge issued by the city with a recent photograph of the solicitor and the name
and address of any entity with which the solicitor is associated. Such badge
shall be worn at all times while the solicitor is engaged in soliciting. (Ord.
05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.110: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The license officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
record of every application received, together with any information pertaining
thereto, all certificates of registration issued, and all denials of
applications. Each application shall be numbered in consecutive order and each
certificate issued shall be assigned a number exclusive to the registered
solicitor. Every certificate renewed shall be identified with the duplicate
number of the application upon which it was initially issued. The license
officer shall furnish to the chief of police a listing of all certificates
issued and renewed and the chief of police shall maintain such listing for
public inspection and for identification. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.120: RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE:
A certificate shall be valid for the one year from the date it is issued and
shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of
issuance. Any certificate in good standing may be renewed upon request of the
registered solicitor. The registered solicitor shall be required to fill out a
renewal application providing the information required in the initial
registration and pay a renewal fee which fee shall not exceed the city's actual
cost of processing the application and renewing the certificate. (Ord. 05-05,
4-7-2005)
5.86.130: NONTRANSFERABILITY:
Certificates of registration shall be issued only in the name of the applicant
and the firm, corporation, or association on whose behalf the applicant is
authorized to solicit. The certificate shall be nontransferable from an
individual to another individual, from individual to firm, from firm to firm,
and firm to individual. It shall be a violation for a solicitor whose
certificate authorizes soliciting on behalf of a firm named in a certificate to
solicit on behalf of any other firm, organization, or association, or for any
purpose other than that specified on the application. Any certificate used by a
person other than the person for whom it was originally issued shall be
forfeited, confiscated and immediately cancelled. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.140: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation the first and last name of the solicitor, the name and
address of the entity with whom the solicitor is associated and the true
purpose of the solicitor's contact with the consumer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the city
endorses the solicitation or that the granting of a certificate of registration
implies any endorsement by the city of the solicitor's product or service or of
the individual solicitor. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.150: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
The registration of any solicitor may be revoked at any time for violating any
of the terms or provisions of this chapter or otherwise, if the solicitor
becomes ineligible to continue as a registered solicitor, including, but not
limited to, conviction of any felony in any jurisdiction or conviction of any
crime involving moral turpitude. The license officer shall issue a notice of
intent to revoke any certificate of registration issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter if the registrant is convicted of a violation of
this chapter or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a
certificate of registration. The notice of intent to revoke shall be
immediately given to the registrant by personal service or by certified mail to
the address listed on the application and to the organization for which the
registrant was soliciting. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the
certificate of registration shall become null and void and shall remain so
unless the solicitor files an appeal pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 05-05, 4-
7-2005)
5.86.160: APPEAL:
An applicant whose registration was denied or a registrant whose certificate
was revoked by the license officer shall have the right to appeal to the city
manager or his designee. Any appeal must be demanded in writing sent by
certified mail or hand delivered to the city recorder with a copy to the
license officer within seven (7) calendar days of the decision from which the
appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal,
the action complained of and the grounds for appeal. If the solicitor whose
registration is revoked or denied files an appeal the certificate of
registration or temporary certificate shall stay in effect until the appeal is
heard and resolved. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.170: "NO SOLICITING" NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence desiring to secure the protection of this
chapter shall give notice of a desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a
placard or sign no smaller than sixteen (16) square inches stating "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salesmen" or words of similar import which
shall be posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near the property
line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply to solicitors who are
soliciting under the provisions of section
5.86.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.180: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every solicitor shall, prior to entering premises on which a residence
or dwelling is located, examine the sidewalk leading to the residence or
dwelling unit and the door and areas near the door for any "No Soliciting" sign
or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a solicitor not to solicit on
the premises, such as, but not limited to, "No Salesmen" and "No Solicitors"
signs. If such sign or placard is posted, solicitor shall desist from any
efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall immediately depart
from such property. Possession of a certificate of registration does not in any
way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person not otherwise exempted
to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to
attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No
Soliciting" or similar sign or placard. It is a violation of this chapter for
any solicitor, through ruse, deception, or concealment of a purpose to solicit,
to take action calculated to secure an audience with the occupant of a
residence that has posted a "No Soliciting" or similar sign or placard.
   C.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by the occupant of a residence
or dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-
2005)
5.86.190: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit any
person at a residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and after eight thirty
o'clock (8:30) P.M., or on holidays (defined herein to include: New Year's Day,
Presidents' Day, Easter, Memorial Day, July 4 and 24, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day) unless the solicitor has express permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.200: STREET USE RESTRICTIONS:
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location on the public streets
or roads, nor shall any be permitted in a stationary location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede,
inconvenience or endanger the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the
judgment of a peace officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded,
inconvenienced or endangered. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.210: NOISE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any peddler licensed or registered under the provisions of
this chapter to sound a gong, blow a whistle or make any other loud noise to
attract customers, provided that such peddler may ring a small bell or play
soft music, provided that such ringing or playing does not emit sound audible
to the human ear at a distance greater than one block from its source. (Ord.
05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.220: SALES NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS AND PLAYGROUNDS:
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to stand or station himself, or to drive
any vehicle for the purpose of selling his wares and merchandise, or to sell or
offer to sell any of his wares or merchandise within two (2) blocks of any
public school property in the city between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on all days when school is in session, or
within one block of any public park or playground or church. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-
2005)
5.86.230: FEES:
The fees required under this chapter may be set by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
5.86.240: PENALTIES:
Any person who engages in soliciting without complying with the requirements of
this chapter or violates any other terms or provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 05-05, 4-7-2005)
CHAPTER 5.88
VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
5.88.010: Vending Machine Defined
5.88.020: Licensing Requirements; Inspection Fee
5.88.010: VENDING MACHINE DEFINED:
"Vending machine" means any self service device offered for public use which,
upon insertion of coins, tokens or currency, or by other means dispenses unit
servings of food or beverage, or other articles or items, either in bulk or in
package, without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending
operation. (1999 Code)
5.88.020: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; INSPECTION FEE:
   A.   Fee Schedule: In addition to the general business license fee, the
annual license fee for a vending machines (other than vending machines
dispensing cigarettes) is as specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.050 of this title.
   B.   Fees Accompany Application: These fees shall accompany the annual
license application filed with the license officer. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.90
VENDING MACHINES; CIGARETTES
SECTION:
5.90.010: License Required
5.90.020: License Application
5.90.030: License Fee
5.90.040: Sales To Persons Under Twenty-One
5.90.050: Violation; Penalty
5.90.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to sell or give away any cigarettes by means of a vending
machine without first being licensed to do so. (1999 Code)
5.90.020: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the license
official. Applications shall contain the name of the applicant, the address at
which sales are to be made, and the number of cigarette vending machines;
applications shall be filed with the license official, together with the
license fee hereinafter required. (1999 Code)
5.90.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a license under this chapter shall be as specified in the
fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.050 of this title. (1999 Code)
5.90.040: SALES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE:
No person shall maintain any tobacco vending machine in a place of business
where persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years are allowed. (1999 Code;
amd. Ord. 2021-06, 3-4-2021)
5.90.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter, or
permitting the same to be violated by their employees, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The holder of such license may also suffer the penalty of having
his license for such sale revoked for any such violation. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5.91
MOBILE FOOD BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.91.010: Purpose And Intent
5.91.020: Mobile Food Business Allowed
5.91.030: Definitions
5.91.040: Application For A Business License
5.91.050: Separate Applications
5.91.060: Fees; Annual Operation
5.91.070: Business Activity To Be Temporary
5.91.080: Design And Operation Guidelines
5.91.090: Signs
5.91.100: Professional And Personal Services Prohibited
5.91.110: Compliance Responsibility
5.91.120: Special Events
5.91.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to
provide responsible companies and individuals who engage in the operation of
mobile food businesses with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety,
traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety and
welfare of the community. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.020: MOBILE FOOD BUSINESS ALLOWED:
   A.   No person shall operate a mobile food business or a mobile food court,
without first having obtained a business license from the city in accordance
with this title.
   B.   Mobile food truck vehicles are allowed to operate only within those
zones as allowed by title 13,
chapter 13.100 of this code and in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Provisions found in this section shall not apply to vending carts,
mobile ice cream vendors, seasonal farm stands and other temporary merchants or
uses that are specifically authorized by this title or other city ordinances.
(Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.030: DEFINITIONS:
MOBILE FOOD BUSINESS: A business that serves food or beverages from a self-
contained unit either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, and is readily
movable, without disassembling, for transport to another location. The term
"mobile food business" shall not include vending carts or mobile ice cream
vendors.
MOBILE FOOD COURT: The lot or parcel where ten (10) or less mobile food truck
(s) or trailer(s) can be located for the business of selling food as approved
by a city of Holladay land use authority.
MOBILE FOOD TRAILER: A mobile food business that serves food or beverages from
a nonmotorized vehicle larger than three feet (3') in width and eight feet (8')
in length that is normally pulled behind a motorized vehicle. The term "mobile
food trailer" shall not include vending carts, mobile food trucks or mobile ice
cream vendors.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK: A mobile food business that serves food or beverages from an
enclosed self-contained motorized vehicle. The term "mobile food truck" shall
not include vending carts, mobile food trailers or mobile ice cream vendors.
VENDING CART: Includes any nonmotorized mobile device or pushcart smaller than
three feet (3') in width and eight feet (8') in length from which limited types
of products are sold or offered for sale directly to any consumer, where the
point of sale is conducted at the cart. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.040: APPLICATION FOR A BUSINESS LICENSE:
Application for all mobile food businesses including food courts shall be made
with the city business licensing division, prior to the commencement of
operation. The applicant shall submit the following information:
   A.   Name and address of applicant and the name and address of all employees
operating the mobile food truck or trailer and/or name and address of the owner
of the mobile food court.
   B.   The location(s) where the truck will be parked for business and the
proposed duration of the business activity along with written consent of the
property or business owner.
   C.   Where applicable, a copy of the conditional use permit for a mobile
food court approved by the Holladay City planning commission.
   D.   Name and address of the approved commercial supply source and primary
licensed food establishment, if applicable.
   E.   Each owner or driver operating the mobile food truck shall submit a
background check for review by the city.
   F.   License plate number of the mobile food truck or trailer.
   G.   A description of the preparation methods and food product offered for
sale, including the intended menu, display, and distribution containers.
   H.   A description of the vehicle to be used in conducting business
including, but not limited to, a description of any method to display food or
products to be offered for sale.
   I.   The anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and sold.
   J.   A valid copy of all necessary licenses or permits required by state or
local health and transportation authorities.
   K.   Each applicant for a license or renewal under this chapter shall
submit, with its application, a certificate of insurance executed by an
insurance company or association authorized to transact business in this state,
approved as to form by the city attorney, that there is in full force and
effect general liability insurance in an amount not less than amounts as set
forth in section 63-30-34 of the Utah code, as amended, or its successor. Such
policy or policies shall include coverage of all motor vehicles used in
connection with applicant's business. A current certificate of insurance shall
be kept on file with the city business license official at all times that
applicant is licensed by the city verifying such continuing coverage and naming
the city as an additional insured. The certificate shall contain a statement
that the city will be given written notification at least thirty (30) days
prior to cancellation or material change in the coverage without reservation of
nonliability for failure to so notify the city. Cancellation shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the license issued hereunder unless another insurance
policy complying herewith is provided and is in effect at the time of
cancellation/termination. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.050: SEPARATE APPLICATIONS:
Separate business license applications may be required for each mobile food
business. Separate business license fees shall be required for each mobile food
business vehicle operating under one business license. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-
2013)
5.91.060: FEES; ANNUAL OPERATION:
No license shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof
has paid an annual business regulatory fee as set forth in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, for each mobile food business or mobile food court.
(Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.070: BUSINESS ACTIVITY TO BE TEMPORARY:
All business activity related to mobile food businesses shall be of a temporary
nature, the duration of which shall not extend for more than sixteen (16) hours
within a twenty four (24) hour period at any one premises or location. (Ord.
2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.080: DESIGN AND OPERATION GUIDELINES:
Mobile food trucks operating in the city of Holladay shall comply with the
following design requirements:
   A.   Mobile food truck vehicles shall be designed to meet all applicable
health department requirements.
   B.   The mobile food truck shall not have a drive-through.
   C.   Mobile food truck vehicles shall be kept in good operating condition,
no peeling paint or rust shall be visible.
   D.   All grounds utilized by a mobile food business shall at all times be
maintained in a clean and attractive condition.
   E.   Trash and recycling containers shall be provided for use of the
business patrons.
   F.   Any enclosures or canopy extensions must be integrated into the design
of the mobile food business vehicle and must not project onto the public
sidewalk or any other part of the public right of way.
   G.   Power required for the operation of the mobile food truck may be self-
contained or by the use of public or private power sources upon providing
written consent from the property owner. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.090: SIGNS:
No signs shall be used to advertise the conduct of the mobile business at the
premises other than that which is physically attached to the vehicle, except
temporary signs authorized by section
13.82.210 of this code. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.100: PROFESSIONAL AND PERSONAL SERVICES PROHIBITED:
The performance of professional or personal services for sale shall not be
provided from a mobile food truck. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.110: COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
The holder shall not be relieved of any responsibility for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, whether the holder pays salary, wages or any other
form of compensation to drivers. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
5.91.120: SPECIAL EVENTS:
The restrictions of this chapter notwithstanding, nothing herein shall prohibit
the city from authorizing mobile food businesses, other than those licensed
under this chapter, to conduct concurrent vending operations within the public
right of way, or such other areas as the city may deem appropriate, during
special events (special event vendors). The special event vendors shall not be
governed by this chapter, but shall be governed by such other ordinance, city
policy, or executive order as may be applicable. (Ord. 2013-24, 9-19-2013)
CHAPTER 5.92
TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS
SECTION:
5.92.010: Definitions
5.92.020: License Required
5.92.030: Location Restrictions
5.92.040: Zoning Requirements
5.92.050: Violation
5.92.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
 
TOBACCO   Any substance or product as defined in Utah Code Annotated section. 10-8-41.6(1).
PRODUCT:
TOBACCO   Means the same as “retail tobacco specialty business” as defined in Utah Code
SPECIALTY Annotated section 10-8-41.6(1). (Ord. 2022-04, 1-20-2022)
BUSINESS:
 
5.92.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, carry on or maintain a
tobacco specialty business within the City of Holladay boundaries without a
license. (Ord. 2022-04, 1-20-2022)
5.92.030: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A license to operate a tobacco specialty business on any property shall not be
issued within the City of Holladay municipal limits, in accordance with
13.100 Appendix A Land Use Table 13. (Ord. 2022-04, 1-20-2022)
5.92.040: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
A license to operate a tobacco specialty business shall not be issued to a new
or existing retailer within any land use zone within the City of Holladay.
(Ord. 2022-04, 1-20-2022)
5.92.050: VIOLATION:
   A.   Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter, or
permitting the same to be violated by its employees or agents, is guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor.
   B.   The city's business license official shall have the authority to work
with county and local law enforcement to enforce the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2022-04, 1-20-2022)
TITLE 7
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM
CHAPTER 7.01
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM
SECTION:
7.01.010: Short Title
7.01.020: Purpose
7.01.030: Scope
7.01.040: Existing Law Continued
7.01.050: Criminal Prosecution Right
7.01.060: Effect Of Headings
7.01.070: Severability
7.01.080: Civil Liability
7.01.090: General Rules Of Interpretation
7.01.100: Definitions Applicable To Title Generally
7.01.110: Acts Include Causing, Aiding And Abetting
7.01.120: Service Of Notice Requirements
7.01.130: General Enforcement Authority
7.01.140: Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
7.01.150: Authority To Inspect
7.01.160: False Information Or Refusal Prohibited
7.01.170: Failure To Obey A Subpoena
7.01.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT or “ACE”
program. This title shall also be known as title 7 of the code of ordinances of
the City. It may be cited and pleaded under either designation.(Ord. 2025-17,
10-2-2025)
7.01.020: PURPOSE:
Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public health, safety,
welfare and quality of life. Code enforcement is effective only when done
quickly and fairly. An enforcement system that allows a combination of judicial
and administrative remedies is effective in correcting violations. (Ord. 2025-
17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.030: SCOPE:
The provisions of this title may be applied to all violations of the City Code
of the City of Holladay or applicable state codes which occur within the City
limits and such territory outside the City limits over which the City has
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional provision or law. This
title establishes an additional remedy that may be used by the City to achieve
compliance with applicable codes. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.040: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this title shall not invalidate any other title, chapter or
ordinance of this code, but shall be read in conjunction with those titles,
chapters and ordinances and shall be used as an additional remedy for
enforcement of violations thereof.(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.050: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION RIGHT:
The City shall have sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or
criminal judicial case or pursue an administrative enforcement action for the
violation of any of its ordinances or applicable code requirements. The
enactment of this title shall not be construed to limit the City’s right to
prosecute any violation as a criminal offense. If the City chooses to file both
administrative actions and criminal charges for the same violation, no civil
fees shall be assessed in the administrative action, but all other remedies
contained herein shall be available. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.060: EFFECT OF HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of this title.(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.070: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion or provision of
this title is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this title and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, portion or provision thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, portions or
provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to
all amendments made to this title.(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.080: CIVIL LIABILITY:
By establishing performance standards or by establishing obligations to act, it
is the intent of the City Council that the City employees and officers are
exercising discretionary authority in pursuit of an essential governmental
function and that any such standards or obligations shall not be construed as
creating a ministerial duty for purposes of tort liability. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-
2-2025)
7.01.090: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
For purposes of this title:
   A.   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   B.   Unless otherwise specified, the terms “hereof”, “herein”, and similar
terms refer to this title as a whole.(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.100: DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO TITLE GENERALLY:
In the construction of this title, the following words and phrases shall be as
defined as set forth in this section unless a different meaning is specifically
defined elsewhere in this title and specifically stated to apply:
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION: A citation issued to a responsible person which gives
reasonable notice of a violation and the civil fee for such violation.
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING: A hearing held pursuant to the procedures
established by this title and at the request of a responsible person charged
with a violation.
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ORDER: An order issued by a hearing examiner. The
order may include an order to abate the violation, pay civil fees and
administrative costs or any other action as authorized or required by this
title and applicable state codes.
CITY: The City of Holladay, Utah, including the mayor, City Manager and all
other employees of the City, excepting employees of the court.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Holladay.
CITY MANAGER: The City Manager or their designee
DIRECTOR: The community economic development director or his/her designee.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Any person authorized by the City to enforce violations
for this code of the City of Holladay or applicable state codes, including, but
not limited to, land use officers, police officers, building inspection
officials, code enforcement officers, fire marshal, fire officers and animal
control officers.
HEARING OFFICER: A person appointed by the City Manager or his/her designee to
preside over administrative enforcement hearings. Seems like we use hearing
examiner and hearing officer interchangeably.
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD: Any condition that creates a serious and immediate
danger to life, property, health or public safety.
NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE: A document or form approved by the community development
department director or designee which indicates that a property complies with
the requirements set forth in a notice of violation.
NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT: A written notice that informs a responsible
person of emergency abatement actions taken by the City and the costs of those
actions, and orders payment for those costs.
NOTICE OF ITEMIZED BILL FOR COSTS: A written notice, itemizing the City’s costs
and ordering payment of those costs.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: A written notice that informs a responsible person of code
violations and orders certain remedial steps to correct said violations by a
determined deadline.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer or employee of
any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of
rights or duties.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner of real property as shown on the records of
the Salt Lake County assessor/recorder.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person determined by the City who is responsible for
causing or maintaining a violation of this code of the City of Holladay or
applicable state codes. The term “responsible person” shall include, but is not
limited to, a property owner, agent, tenant, lessee, occupant, architect,
builder, contractor or other person who individually or together with another
person is responsible for the violation of any provision of this code of the
City of Holladay or applicable state codes.
WRITTEN: Includes handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, computer printed or
facsimile. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.110: ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, AIDING AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this title, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission. (Ord. 2025-17,
10-2-2025)
7.01.120: SERVICE OF NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Methods Of Service: Whenever a notice is required to be given under
this title, the notice shall be served by one of the following methods, unless
different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply:
      1.   Personal service;
      2.   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of a
responsible person;
      3.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. The
form of the posted notice shall be approved by the director; or
   B.   Failure To Receive Notice: Failure of a responsible person to actually
receive notice shall not affect the validity of any action taken hereunder if
notice has been served in the manner set forth above.
   C.   Service Date: Service by regular mail in the manner set forth above
shall be deemed served on the seventh day after the date of mailing when mailed
in the continental United States. Service by regular mail to all other
addresses shall be deemed served on the tenth day after the date of mailing.
   D.   Failure To Be Served: The failure of a person, other than a responsible
person, to be served notice in accordance with this section shall not affect
the validity of any proceeding taken hereunder. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.130: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever an enforcement official finds that violation of this code or
applicable state codes has occurred or continues to exist, he may undertake any
of the procedures herein. The director or any designated enforcement official
shall have the authority to gain compliance with the provisions of this code
and applicable state codes subject to the provisions of this title. Such
authority shall include the power to issue notices of violation and
administrative citations, inspect public and private property, abate nuisances
on public and private property and to use any remedy available under this title
or law. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.140: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The City Manager shall establish policies and procedures for the holding of
administrative enforcement hearings, the appointment of hearing officers, and
the use of the administrative procedures herein by enforcement officials. (Ord.
2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.150: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
Enforcement officials are hereby authorized, in accordance with applicable law,
to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of
this code or applicable state codes are being obeyed and to make any
reasonable, lawful examination or survey necessary to determine compliance with
this code or applicable state codes. This may include the taking of
photographs, samples or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries,
examinations and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If a property
owner or responsible person refuses to allow an enforcement official to enter
property, the enforcement official shall obtain a search warrant before
entering the property. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.160: FALSE INFORMATION OR REFUSAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make a false statement or
refuse to give his name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with an
enforcement officer when in the performance of his official duties under the
provisions of this title. A violation of this section shall be a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.01.170: FAILURE TO OBEY A SUBPOENA:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully refuse or fail to obey a
subpoena issued for an administrative enforcement hearing. A violation of this
section shall be a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
CHAPTER 7.02
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
SECTION:
7.02.010: Purpose
7.02.020: Administrative Citations
7.02.030: Contents Of Notice
7.02.040: Civil Fees Assessed
7.02.010: PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for violations
of the Holladay code and applicable state codes is by administrative citation.
The procedures established in this chapter shall be an alternative and in
addition to those procedures set forth in
chapter 7.03 of this title. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.02.020: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS:
   A.   Warning Notice: Upon discovering a violation of this code or applicable
state codes that does not require a notice of violation, an enforcement
official shall serve a warning notice, containing the information required in
the administrative citation, on the responsible person providing ten (10) days
to correct the violation.
   B.   Administrative Citation: If the violation continues on the eleventh day
after the warning notice, an enforcement official shall serve an administrative
citation on the responsible person.
   C.   Service: The administrative citation shall be served in the manner
prescribed in section
7.01.120 of this title.
   D.   Signature Upon Administrative Citation: The enforcement official shall
attempt to obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative
citation. If the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative
citation, such failure or refusal shall not affect the validity of the citation
and subsequent proceedings. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.02.030: CONTENTS OF CITATION:
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
   A.   The date, location and explanation of all violations;
   B.   Code sections violated;
   C.   The amount of the civil fee imposed for each violation;
   D.   An explanation of how the civil fee shall be paid, the time period in
which the civil fee shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the
civil fee;
   E.   Identify the right to and the procedures for requesting an
administrative enforcement hearing; and
   F.   The signature of the enforcement official and, if possible, the
signature of the responsible person. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.02.040: CIVIL FEES ASSESSED:
   A.   Due And Payable: Civil fees shall be due and payable immediately upon
service of an administrative citation.
   B.   Amount Of Civil Fee: The civil fee for each violation listed on the
administrative citation shall be as identified in table 1, civil fees, in the
consolidated fine schedule.
   C.   Double Fees For Nonpayment: Civil fees shall be double if paid after
ten (10) days but within twenty (20) days of service.
   D.   Triple Fees For Nonpayment: Civil fees shall be triple if paid after
twenty (20) days but within thirty (30) days of service.
   E.   Payment Of Fee Not Excuse: Payment of any civil fee shall not excuse a
failure to correct a violation or any reoccurrence of the violation, nor shall
it bar further enforcement action by the City.
   F.   Payable To City: Civil fees shall be paid to the City. (Ord. 2025-17,
10-2-2025)
CHAPTER 7.03
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
7.03.010: Administrative Enforcement Hearings
7.03.020: Request For Administrative Enforcement Hearing
7.03.025: City Requested Administrative Hearing
7.03.030: Notification Of Administrative Enforcement Hearing
7.03.040: Appointment And Qualifications Of Hearing Examiner
7.03.050: Powers Of Hearing Examiner
7.03.060: Procedures At Administrative Enforcement Hearing
7.03.070: Failure To Attend Administrative Enforcement Hearing
7.03.080: Administrative Enforcement Order
7.03.090: Failure To Comply With Order
7.03.100: Appeal Of Administrative Enforcement Decision
7.03.010: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARINGS:
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council that property owners shall be
afforded due process of law during the enforcement process. Due process of law
shall require adequate notice, an opportunity to request and to fully
participate in any hearing, and an adequate explanation of the reasons
justifying any resulting action. The following procedures are intended to
establish a forum to resolve and correct violations of this code and applicable
state codes fairly, quickly and efficiently while providing due process. (Ord.
2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.020: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Filing: A responsible person served with one of the following documents
or notices shall have the right to request an administrative enforcement
hearing. Such request shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days from the
date of service of one of the following notices:
      1.   Notice of violation;
      2.   Notice of itemized bill for costs;
      3.   Administrative citation; or
      4.   Notice of emergency abatement.
   B.   Notice And Information Provided: Said notice, including all information
concerning the responsible person’s right to an administrative enforcement
hearing, shall be provided.
   C.   Request Filed With City Official: The request for an administrative
enforcement hearing shall be made in writing to the director of community
development.
   D.   Appointment Of Hearing Officer; Hearing Scheduled: As soon as
practicable after receiving the written notice of the request for an
administrative enforcement hearing, the City Manager shall refer the matter to
an appointed hearing officer who shall schedule a date, time and place for the
administrative enforcement hearing.
   E.   Failure To Request Constitutes Waiver; Waiver By City: Failure to
request an administrative enforcement hearing within ten (10) calendar days
from the date of service of any of the notices in subsection A of this section
shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative enforcement
hearing. The right to appeal said failure may be waived by the City upon
showing of good cause.
   F.   Failure To Request Hearing: If a responsible person fails to request a
hearing after being issued a notice of violation or administrative citation as
provided herein, the corrective action detailed on the notice of violation
shall be considered the administrative enforcement order pursuant to section
7.02.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.025: CITY REQUESTED ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
The City may request an administrative hearing before the hearing officer. The
request for hearing shall be delivered in the same manner as specified in
section 7.02.020 of this chapter. The request shall identify with specificity
the reasons for the request. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.030: NOTIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Notice Served: Written notice of the date, time and place of the
administrative enforcement hearing shall be served to the responsible persons
as soon as practicable prior to its date.
   B.   Method Of Service: The notice shall be served by any of the methods of
service set forth in section
7.01.120 of this title. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.040: APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Appointment: The City Manager or his/her designee shall appoint a
hearing officer(s) to preside at administrative enforcement hearings.
   B.   Qualifications: A hearing officer:
      1.   Shall have no personal, financial or other conflict of interest in
the matter for which the hearing is being held;
      2.   May be a City employee. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.050: POWERS OF HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Conduct Hearing: A hearing officer shall have authority to conduct an
administrative enforcement hearing for violations of this Code and applicable
State codes.
   B.   Continuance Of Hearing: A hearing officer may, for good cause shown by
one of the parties or if the hearing officer independently determines that due
process has not been adequately afforded to such party, continue a hearing.
   C.   Subpoenas: At the request of any party to an administrative enforcement
hearing, a hearing officer may sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents and
other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence
is deemed helpful or necessary by the hearing officer to decide issues at the
hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees,
shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena.
   D.   Jurisdiction Of Officer: A hearing officer has continuing jurisdiction
over the subject matter of an administrative enforcement hearing for the
purposes of granting a continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an
administrative enforcement order; ensuring compliance of that order, which
includes authorizing the City to enter and abate a violation; modifying an
administrative enforcement order; or, where extraordinary circumstances exist,
granting a new hearing.
   E.   Bond May Be Required: A hearing officer may require a responsible
person to post a cash performance bond to ensure compliance with an
administrative enforcement order, but only if agreed to by the enforcement
official handling the matter for the City. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.060: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Informal Hearing: Administrative enforcement hearings are intended to
be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery shall not apply;
however, an informal exchange of discovery may be required. Any such request
shall be in writing. Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a
continuance. Complainant information is not required to be disclosed or
released unless the complainant is a witness at the hearing. The procedure and
format of the administrative enforcement hearing shall follow general
guidelines of due process and any duly adopted policies and procedures.
   B.   Burden Of Proof For Violation: A party alleging a violation of this
Code shall bear the burden of proof to establish the existence of a violation
of this Code or applicable State codes.
   C.   Proof Established: Such proof shall be established by a preponderance
of the evidence.
   D.   Participation And Testimony: Each party shall have the opportunity to
cross examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his case. A written
declaration signed under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a
personal appearance at the discretion of the Hearing Officer. Testimony may be
given by telephone or other electronic means.
   E.   Open Hearings; Recording; Location: All administrative enforcement
hearings shall be open to the public and shall be recorded in the manner
determined by the City. At the discretion of the hearing officer,
administrative enforcement hearings may be held at the location of the
violation.
   F.   Representation: The responsible person shall have the right to be
represented by an attorney. If an attorney will be representing a responsible
person at a hearing, notice of the attorney’s name, address and telephone
number shall be given to the City at least two (2) days prior to the hearing.
If such notice is not given, the hearing may be continued at the City’s
request, and all costs of the continuance shall be assessed to the responsible
person.
   G.   Defenses: The burden to prove any raised defenses shall be upon the
party raising any such defense. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.070: FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
A responsible person who fails to appear at an administrative enforcement
hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to such hearing, the
adjudication of issues related to the hearing, and the right to appeal,
provided that proper notice of the hearing has been given as provided in
section
7.01.120 of this title. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.080: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   A.   Stipulated Agreement: A responsible person and the City may enter into
a stipulated agreement, which shall be signed by both parties. Such agreement
shall be entered as an administrative enforcement order. Entry of such
agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative
enforcement hearing and the right to appeal.
   B.   Written Order: After all evidence and testimony are presented, the
hearing officer shall issue a written administrative enforcement order within
ten (10) days that affirms or rejects the notice or citation.
   C.   Cease And Desist Order: A hearing officer may issue an administrative
enforcement order that requires a responsible person to cease and desist from
violating this code or applicable state codes and to take any necessary
corrective action.
   D.   Order Of Abatement: A hearing officer may order the City to enter the
property and abate all violations, including the removal of animals that are in
violation of applicable code requirements.
   E.   Revocation Of Right To Possess Animals: A hearing officer may revoke an
animal license or the right to possess animals as provided in this code.
   F.   Assessment Of Deadlines: As part of an administrative enforcement
order, a hearing officer may establish specific deadlines for the payment of
fees and costs, and condition the total or partial assessment of civil fees on
the responsible person’s ability to take necessary corrective actions by the
specified deadlines.
   G.   Civil Fees: A hearing officer may issue an administrative enforcement
order imposing civil fees in accordance with the consolidated fine schedule.
Such fees shall continue to accrue until the responsible person complies with
the hearing officer’s decision and corrects the violation.
   H.   Subsequent Review Hearings: A hearing officer may schedule subsequent
review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by the City to ensure
compliance with an administrative enforcement order.
   I.   Bond May Be Required: A hearing officer may order a responsible person
to post a cash performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative
enforcement order, but only if agreed to by the enforcement official handling
the matter for the City.
   J.   Final Order: An administrative enforcement order shall become final on
the date of signing by the hearing officer.
   K.   Order Served: A copy of the administrative enforcement order shall be
served on all parties by any one of the methods listed in section
7.01.120 of this title. When required by this title, the director shall record
the administrative enforcement order with the Salt Lake County recorder’s
office.
   L.   Monitor For Compliance: After a hearing officer has issued an
administrative enforcement order, the director shall monitor the matter for
compliance with the administrative enforcement order. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.03.090: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER:
It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to fail to comply with the
terms and deadlines set forth in an administrative enforcement order. A
violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-
2025)
7.03.100: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT DECISION:
   A.   Petition For Review: Any responsible person adversely affected by an
administrative enforcement order made in the exercise of the provisions of this
title may file a petition for review in the third district court of Salt Lake
County.
   B.   Time Limit: The petition shall be barred unless it is filed within
thirty (30) days after the administrative enforcement order is final.
   C.   Allegations: In the petition, the plaintiff may only allege that the
administrative enforcement order was arbitrary or capricious.
   D.   Authority Of Court: The court shall:
      1.   Presume that the administrative enforcement order is valid;
      2.   Review the record to determine whether the order was arbitrary,
capricious or illegal; and
      3.   Affirm the administrative enforcement order if it is supported by
substantial evidence.
   E.   Records Submitted To Court: If appealed, the record of the proceedings
including minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct
transcript of the proceeding shall be transmitted to the reviewing court within
thirty (30) days of the notice of appeal. If the proceeding was tape recorded,
a transcript of such tape recording shall be deemed a true and correct
transcript for purposes of this subsection.
   F.   Limit Of Court Review If Record Available: If there is a record, court
review shall be limited to the record of the proceeding. The court may not
accept or consider any evidence outside such record unless that evidence was
offered to the hearing examiner and the court determines that it was improperly
excluded by the hearing officer. The court may call witnesses and take evidence
if there is no record.
   G.   Request For Stay Of Execution: The filing of a petition does not stay
execution of an administrative enforcement order. Before filing a petition, a
responsible person may request the hearing officer to stay an administrative
enforcement order. Upon receipt of a request to stay, the hearing officer may
order the administrative enforcement order to be stayed pending district court
review if the hearing examiner finds such stay to be in the best interest of
the City. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
CHAPTER 7.04
ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT
SECTION:
7.04.010: Administrative Abatement
7.04.020: Notice Of Violation
7.04.030: Requesting Hearings
7.04.040: Failure To Correct
7.04.050: Inspections
7.04.060: Authority To Abate
7.04.070: Procedures For Abatement
7.04.080: Procedures For Recordation
7.04.090: Notice Of Compliance
7.04.100: Prohibition Against Issuance Of Municipal Permits
7.04.110: Civil Fees
7.04.010: ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT:
Any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any
provision of the Holladay Code or applicable state codes may be abated by the
City pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-
2025)
7.04.020: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Information Included: Whenever an enforcement official determines that
a violation of this code or applicable state codes has occurred or continues to
exist, a notice of violation may be issued to the responsible person. The
notice of violation shall include the following information:
      1.   Name of the responsible person.
      2.   Street address of violation.
      3.   Date violation observed.
      4.   All code sections violated and a description of the condition that
violates the applicable code.
      5.   All remedial action required to permanently correct any violation,
which may include corrections, repairs, demolition, removal or other
appropriate action.
      6.   Specific date, determined by the director to correct the violation
set forth in a notice of violation.
      7.   Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail
to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of
violation, which may include, but is not limited to: criminal prosecution;
civil fees; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation;
withholding of municipal permits; abatement of the violation; costs;
administrative fees; and any other legal remedies.
      8.   Statement that civil fees will begin to accrue immediately on
expiration of the date to correct violation.
      9.   The amount of the civil fee for each violation and a statement that
the civil fee shall accrue daily until the violation is corrected.
      10.   Demand that the responsible person cease and desist from further
action causing the violation and commence and complete all action to correct
violations as directed by the City.
      11.   Procedures to request an administrative enforcement hearing, and
consequences for failure to request such hearing.
      12.   Statement that when the violation is brought into compliance the
responsible person must request an inspection.
   B.   Service Of Notice: The notice of violation shall be served by one of
the methods of service listed in section
7.01.120 of this title. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.030: REQUESTING HEARINGS:
A responsible person shall have the right to an administrative enforcement
hearing as identified in
chapter 7.02 of this title. A request for such hearing shall be in writing and
shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice of
violation. Failure to request an administrative enforcement hearing as provided
shall constitute a waiver to an administrative enforcement hearing and a waiver
of the right to appeal. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.040: FAILURE TO CORRECT:
It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to fail to comply with the
terms and deadlines set forth in a notice of violation. A violation of this
section shall be a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.050: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the responsible person to request an inspection when a
violation has been corrected. If no inspection is requested, it shall be deemed
prima facie evidence that the violation remains uncorrected. If more than one
inspection is necessary, an inspection fee as specified in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code shall be assessed for each subsequent inspection.
(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.060: AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
The director is hereby authorized, upon a showing of probable cause, to enter
upon any property or premises to abate a violation of this code and applicable
state codes as set forth in section
7.01.150 of this title. The director shall assess all costs for abatement to
the responsible person and may use any remedy available under the law to
collect such costs. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.070: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT:
   A.   Abatement By City Personnel Or By Contract: Violations may be abated by
City personnel or by a private contractor acting under the direction of the
City.
   B.   Enter Upon Private Property: City personnel or a private contractor may
enter upon private property upon reasonable notice and in a reasonable manner
to abate a violation as specified in the notice of violation or administrative
enforcement order. In an emergency situation, the City or its contractor may
enter upon private property to abate a code violation that presents significant
imminent risk to public safety or public or private property. The City shall
take reasonable steps to notice a responsible person as soon as is reasonably
practicable concurrent with or after such abatement action.
   C.   Abatement By Responsible Person: If a responsible person abates the
violation before the City abates the violation pursuant to a notice of
violation or administrative enforcement order, the director shall nevertheless
assess all costs actually incurred by the City against the responsible person.
   D.   Notice Of Itemized Bill For Costs: When abatement is completed, the
director shall prepare a notice of itemized bill for costs.
   E.   Service Of Notice; Demand For Payment: The director shall serve the
notice of itemized bill for costs by registered mail to the last known address
of the responsible person. The notice shall demand full payment within twenty
(20) days to the City.
   F.   Right To Administrative Enforcement Hearing; Time Limit: The
responsible person shall have a right to an administrative enforcement hearing
to contest the notice of itemized bill for costs. A request for such hearing
shall be in writing and shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of
service of the notice of itemized bill for cost. Failure to request an
administrative enforcement hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver to
such hearing and a waiver of the right to appeal. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.080: PROCEDURES FOR RECORDATION:
For violations of this code or any other applicable code, when a notice of
violation has been served on a responsible person, and the violation remains
uncorrected after the date to correct set forth in the notice of violation, and
a request for an administrative enforcement hearing has not been timely
requested, the director shall record the notice of violation with the Salt Lake
County recorder’s office. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.090: NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Request For Inspection: When a violation is corrected, a responsible
person shall request an inspection from the director.
   B.   Reinspection: When the director receives such request, the director
shall reinspect the property within three (3) days to determine whether the
violation has been corrected, and whether all necessary permits have been
issued and final inspections have been performed as required by applicable
codes.
   C.   Notice Of Compliance: Within ten (10) days of an inspection of a
property which is subject to a notice of violation in which the officer finds
compliance, the director shall serve a notice of compliance to the responsible
person and property owner in the manner provided in section
7.01.120 of this title if the director determines that:
      1.   All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation or
administrative order have been corrected;
      2.   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
      3.   All assessed civil fees have been paid; and
      4.   All assessed administrative fees and costs have been paid.
   D.   Record Notice Of Compliance: The director shall record the notice of
compliance with the Salt Lake County recorder’s office if the notice of
violation was recorded. Recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the
effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.100: PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL PERMITS:
The City shall withhold business licenses or permits for any alteration, repair
or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the
property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real
property or the structure where a violation is located. The City shall withhold
such permits until a notice of compliance has been issued by the director. The
City shall not withhold permits necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or
to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.04.110: CIVIL FEES:
   A.   Specified: If a responsible person fails to correct a violation by the
correction date listed in a notice of violation or in an administrative
enforcement order, civil fees shall be owed to the City as specified in
Consolidated Fine Schedule. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
CHAPTER 7.05
EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
SECTION:
7.05.010: Emergency Abatement
7.05.020: Procedures
7.05.010: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Authority Of Director: Whenever the director determines that an
imminent life safety hazard exists in accordance with the international
building code, international residential code and/or the international fire
code that requires immediate correction or elimination, the director shall
exercise the following powers without prior notice to the responsible person:
      1.   Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy
until all repairs are completed;
      2.   Post the premises as unsafe, substandard or dangerous;
      3.   Board, fence or secure the building or site;
      4.   Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent
further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public;
      5.   Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any
imminent life safety hazard; or
      6.   Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
   B.   Entrance Upon Property: The director may, based on probable cause,
enter property without a search warrant or court order to accomplish the above
listed acts. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.05.020: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Level Of Correction; Costs: The director shall pursue only the minimum
level of correction or abatement necessary to eliminate the immediacy of a
hazard. Costs incurred by the City during the emergency abatement process shall
be assessed and recovered against the responsible person.
   B.   Other Remedies: The director may also pursue any other administrative
or judicial remedy to abate any remaining violations.
   C.   Notice Of Itemized Bill: After an emergency abatement, the City shall,
within ten (10) days, serve a notice of itemized bill for costs to the
responsible person for the abatement action taken. Such notice shall include a
description of the imminent life safety hazard.
   D.   Administrative Enforcement Hearing: A responsible person has the right
to an administrative enforcement hearing concerning the itemized billing. A
request for such hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed within ten (10)
days from the date of service of the notice of itemized bill for costs. Failure
to request an administrative enforcement hearing as provided herein shall
constitute a waiver to an administrative enforcement hearing and a waiver to
the right of appeal. (Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
CHAPTER 7.06
COSTS AND FEES
SECTION:
7.06.010: Purpose
7.06.020: Assessment Of Costs
7.06.030: Failure To Timely Pay Costs
7.06.040: Allocation Of Civil Fees And Administrative Costs And Fees
7.06.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   Recovery: The City Council finds that costs incurred by the City
through the actions of enforcement officials and other City personnel to
correct violations should be recovered from the responsible person.
   B.   Appropriate Method: The City Council further finds that the assessment
of costs is an appropriate method to recover expenses incurred for actual costs
of abating violations, reinspection fees, filing fees, attorney fees, hearing
examiner fees, title search and any additional actual costs incurred by the
City for each individual case. The assessment and collection of costs shall not
preclude the imposition of any judicial fees or fines for violations of this
code or applicable state codes. (*#)
7.06.020: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever actual costs are incurred by the City to enforce
this code and applicable state codes, such costs shall be assessed against the
responsible person.
   B.   Service Of Itemized Bill: The director shall serve the responsible
person with a notice of itemized bill for costs.
   C.   Administrative Enforcement Hearing: The responsible person shall have a
right to an administrative enforcement hearing. A request for such hearing
shall be in writing and shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of
service of the notice of itemized bill for costs. Failure to request an
administrative enforcement hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver to an
administrative enforcement hearing and a waiver of the right to appeal. (Ord.
2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.06.030: FAILURE TO TIMELY PAY COSTS:
The failure of any person to pay assessed costs by the deadline specified in an
invoice shall result in a late fee calculated at the rate of one and one-half
percent (11/2%) per month on the unpaid balances.(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
7.06.040: ALLOCATION OF CIVIL FEES AND ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS AND FEES:
All fees and costs collected pursuant to this title shall be deposited in the
ordinance enforcement general fund. All fees and costs deposited in the general
fund may be allocated pursuant to the City budget process and as authorized by
applicable law.(Ord. 2025-17, 10-2-2025)
TITLE 8
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 8.01
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
8.01.010: Abandonment
8.01.020: Allow
8.01.030: Animal
8.01.040: Animal At Large
8.01.050: Animal Boarding Establishment
8.01.060: Animal Control Officer
8.01.070: Animal Exhibition
8.01.080: Animal Grooming Parlor
8.01.090: Animal Shelter
8.01.100: Animal Under Physical Restraint
8.01.105: Attack
8.01.107: Beekeeping
8.01.110: Bite
8.01.120: Cat
8.01.130: Cattery
8.01.140: Commercial Animal Establishment
8.01.150: Community Cat
8.01.160: Custody
8.01.170: Dangerous Animal
8.01.180: Director
8.01.190: Division
8.01.200: Dog
8.01.210: Domestic Fowl
8.01.220: Domesticated Animals
8.01.230: Enclosure
8.01.240: Euthanasia
8.01.250: Exotic Animal
8.01.260: Ferret
8.01.270: Guard Dog
8.01.280: Handler
8.01.290: Harbor
8.01.300: Health Department
8.01.310: Holding Facility
8.01.320: Household Pet Or Companion Animal
8.01.330: Humane Treatment
8.01.340: Hybrid
8.01.350: Identification
8.01.360: Impound
8.01.370: Kennel
8.01.380: Leash Or Lead
8.01.390: Livestock
8.01.400: Nuisance
8.01.410: On Site Impoundment
8.01.420: On Site Redemption
8.01.430: Overwork
8.01.440: Owner
8.01.450: Performing Animal Exhibition
8.01.460: Person
8.01.470: Pet Or Companion Animal
8.01.480: Pet Shop
8.01.490: Provoked
8.01.500: Public Place
8.01.510: Quarantine
8.01.520: Riding School Or Stable
8.01.530: Set
8.01.540: Shelter
8.01.550: Species Subject To Rabies
8.01.560: Stray
8.01.570: Tether
8.01.580: Trap
8.01.590: Veterinarian
8.01.600: Veterinary Hospital
8.01.610: Vicious Animal
8.01.620: Wild Animal
8.01.630: Zoological Park
8.01.010: ABANDONMENT:
"Abandonment" includes placing an animal in an environment where the animal is
separated from basic needs such as food, water, shelter or necessary medical
attention, for a period longer than twenty four (24) hours, or to intentionally
deposit, leave or drop off any live animal; failure to reclaim an animal
seventy two (72) hours beyond the time agreed upon with a kennel, grooming
service, or similar facility; failure to reclaim a pet from an animal shelter
beyond seventy two (72) hours of notification or refusal to sign relinquishment
authorization. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.020: ALLOW:
"Allow", for the purposes of this title, shall include human conduct that is
intentional, deliberate, careless, inadvertent or negligent in relation to the
actions of an animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.030: ANIMAL:
"Animal" means every nonhuman species, both domestic and wild. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.01.040: ANIMAL AT LARGE:
"Animal at large" means any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is
not under physical restraint imposed by the owner or handler when off the
premises of the owner. Cats are excluded from this definition. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.01.050: ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT:
"Animal boarding establishment" means any commercial establishment that takes
in animals for the purpose of providing temporary shelter or care and charges a
fee for such service. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.060: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
"Animal control officer" means the city's animal control services contract
provider, any person designated by the state of Utah as a "peace officer", as
defined in Utah Code Annotated section 53-13-101 et seq., as amended, or any
other person designated by the city as an officer who is authorized to perform
the duties specified by this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.070: ANIMAL EXHIBITION:
"Animal exhibition" means any display of, event or contest involving animals.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.080: ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR:
"Animal grooming parlor" means any commercial establishment maintained for the
purpose of offering cosmetic services for animals for a fee. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-
21-2012)
8.01.090: ANIMAL SHELTER:
"Animal shelter" means any facility owned, operated or maintained for the care
and custody of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned, unwanted
animals or animals held for the purpose of protective custody under the
authority of this title or state law. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.100: ANIMAL UNDER PHYSICAL RESTRAINT:
"Animal under physical restraint" means any animal under the physical control
of its owner or person over the age of twelve (12) years having charge, care,
custody or control of the animal, by the means of a leash, tether, or other
physical control device or enclosure. A leash or tether shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in length when in close proximity to other animals or people. Animals
confined in or upon a motorized vehicle shall be considered physically
restrained; providing, that the animal's body parts cannot extend beyond two
inches (2") from the vehicle, when the vehicle is not in motion and not more
than the length of the distance from the animal's shoulders to the tip of its
muzzle when the vehicle is in motion. Animals upon the real property of their
owner, or upon the property of another (with prior written permission of the
property owner) and under direct adult supervision shall be considered under
physical restraint; provided, however, that an animal shall not be considered
under physical restraint within the real property limits of the owner if an
individual engaged in a normal and expected activity may come in conflict with
such animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.105: ATTACK:
"Attack" means any attempted action by an animal which places a person or
another animal in danger of imminent bodily harm. Actual physical contact shall
not be required to constitute an attack. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.107: BEEKEEPING:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage clearly indicates
another meaning:
APIARY: The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
BEEKEEPER: A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees.
BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT: Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive
bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
COLONY: An aggregation of bees in any type of hive that includes queens,
workers, drones, or brood.
HIVE: A frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log, gum skep, or other artificial
or natural receptacle that may be used to house bees.
HONEYBEE: All life stages of the common domestic honeybee, Apis mellifera
species.
LOT, PARCEL, PLOT OR TRACT OF LAND: See section
13.04.040 of this code.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY: Any idle land that is not improved or actually in the
process of being improved with residential, commercial, public or other
structures or improvement intended for human use occupation and the grounds
maintained in association therewith. (Ord. 2014-08, 6-5-2014)
8.01.110: BITE:
"Bite" means an actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin, inflicted by the
teeth of an animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.120: CAT:
"Cat" means any feline of the domesticated types more than four (4) months of
age. Any feline of the domesticated types less than four (4) months of age is a
kitten. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.130: CATTERY:
"Cattery" means an establishment where cats are boarded, bred, bought, sold, or
groomed for a fee. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.140: COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT:
"Commercial animal establishment" means any pet shop, animal grooming parlor,
guard dog location or exhibition, riding school or stable, zoological park,
circus, rodeo, animal exhibition, cattery, kennel or animal breeding or housing
facility. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.150: COMMUNITY CAT:
"Community cat" means a feral or free roaming cat that is without visibly
discernible or microchip owner identification of any kind, and has been
sterilized, vaccinated, and ear tipped. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.160: CUSTODY:
"Custody" means ownership, possession of, harboring, or exercising control over
any animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.170: DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
"Dangerous animal" means any animal that is a hazard to the public safety by
virtue of training, treatment, physical condition, or has a known propensity,
tendency or disposition to attack, or any animal which, because of its size,
predatory or vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute an
unreasonable danger to human life, health, or property if not kept, maintained,
or confined in a safe and secure manner. "Dangerous animal" includes those
animals meeting the definition of "vicious animal" as set forth in this title.
For the purpose of this title, constrictor snakes over ten feet (10') in length
will be considered a dangerous animal, as well as any other constrictor snake
found to be in violation of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.180: DIRECTOR:
The term "director" means the director of the city's community development
department or any other person designated by the city as an officer who is
authorized to perform duties of the director specified by this title. (Ord.
2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.190: DIVISION:
The term "division" means the city's designated animal control services
contract provider or any other person, agency or entity designated by the city
to perform the duties of the division specified by this title. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.01.200: DOG:
"Dog" means any Canis familiaris more than four (4) months of age. Any Canis
familiaris less than four (4) months of age is a puppy. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-
2012)
8.01.210: DOMESTIC FOWL:
"Domestic fowl" means any variety of ducks or adult female domesticated
chickens and baby ducks or chickens of either gender, not over twenty (20)
weeks in age, but not to include adult male chickens or other bird species,
unless otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.220: DOMESTICATED ANIMALS:
"Domesticated animals" means animals accustomed to living in or about the
habitation of man, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, ferrets and
livestock. "Domesticated animal", however, shall not include "exotic animals".
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.230: ENCLOSURE:
"Enclosure" means any structure that prevents an animal from escaping its
primary confines. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.240: EUTHANASIA:
"Euthanasia" means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
approved by the most recent report of the American Veterinary Medical
Association panel on euthanasia that results in unconsciousness and immediate
death, or by a method that causes painless loss of consciousness and death
during such loss of consciousness. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.250: EXOTIC ANIMAL:
"Exotic animal" means any animal whose native habitat is not indigenous to the
continental United States, excluding Alaska, except tropical fish, furbearing
animals commercially bred for the furrier trade, and birds. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-
21-2012)
8.01.260: FERRET:
"Ferret" means any domestic Mustela putorius (except the black footed ferret)
more than three (3) months of age. Any Mustela putorius less than three (3)
months of age is a kit. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.270: GUARD DOG:
"Guard dog" means any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an
intruder is present in or near an area that is being secured and will attack a
human pursuant to training or its handler's command. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.280: HANDLER:
"Handler" is any person who has physical control, i.e., the charge, care,
control, custody, or possession, or responsibility for the same, of an animal
at any given time. An "owner" shall be presumed to have ultimate responsibility
for the physical control of the animal and may divest him/herself of such
responsibility only by the transferring of, or giving permission for, actual
physical control of the animal to a legally responsible adult person of age
eighteen (18) or more. Whenever such other person of the requisite age has
responsibility for physical control of the animal, such person shall be the
"handler". At all other times, the "owner" shall be presumed to be the
"handler". (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.290: HARBOR:
"Harbor" means housing, feeding, or caring for someone else's pet within a
person's house, yard, or premises for more than twenty four (24) hours without
the permission of the owner. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.300: HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
"Health department" means the Salt Lake city-county health department. (Ord.
2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.310: HOLDING FACILITY:
"Holding facility" means any pet shop, kennel, cattery, animal grooming parlor,
riding school, stable, animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or any other such
facility used for holding animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.320: HOUSEHOLD PET OR COMPANION ANIMAL:
"Household pet" or "companion animal" means any animal of a species that has
been domesticated to live in or about the habitation of humans, is dependent on
humans for food and shelter and is kept by its owner for pleasure rather than
utility and/or commercial purposes. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.330: HUMANE TREATMENT:
"Humane treatment" means ensuring the provision of appropriate food, human
interaction, and care; and of protecting any animal from danger, mistreatment,
neglect, or abuse. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.340: HYBRID:
"Hybrid" means any animal, however tame or docile, that is the offspring of a
breeding between a domestic animal and a wild animal, a domestic animal and a
hybrid, or two (2) hybrid animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.350: IDENTIFICATION:
"Identification" means a pet license or identification tag which is attached to
the collar or harness of an animal; a microchip implanted as recommended by the
manufacturer for the specific species; or a tattoo, or other livestock
identification such as ear tags, brands, etc. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.360: IMPOUND:
"Impound" means being taken into custody of an animal control officer, police
agency or an agent thereof. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.370: KENNEL:
"Kennel" means a commercial establishment having three (3) or more dogs for the
purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for
fee, or selling said dogs. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.380: LEASH OR LEAD:
"Leash" or "lead" means any chain, rope, or device of sufficient strength used
to restrain an animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.390: LIVESTOCK:
"Livestock" means animals kept for husbandry or for family food production,
including the following:
   A.   "Large livestock" means horses, mules, burros, donkeys, cattle, sheep,
goats, llamas, swine, ratites and other similarly sized farm, hoofed
domesticated animals, excluding dogs, cats and ferrets.
   B.   "Small livestock" means chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, pigeons,
pheasants, rabbits and other similarly sized fowl or animals, excluding dogs,
cats and ferrets. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.400: NUISANCE:
"Nuisance" means any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger
the life or health of other animals or humans, or substantially interfere with
humans', other than their owner's, enjoyment of life or property, or as defined
in
chapter 8.06 of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.410: ON SITE IMPOUNDMENT:
"On site impoundment" means to place an animal under seizure by law enforcement
personnel, animal services personnel or an agent thereof, on a property other
than an animal services sheltering facility pending transportation or court
seizure order. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.420: ON SITE REDEMPTION:
"On site redemption" means to return an impounded animal to the owner or
caretaker, prior to transportation to the sheltering facility upon collection
of all applicable impound and/or license fees. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.430: OVERWORK:
"Overwork" means to work or exercise any animal to a point of physical harm.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.440: OWNER:
"Owner" means any person, partnership, corporation, or any other type of entity
or association having title to, or custody of, or keeping, or harboring one or
more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed and
sheltered for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours or more, or fed
for a period of two (2) or more days. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.450: PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION:
"Performing animal exhibition" means any spectacle, display, act, or event in
which animals are used to provide a performance whether a fee is charged or
not. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.460: PERSON:
"Person" means a natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited
to, a corporation, limited liability corporation, firm, partnership, or trust.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.470: PET OR COMPANION ANIMAL:
"Pet" or "companion animal" means any animal of a species that has been
domesticated to live in or about the habitation of humans, is dependent on
humans for food and shelter and is kept by its owner for pleasure rather than
utility and/or commercial purposes. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.480: PET SHOP:
"Pet shop" means any commercial establishment containing cages or exhibition
pens wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets, are kept, displayed and sold.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.490: PROVOKED:
"Provoked" means any deliberate act by a person towards a dog or any other
animal done with the intent to tease, torment, abuse, assault, or otherwise
cause a reaction by the dog or other animal; provided, however, that any act by
a person done with the intent to discourage or prevent a dog or other animal
from attacking shall not be considered provocation. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.500: PUBLIC PLACE:
"Public place" means any location which is accessible to members of the general
public, where members of the general public gather, engage in business, or have
free access. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.510: QUARANTINE:
"Quarantine" means the isolation of an animal in an enclosure so that the
animal cannot have physical contact with other animals or persons without
recognized authority to be near or about the quarantined animal. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.01.520: RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE:
"Riding school" or "stable" means an establishment which offers boarding and/or
riding instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers
the use of such animals for hire. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.530: SET:
"Set" means to cock, open or put a trap in such a condition that it would close
when an object, animal or person touched a triggering device. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-
21-2012)
8.01.540: SHELTER:
"Shelter" means a structure which is substantial in construction and provides
protection from moisture, wind and other factors of weather, and is of a size
appropriate to the particular animal to ensure retention of body heat within
the enclosure. Any shelter will be maintained to ensure a clean, dry, healthy
environment for the animal being housed. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.550: SPECIES SUBJECT TO RABIES:
"Species subject to rabies" means any species that has been reported to the
health department or the center for disease control and prevention to have
contracted the rabies virus and become a host for that virus. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-
21-2012)
8.01.560: STRAY:
"Stray" means any "animal at large", as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.01.570: TETHER:
"Tether" means any chain, rope, cable, or device attached to a fixed object and
used for restraining a dog. The tether must be of sufficient strength to
restrain the dog and be appropriate to the breed, age, size, and weight of the
dog and is attached to the dog by a properly applied collar, halter or harness
configured so as to protect the dog from injury or entanglement with objects or
other animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.580: TRAP:
"Trap" means an apparatus designed to come together with force so as to clamp
or close upon an animal, person, or object when the spring or triggering device
is activated. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.590: VETERINARIAN:
"Veterinarian" means any person properly licensed under the laws of the state
of Utah to practice veterinary medicine. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.600: VETERINARY HOSPITAL:
"Veterinary hospital" means any establishment operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.610: VICIOUS ANIMAL:
"Vicious animal" means:
   A.   Any animal which, in a threatening and terrorizing manner, approaches
any person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places in an
apparent attitude of attack;
   B.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or
animals; or
   C.   Any animal, which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being or domestic animal on public or private property.
Whether an animal has been properly licensed under the provisions of this title
shall have no relevance to the determination of whether an animal is a "vicious
animal", as defined herein. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.620: WILD ANIMAL:
"Wild animal" means any animal of a species that in its natural life is usually
untamed and undomesticated, including hybrids and animals which, as a result of
their natural or wild condition, cannot be vaccinated effectively for rabies.
These animals, however domesticated or tamed, shall include, but are not
limited to:
   A.   Alligators and crocodiles;
   B.   Bears (Ursidae). All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black
bears, etc.;
   C.   Cat family (Felidae). All except the commonly accepted domesticated
cats, including cheetah, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, mountain lion, tiger,
wildcat, etc.;
   D.   Dog family (Canidae). All except domesticated dogs, including wolf,
part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote, part coyote, dingo, etc.;
   E.   Porcupine (Erethizontidae);
   F.   Primate (Hominidae). All nonhuman primates;
   G.   Raccoon (Procyonidae). All raccoons, including eastern raccoon, desert
raccoon, ringtailed cat, etc.;
   H.   Skunks;
   I.   Venomous fish and piranha;
   J.   Venomous snakes or lizards;
   K.   Weasels (Mustelidae). All including martens, wolverines, black footed
ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongoose, etc.
For the purpose of this title, animals that are kept commercially or ranched
shall not be wild animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.01.630: ZOOLOGICAL PARK:
"Zoological park" means any facility, properly and lawfully licensed by
applicable federal, state, or local law, operated by a person, partnership,
corporation, or government agency, other than a pet shop, kennel, or cattery,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals. (Ord.
2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.02
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
8.02.010: Enforcement Authority
8.02.020: Division Powers And Duties
8.02.030: Animal Control Officers Powers And Duties
8.02.040: Right Of Entry For Enforcement
8.02.050: Interfering With Animal Control Officers Prohibited
8.02.010: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The division, other agent designated by the city, or any law enforcement
officer, are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce this title and to
apprehend, to transport and impound any animal found in violation of this
title, including licensable animals for which no license has been procured in
accordance with this title, or any licensed or unlicensed animals for any other
violation thereof and to issue criminal citations and/or notice of violation
and stipulation for violations of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.02.020: DIVISION POWERS AND DUTIES:
The division, or other agent designated by the city, or any law enforcement
officer, shall:
   A.   Enforce this title and perform other responsibilities inherent thereto;
   B.   Supervise the animal shelter under his/her jurisdiction;
   C.   Keep records of all animals impounded in said shelter;
   D.   Keep accounts of all monies collected and received in accordance with
governing law;
   E.   Establish rules and regulations for the training of all persons hired
as animal control officers to assure professional conduct of said persons and
compliance with governing law. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.02.030: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS POWERS AND DUTIES:
Each animal control officer shall be authorized to enforce this title in all
respects pertaining to animal control within the city, including, but not
limited to, the apprehension, transport and impoundment of animals found to
warrant such action; the care of animals; the prevention of cruelty to animals;
and the issuance of criminal citations and/or notice of violation and
stipulation for violations of this title. Animal control officers shall further
carry out all lawful duties prescribed or delegated by the city by contract or
otherwise. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.02.040: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
In the enforcement of this title, each animal control officer is authorized to
enter into the open premises of any person to secure or take possession of any
animal which is reasonably deemed by said officer to then and there, in the
presence of said officer or official, be in violation of this title and issue
criminal citations and/or notice of violation and stipulations for violations
of this title to the owner or handler of said animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.02.050: INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with any
animal control officer in the lawful discharge of his/her duties as prescribed
in this title. For the purpose of this section, interfering with animal control
officers shall include, but not be limited to, failing to hand over to or
release to an officer an identifiable animal which has been pursued but not
captured by said officer, failing to make payment of agreed upon fees,
knowingly and intentionally failing to comply with an abatement order lawfully
issued by the city or the division or failing to meet the conditions imposed by
a notice of violation and stipulation. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.03
COMMERCIAL PERMITS
SECTION:
8.03.010: Commercial Permits Requirements
8.03.020: Regulatory Authority Of Division
8.03.030: Procedures
8.03.040: Requirements For Catteries And Kennels
8.03.050: Requirements For Pet Shops
8.03.060: Requirements For Animal Grooming Parlor
8.03.070: Requirements For Stables
8.03.080: Requirements For Animal Exhibitions
8.03.090: Requirements For Guard Dogs
8.03.100: Permit For Foster Animals
8.03.110: Exotic Animal Permit
8.03.120: Dangerous Animal Permit
8.03.130: Exemptions
8.03.140: Permits; Display Requirements
8.03.150: Permit Fees; Expiration; Renewal
8.03.160: Establishments; Rules And Regulations
8.03.170: Establishments; Inspections And Reports
8.03.180: Unlawful Activities; Notice Requirements
8.03.190: Permits; Suspension Or Revocation; Grounds
8.03.200: Permits; Suspension Or Revocation; Procedure
8.03.210: Emergency Suspension Of Permits
8.03.220: Notice Of Suspension Of Permits; Service Procedures
8.03.010: COMMERCIAL PERMITS REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a commercial holding
facility or any similar establishment, except a licensed veterinary hospital or
clinic, unless such person first obtains a regulatory permit from the division,
in addition to all other required licenses. All applications for permits to
operate such establishments shall be submitted, together with the required
permit fee, on a printed form provided by the division. Before the permit is
issued, approval must be granted by the health department, the appropriate land
use authority, and the director. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.020: REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF DIVISION:
The director shall have the authority to promulgate regulations for the
issuance of permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all
animals and for compliance with the provisions of this title and other
applicable laws. Such regulations may be amended from time to time as deemed
desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals.
Regulations promulgated under this delegation of authority shall not extend the
power of the director or the division beyond that reasonably necessary to carry
out the requirements of this title. Regulations shall not become effective
until approved and adopted by the city council. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.030: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Form: All applications for permits to operate a commercial animal
establishment or animal shelter shall be submitted to the director on a form
provided by the director.
   B.   Verify Compliance: Upon submission of an application, the director will
verify with the health department, appropriate land use authority, and
appropriate business licensing division that the applicant is in compliance
with applicable rules, regulations, ordinances and laws.
   C.   Fee Accompany Application: Applications must be accompanied by the fee
established by resolution and adopted by the city council. The fee schedule may
be modified from time to time as deemed necessary by the division and upon the
approval of the city council.
   D.   Expiration Of Permit: Each permit issued under this chapter shall
expire as outlined in section
8.03.150 of this chapter.
   E.   Nontransferable: Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are
nontransferable.
   F.   Display Of Permit: A permit issued under this chapter shall be
prominently displayed in the business office of the commercial animal
establishment or animal shelter.
   G.   Late Applications: Late applications for the permits required by this
chapter shall be subject to the late fee set forth in the current fee schedule.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.040: REQUIREMENTS FOR CATTERIES AND KENNELS:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all catteries and
kennels within the city shall comply with all land use requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for boarded animals which are sick or
diseased;
   C.   Retain for a period of one year the name, address and telephone number
of the owner and license number of each dog or cat boarded;
   D.   Retain for a period of three (3) years the name and address of each
person selling, trading or giving any animal to the kennel or cattery;
   E.   Keep all boarded animals caged or under control of the owner or
operator of the kennel or cattery;
   F.   Care for all animals in the kennel or cattery, whether or not owned by
the kennel or cattery, shall comply with all the requirements of this title for
the general care of animals;
   G.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and all
regulations respecting kennels and catteries which are adopted by the city and
in effect from time to time; and
   H.   Supply the purchaser, residing in the licensing authority of this
title, of any dog, cat or ferret with an application for animal license, the
form of which is prescribed by the city. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.050: REQUIREMENTS FOR PET SHOPS:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all pet shops
within the city shall comply with all land use requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   C.   Keep all animals caged or under the control of the owner or operator of
the pet store;
   D.   With respect to all animals in the pet shop, comply with all provisions
of this title providing for the general care of animals;
   E.   Not sell animals which are unweaned or so young or weak that their sale
poses a serious risk of death or inadequate development to them;
   F.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and all
regulations respecting pet shops that are adopted by the city and in effect
from time to time;
   G.   Supply any purchaser, residing within the city, of any dog, cat or
ferret with an application for animal license, the form of which is prescribed
by the division; and
   H.   Provide the purchaser of an animal with written instructions as to the
proper care and control of that species. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.060: REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all grooming
parlors within the city shall comply with all land use requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for animals, which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   C.   Keep all animals caged or under the control of the owner or operator of
the grooming parlor;
   D.   With respect to all animals in the grooming parlor, complies with all
provisions of this title providing for the general care of animals;
   E.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and all
regulations respecting grooming parlors that are adopted by the city and in
effect from time to time; and
   F.   Supply applications for animal licenses, in the form of which is
prescribed by the division. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.070: REQUIREMENTS FOR STABLES:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all stables
within the city shall comply with all land use requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   C.   Keep all animals confined or under the control of the owner or operator
of the stable;
   D.   Care for all animals in the stable, shall comply with all the
requirements of this title for the general care of animals; and
   E.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, and all
regulations respecting stables that are adopted by the city and in effect from
time to time. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.080: REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate,
sponsor or conduct an animal exhibition within the city without first obtaining
an animal exhibition permit issued by city, and/or division.
   B.   Prohibited Contests: No animal exhibition shall occur within the city
in which any animal is exhibited, paraded or allowed to participate in a
contest:
      1.   Under conditions which cause physical injury to such animal;
      2.   Under conditions that place spectators at risk of being harmed; or
      3.   Unless all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations,
and standards adopted by reputable, nationally recognized associations
organized for the operation of such exhibitions and acceptable to the city,
and/or division are complied with by the operator of the exhibition.
   C.   Penalty: A person owning, operating or sponsoring an animal exhibition
within the city without first obtaining the permit therefor required by this
chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day of violation of this
section shall be a separate offense. The division may also seek to obtain an
injunction against an animal exhibition through a court with jurisdiction over
the matter.
   D.   Information Required: The application for an animal exhibition permit
required by this section shall:
      1.   Describe the type of exhibition or contest and the kind and number
of animals to be on exhibition or involved in the contest and list the sites
and dates of the event; and
      2.   Contain such other information as may be required under regulations
established by the director; and include a sworn statement by the applicant
that the provisions of this title pertaining to animal exhibitions will be
complied with at all times.
   E.   Issuance Conditions: No permit required by this section shall be issued
until the applicant completes the application form, pays the applicable fees as
set forth in the current fee schedule, and receives the written approval of the
director of the provisions made for the safety, well being and comfort of the
animals involved.
   F.   Term Of Permit: Animal exhibition permits issued pursuant to this
section shall be effective only for the period specified in the permit, not to
exceed thirty (30) days.
   G.   Nontransferable: A permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be
transferable.
   H.   Display Of Permit: A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
displayed prominently at the site of the animal exhibition.
   I.   Waiver Of Fee: The director may waive the permit fee for an animal
exhibition that is sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization, a
governmental entity or a school if the purpose is a city or county public
purpose or a charitable purpose.
   J.   Access Permitted: Animal exhibitions permitted under this section shall
provide immediate access to animal control officers, health department agents,
and/or state officials, for the purpose of compliance inspections. (Ord. 2012-
16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.090: REQUIREMENTS FOR GUARD DOGS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own a guard dog
without first obtaining a guard dog permit as provided hereafter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to hire the use of a guard dog that has not been issued
a guard dog permit.
   B.   Application: A permit required by this section shall be obtained from
the city. The application shall set forth the type of dog, the site where said
dog shall be used, the hours of use of said dog, and any other information the
director deems appropriate.
   C.   Nontransferable: Permits are not transferable from one owner to
another, nor from one site to another.
   D.   Warning Signs: On the premises where a guard dog is used, conspicuous
warning signs shall be posted at each door or gate that give access to the
guard dog, and shall contain the following wording: "Warning: A Guard Dog Is
Guarding This Property. Entry Herein May Cause Said Dog To Attack Your Person
And Cause Significant Injury, Even Death. To Reach The Handler For Said Dog,
Call (enter telephone number)". The telephone number contained in the warning
required by this section must provide a twenty four (24) hour per day access to
the guard dog's owner or handler.
   E.   Nuisance: A guard dog shall not be allowed to become a nuisance.
   F.   Microchip, Collar Required: A guard dog shall, in addition to
licensing, be microchipped and the microchip number shall be registered with
the city. The license shall be attached to a one inch (1") wide red or orange
collar with the word "danger" written or embroidered in black lettering three-
fourths inch (3/4") in height. The collar must be on the dog at all times.
   G.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day a guard dog is deployed for use by
any person for the detection of intruders and/or protection of premises, in
violation of any provision of this section, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.100: PERMIT FOR FOSTER ANIMALS:
Where permitted by the land use ordinances, owners of dogs and cats may obtain
a permit to keep more foster dogs or cats in a residential area, provided:
   A.   Such pets are the property of a local public animal shelter or a
section 501(c)(3) United States internal revenue code animal welfare
organization;
   B.   Such pets are awaiting adoption;
   C.   Approval is granted by the appropriate land use authority, the health
department and the director;
   D.   Adequate areas for confinement and shelter are provided; and
   E.   Other provisions of this title are complied with, and no pet or
premises is deemed to be a nuisance. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.110: EXOTIC ANIMAL PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to own or keep an exotic animal without a permit.
Unless prohibited by land use or other ordinances or laws, any person, over the
age of eighteen (18) years of age, may obtain an exotic animal permit upon:
   A.   Demonstrating sufficient knowledge of the species to provide adequate
care;
   B.   Presenting proof of adequate caging appropriate for the species;
   C.   Presenting proof that the animal poses no threat to the health and
safety of the community in the event that the animal should escape. The
director may consult with a review board comprising federal, state and local
public health authorities in considering a request for an exotic animal permit;
and
   D.   Presenting proof of required, if any, state or federal permits.
For the purpose of this section, to demonstrate "sufficient knowledge" of a
species, a person must show that he/she has adequate knowledge of a species to
provide for its basic needs to maintain the animal's health and welfare. The
director may consider the person's experience, education, apprenticeship or by
examination administered by the director when determining that a person has
sufficient knowledge of a species. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.120: DANGEROUS ANIMAL PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to own or keep a dangerous animal without a
permit. Unless prohibited by land use or other ordinances or laws, any person,
over the age of eighteen (18) years of age, may obtain a dangerous animal
permit upon complying with applicable zoning requirements and:
   A.   Demonstrating sufficient knowledge of the species so as to be an expert
in the care and control of the species;
   B.   Presenting proof of adequate primary caging appropriate for the species
and a sufficient secondary system of confinement so as to prevent unauthorized
access to the animal and to prevent the animal's escape;
   C.   Presenting proof that adequate measures have been taken to prevent the
animal from becoming a threat to the health and safety of the community;
   D.   Presenting a plan of action in the event of the animal's escape. The
director may consult with a review board comprising federal, state and local
public health authorities in considering a request for a dangerous animal
permit;
   E.   Presenting proof of required, if any, state or federal permits; and
   F.   Presenting proof of liability insurance in an amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which policy shall name the city as an
additional insured and shall not be subject to cancellation or other material
modifications without at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the
city.
For the purpose of this section, to demonstrate "sufficient knowledge" of a
species, a person must show that he/she has specialized knowledge of a species
to provide for its basic needs to maintain the animal's health, welfare and
confinement. The director may consider the person's experience, education,
apprenticeship or by examination administered by the director when determining
that a person has sufficient knowledge of a species. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.130: EXEMPTIONS:
Research facilities where bona fide medical or related research is being
conducted, 501(c)(3) animal welfare shelters, and other animal establishments
operated by state or local government, or which are licensed by federal law,
are excluded from the permit requirements of sections
8.03.040 through
8.03.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.140: PERMITS; DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS:
A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in any establishment for
which said permit is required, and such permit shall be considered as
appurtenant to the premises and not transferable to another location. The
permittee shall notify the director within thirty (30) days of any change in
his/her establishment or operation, which may affect the status of his/her
permit. In the event of a change in ownership of the establishment, the
permittee shall notify the director immediately. Permits shall not be
transferable from one owner to another. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.150: PERMIT FEES; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year after it is
issued by the director and shall be renewable upon acceptance by the director
of a new application. Renewal applications shall not be available until thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. A permit may only
be issued after the appropriate fee has been paid. Application must be
accompanied by the fee established in the current fee schedule.
   A.   Modification: The permit and fee schedule may be modified from time to
time as deemed appropriate by the director and upon resolution by the city
council. The then current permit fee schedule shall apply to all permit
applications. A copy of the then current fee schedule shall be available from
the director.
   B.   Nontransferable: Permits are not transferable from one owner to
another, from one site to another or from one animal to another. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.03.160: ESTABLISHMENTS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Authority: From time to time, the director may, upon resolution by the
city council, adopt rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels,
catteries, animal grooming parlors, pet shops, riding stables or other animal
related establishments.
   B.   Provisions: Such rules and regulations may provide for:
      1.   The type of structures, buildings, pens, cages, runways or yards
required for the animals sought to be kept, harbored or confined on such
premises;
      2.   The manner in which food, water, and sanitation facilities will be
provided to such animals;
      3.   Measures relating to the health of such animals, the control of
odors, noise, and the protection of persons or property on adjacent premises;
and
      4.   Such other matters as the city shall deem necessary.
   C.   Effect: Such rules and regulations shall, upon publication and
following adoption by the city, have the effect of law, and violation of such
rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this title, subject to the
penalties provided for in section
1.08.020 of this code, and grounds for revocation of a permit issued by the
city. Copies of the rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be filed for
public inspection in the office of the city recorder and of the director. (Ord.
2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.170: ESTABLISHMENTS; INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS:
All establishments required to have permits under this title shall be subject
to periodic inspections, and the inspector shall make a report of such
inspection, which shall be given to the establishment and will be filed with
the director. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.180: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
If an inspection of kennels, catteries, animal grooming parlors, pet shops,
riding stables, similar establishments, or the premises of the holder of a
permit reveals a violation of this title, the inspector shall notify the permit
holder or operator of such violation by means of issuance of a citation as
provided in
chapter 8.10 of this title or issuance of a notice of violation and stipulation
as provided in
chapter 8.11 of this title. If the notice of violation and stipulation is used,
the notice shall:
   A.   Set forth the specific violations found;
   B.   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for correction of
the violations found;
   C.   State that failure to comply in the specified period of time with any
notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this section may result in
immediate suspension of the permit and/or issuance of a citation; and
   D.   State that an opportunity for a hearing upon any grievance the owner or
operator may have concerning the inspection findings and corrections ordered by
the animal control officer may be processed according to the provisions of
chapter 8.11 of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.190: PERMITS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; GROUNDS:
A permit may be suspended or revoked or a permit application rejected on any
one or more of the following grounds:
   A.   Falsification of facts in a permit application;
   B.   Material change in the conditions upon which the permit was granted;
   C.   Violation of any provisions of this title or any other law or
regulation governing the permittee's establishment, including, but not limited
to, noise and/or building and land use ordinances; or
   D.   Conviction on a charge of cruelty to animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.200: PERMITS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Authority; Request For Review: Any permit granted under this title may
be suspended or revoked by the city for violations of any of the requirements
of this title. A permittee aggrieved by the suspension or revocation of his/her
permit may petition the director for review of said grievance. Upon
consideration of said grievance and upon good cause showing, the director may,
at his or her sole discretion, uphold or modify the suspension or revocation,
or reinstate the permit.
   B.   New Permits: A new permit shall not be issued to any person whose prior
permit was suspended or revoked by the city until the applicant has satisfied
the director that he/she has the means and the will to comply with the
requirements of this title in the future. An application for another permit
must comply with the requirements for an application for an initial permit,
including application fee. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.210: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF PERMITS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, when the inspecting officer
finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of kennels, catteries,
animal grooming parlors, riding stables, pet shops, or any similar
establishments, or premises of the holder of a permit obtained under this
title, which in his/her judgment constitute an immediate and substantial hazard
to public health or the health and safety of any animal, he/she may order the
immediate seizure of any animals whose health and safety are at risk and order
the owner or operator of the establishment to immediately cease operations. It
shall be unlawful for any person to whom such an order is given to fail to obey
the same. Any animals seized under this section shall be impounded or otherwise
cared for as the division deems necessary. Persons whose permit has been
suspended by such action may petition the director for review of said
suspension. Upon consideration of said petition and upon good cause showing,
the director may, at his or her sole discretion, uphold or modify the emergency
suspension or reinstate the permit. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.03.220: NOTICE OF SUSPENSION OF PERMITS; SERVICE PROCEDURES:
Notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the
inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the
permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified
mail to the last known address of the permit holder. A copy of such notice
shall be filed with the director. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.04
ANIMALS REQUIRING A LICENSE
SECTION:
8.04.010: License Required; Age And Residence Requirements For License Holder
8.04.020: License Required; Age Of Animals
8.04.030: License Application
8.04.040: Additional Requirements For Licensing And Keeping Ferrets
8.04.050: Veterinary Verification
8.04.060: License Term And Renewal
8.04.070: License Revocation
8.04.080: License Tag Requirements
8.04.090: License Exemption
8.04.100: License Vendor
8.04.010: LICENSE REQUIRED; AGE AND RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE HOLDER:
All dogs, cats and ferrets must be licensed each year, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, to a person of the age of eighteen (18) years or
older that has a residence, with street address, within the city. (Ord. 2012-
16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.020: LICENSE REQUIRED; AGE OF ANIMALS:
Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog, cat or ferret within the
city shall obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the
animal reaches the age of four (4) months, or, in the case of a dog, cat or
ferret over four (4) months of age, within thirty (30) days of the acquisition
of ownership or possession of the animal by said person. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-
2012)
8.04.030: LICENSE APPLICATION:
License applications must be submitted to the city, utilizing a standard form
which requests name, address and telephone number of the applicant; breed, sex,
color and age of the animal; previous license information, rabies and
sterilization information, and the number, location or other identification
applicable to a tattoo or implanted microchip of the animal. The application
shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee. A licensed veterinarian
shall give rabies vaccinations with a vaccine approved by the current
compendium of animal rabies control. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.040: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING AND KEEPING FERRETS:
Without limiting any other requirements of this title, those wishing to keep
ferrets must adhere to the following requirements:
   A.   Number Permitted: No more than two (2) adult ferrets may be kept in a
household at any time, and no more than two (2) litters of kits may be kept in
a household at any time.
   B.   Housing; Confinement: Ferrets shall be kept primarily as indoor pets,
and shall be housed in a cage or kennel of sufficient size and construction to
allow proper space and safekeeping of the ferret. When a ferret is outside, it
shall be kept on a harness with a leash not over six feet (6') in length
specifically designed for ferrets.
   C.   Prohibited Persons: A ferret license shall not be granted to any person
with an animal control violation within the three (3) years preceding the
license application.
   D.   Sterilization; Descenting: The city division encourages owners to
sterilize and descent their ferrets. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.050: VETERINARY VERIFICATION:
No dog, cat or ferret will be licensed as spayed or neutered without veterinary
verification that such surgery has been performed. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.060: LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL:
The license shall be issued for one year and be effective from the date of
purchase, through the end of the same month of the expiration year as the month
in which the license is purchased, or at the end of the rabies vaccination
period current for the animal at the time the license is obtained, whichever
date occurs first. Renewals must be obtained prior to the expiration of the
immediately preceding license. Applications for renewals made after the
expiration of the immediately preceding license must be accompanied by a late
fee as set forth in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.070: LICENSE REVOCATION:
If the owner of any dog, cat or ferret is found to be in violation of this
title on three (3) or more different occasions, within a twelve (12) month
period, the director may seek a court order pursuant to
chapter 8.10 of this title, revoking for a period of one year any and all
licenses such person may possess, and providing for the division to pick up and
impound any animal kept by the person under such order. Any animal impounded
pursuant to such an order shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions
of this title for impounded animals, except that the person under the order of
revocation shall not be allowed to redeem such animal, unless successfully
making reapplication of the license with the division. Persons seeking
reapplication of said animals must comply with conditions as set forth by the
director that may include, but not limited to, sterilization of the animals,
enclosure requirements and confinement conditions. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.080: LICENSE TAG REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Tag Required: Upon payment of the license fee, the director shall issue
to the owner a receipt and a tag for each pet licensed. The tag shall have
stamped thereon the license number, corresponding with the tag number on the
receipt. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal
and see that the animal constantly wears the collar and tag. Failure to attach
the tag as provided shall be a violation of this title, except that dogs or
cats which are kept for show purpose are exempt from wearing the collar and tag
while participating in an animal exhibition.
   B.   Nontransferable; Refunds; Replacement: Tags are not transferable from
one animal to another unless authorized by the director. No refunds shall be
made on any dog, cat or ferret license fee for any reason whatsoever.
Replacement for lost or destroyed tags shall be allowed upon payment to the
city of the replacement tag fee set forth in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code.
   C.   Removal Violation: Any person who removes, or causes the removal, of
the collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog, cat or ferret without the
consent of the owner or keeper thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or
animal control officer who removes such for medical or other reasons, shall
violate this title.
   D.   Microchip: Owners may have an identifying microchip implanted in their
animals. If owners take such action, they shall be exempt from the requirement
that such animals wear identifying tags at all times while on the owner's
premises; provided, that the microchip information has been registered with the
director. Owners shall assume the risk of the loss or destruction of an
unrestrained animal whose microchip either cannot be located after a reasonable
search thereof or owner information cannot be found after a reasonable records
search.
   E.   Responsibility Of Microchip Vendor: It is the responsibility of any
vendor of microchips to provide information to the director as to the
identification of the owner of an animal that has been microchipped by said
vendor. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.090: LICENSE EXEMPTION:
   A.   Conditions: The provisions of sections
8.04.010 through
8.04.080 of this chapter shall not apply in the following circumstances:
      1.   The dog, cat or ferret is properly licensed in another jurisdiction
and the owner thereof is within the city temporarily, for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. If the owner shall be within the city
temporarily, but for a period longer than thirty (30) consecutive days, he/she
may transfer the dog, cat or ferret to the local license required by this
chapter by payment of the fee set forth in title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code, and upon presentment of proof of a current rabies
vaccination for the animal.
      2.   Individual dogs or ferrets housed within a properly permitted
facility or other such establishment when such animals are held for resale.
   B.   Fee Exemption: The fee provisions of sections
8.04.010 through
8.04.070 of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform the tasks
for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical,
sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability. The work or
tasks performed by a service animal must be directly related to the
individual's disability.
      2.   Dogs trained to assist officials of government agencies in the
performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies.
   C.   Vaccinations Not Exempted: Nothing in this section shall be construed
so as to exempt any dog, cat or ferret located within the city from having a
current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.04.100: LICENSE VENDOR:
The director may contract with veterinary hospitals, veterinarians, pet shops,
animal grooming parlors, and similar institutions or individuals for the
issuance of license application forms. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.05
RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
8.05.010: Dog, Cat And Ferret Rabies Vaccination Requirements
8.05.020: Rabies Vaccination; When Valid
8.05.030: Rabies Vaccination; Veterinarian Duties; Certification And Tags
8.05.040: Impoundment Of Animals Without Valid Vaccination Tags
8.05.050: Rabid Animal Reports
8.05.060: Animals Exposed To Rabies
8.05.070: Management Of Animals That Bite Humans
8.05.010: DOG, CAT AND FERRET RABIES VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Vaccination Required: The owner or person having charge, care, custody,
and control of a dog, cat or ferret four (4) months of age or older shall have
such animal vaccinated against rabies and shall thereafter ensure that said
animal is revaccinated as often as is required to maintain the animal in a
current rabies vaccination status. Any person permitting any animal to
habitually be on or remain, or be lodged or fed within such person's house,
yard or premises shall be responsible for the vaccinations of the animal.
Unvaccinated dogs, cats or ferrets over four (4) months of age acquired by the
owner or moved into the jurisdiction must be vaccinated within thirty (30) days
of acquisition or arrival. Every dog, cat and ferret shall have a current
rabies vaccination with a rabies vaccine approved by the current compendium of
animal rabies control.
   B.   Operators Responsibility: Veterinarians, cattery and kennel operators
shall be responsible for determining that dogs, cats and ferrets are currently
vaccinated for rabies prior to accepting the animal, from their owners or
caretakers, for temporary housing on their premises.
   C.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
veterinarian providing emergency medical care to a sick or injured animal.
(Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.05.020: RABIES VACCINATION; WHEN VALID:
   A.   Specified: Animals that have had a valid vaccination for rabies will
not be considered to have a current vaccine until thirty (30) days following
the first vaccination and will be considered unvaccinated the day following the
expiration of the last documented valid vaccination.
   B.   Bite Cases: For the purpose of management of bite cases, an owner may,
within the six (6) months of expiration of the last vaccine, submit proof of
protection against rabies. Such proof shall be in the form of a written
statement from a veterinarian based upon a blood titer paid for by the owner,
drawn after the bite and prior to, or within ten (10) days of, any
revaccination. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.05.030: RABIES VACCINATION; VETERINARIAN DUTIES; CERTIFICATION AND TAGS:
   A.   Certificate Information: It shall be the duty of each veterinarian,
when vaccinating any animal for rabies, to complete a certificate of rabies
vaccination, in duplicate, which includes the following information:
      1.   Owner's name and address;
      2.   Description of the animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
      3.   Date of vaccination;
      4.   Rabies vaccination tag number;
      5.   Type of rabies vaccine administered; and
      6.   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
   B.   Distribution Of Copies: A copy of the certificate shall be distributed
to the owner and the original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The
veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies of the certificate for the
interval between vaccinations specified in this chapter.
   C.   Tag: Additionally, a metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag,
serially numbered, may be securely attached to the collar or harness of the
animal. An animal discovered in public view and not wearing a rabies tag, or
current license tag, shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded or
seized in accordance with law and dealt with pursuant to this title. (Ord.
2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.05.040: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS WITHOUT VALID VACCINATION TAGS:
   A.   Reclaim By Owner: Any vaccinated animal impounded because of a lack of
a rabies vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner upon the owner
furnishing proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all fees attributable to
said animal's apprehension and impoundment accrued up to the date of release.
   B.   Rabies Deposit: Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed by its owner
prior to disposal of said animal under the procedures set forth hereafter in
section
8.07.040 of this title by payment of all fees attributable to said animal's
apprehension and impoundment and by the owner posting a rabies deposit as
specified in the current fee schedule. Said deposit may be recovered by owner
upon showing proof of rabies vaccination within seventy two (72) hours of
release.
   C.   Disposal Of Unclaimed Animal: Any animal not reclaimed prior to the
period specified in section
8.07.050 of this title shall be disposed of pursuant to that section. (Ord.
2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.05.050: RABID ANIMAL REPORTS:
   A.   Reporting Required: Any person having knowledge of the presence or
whereabouts of an animal known to have been exposed to or reasonably suspected
of having rabies and any person having knowledge of an animal or person bitten
by a wild or domestic carnivorous mammal or bat shall report such knowledge and
all pertinent information available to the director and the health department.
Any person having custody of such animal shall confine the animal pending
direction from the director or the health department.
   B.   Interference Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person having
knowledge of the presence or whereabouts of an animal known to have been
exposed to, or reasonably suspected of having, rabies; or of an animal or
person bitten by such an animal; to harbor, protect, or otherwise interfere
with the apprehension or identification of said animal or persons by wilfully
withholding such knowledge from an animal control officer or any other officer
of the city, the division, the health department or the Utah state department
of health.
   C.   Failure To Surrender: It shall be a violation of this title for an
owner, or other person having the care, custody and control of an animal known,
suspected, or deemed to have been exposed to rabies as set forth above in this
section to fail to surrender said animal immediately upon demand by any animal
control officer or officer of the city, the division, the health department or
the Utah state department of health. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.05.060: ANIMALS EXPOSED TO RABIES:
Any animal potentially exposed to rabies virus by a wild or domestic
carnivorous mammal or a bat that is not available for testing shall be regarded
as having been exposed to rabies.
   A.   Unvaccinated: Unvaccinated dogs, cats, and ferrets exposed to a rabid
animal shall be euthanized immediately. If the owner is unwilling to have this
done, the animal shall be placed in strict isolation for six (6) months under a
veterinarian's supervision, at the owner's expense, and vaccinated one month
before being released.
   B.   Vaccinated: Dogs, cats, and ferrets that are currently vaccinated shall
be revaccinated immediately, kept under the owner's control and observed for
forty five (45) days.
   C.   Livestock: Livestock shall be handled as per the current compendium of
animal rabies control. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.05.070: MANAGEMENT OF ANIMALS THAT BITE HUMANS:
   A.   Quarantine: An apparently healthy dog, cat, or ferret that bites a
person or another animal shall be quarantined and the following provisions
shall apply:
      1.   The animal shall be observed for a period of not less than ten (10)
days by the division and/or the health department, and the owner of the animal
shall be responsible for the cost of such quarantine.
      2.   The normal place for such quarantine shall be the division's animal
shelter; however, other arrangements suitable to the division's director may be
made for the period of observation specified herein upon the condition that the
biting animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite is
inflicted.
      3.   A person having custody of an animal under quarantine at a place
other than the division's animal shelter shall immediately notify the director
and the division if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal
behavior, or if the animal escapes from quarantine.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined
animal to fail or refuse to allow an officer of the city, the division, the
health department or a veterinarian designated by them, to make an inspection
or examination of the animal during, and/or at the end of the period of
quarantine.
      5.   If the quarantined animal dies within ten (10) days from the date of
the bite for which the animal was quarantined, the person having custody of
said animal shall immediately notify the director and the division of such fact
and immediately deliver the animal to that person's veterinarian or the
division for the removal and delivery of the head of said animal to a
laboratory specified by the state department of health for examination for
rabies.
      6.   At the end of the quarantine period, the director or designee shall
examine the quarantined animal and if no sign of rabies is present in the
animal, the animal may be released to its owner. Stray animals shall be
disposed of as provided in section
8.07.050 of this title.
      7.   If, during the quarantine, the animal exhibits symptoms of rabies,
it shall be immediately destroyed and tested.
      8.   Any stray or unwanted dog, cat or ferret that bites a person may be
euthanized immediately and submitted for rabies examination, if an immediate
examination is determined necessary by the director or the health department.
   B.   Other Animals: Animals other than dogs, cats, or ferrets that might
have exposed a person to rabies shall be reported immediately to the director
and the health department. Case management will be a collaborative effort
between the health department and the division. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.06
ANIMAL BITES AND NUISANCES
SECTION:
8.06.010: Nuisance; Penalties For Allowing
8.06.020: Public Nuisance Animal
8.06.030: Animal Nuisance Abatement
8.06.040: Animal Bites; Reporting Requirements
8.06.050: Dangerous Or Vicious Animals
8.06.060: Control And Fencing Of Livestock
8.06.070: Harboring Stray Animals; Unlawful Confinement Or Concealment Of
Animals
8.06.080: Dogs Or Ferrets Running At Large; Owner Liability
8.06.090: Animal Trespass
8.06.100: Staking Dogs Improperly
8.06.110: Female Dogs In Heat
8.06.120: Dogs Prohibited In Designated Areas
8.06.130: Attacks By Animals; Owner Liability; Destruction Authorized When
8.06.140: Feeding Of Wild Mammals Prohibited
8.06.010: NUISANCE; PENALTIES FOR ALLOWING:
An owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of an animal or
animals creating a "nuisance", as defined in this title, shall be guilty of
allowing a nuisance in violation of this title and subject to the penalties
provided herein. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.020: PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL:
The term "public nuisance animal" shall mean and include, but is not limited
to, any animal that:
   A.   Is repeatedly found at large;
   B.   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
   C.   Repeatedly molests or intimidates neighbors, pedestrians or passersby
by lunging at fences, chasing, or acting aggressively toward such person,
unless provoked by such person;
   D.   Chases vehicles;
   E.   Makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and
repeated howling, barking, whining, or other noise which causes unreasonable
annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others;
   F.   Causes fouling of the air by odors and thereby creates unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others;
   G.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the
animal is kept or harbored;
   H.   Defecates on any public or private property without the consent of the
owner of such property, unless the handler of such animal shall have in his or
her possession the instruments to clean up after his or her animal and shall
remove the animal's feces to a proper trash receptacle;
   I.   Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by
virtue of the number and/or types of animals kept or harbored;
   J.   Attacks people or other animals, whether such attack results in actual
physical harm to the person or animal to whom or at which the attack is
directed;
   K.   Has been found by a court or by any other commission or board lawfully
established under Utah law, to be a public nuisance under any other provision
of Utah law;
   L.   Cannot be restrained by normal restraints, such as standard leashes,
standard chains, or muzzles; or
   M.   Cannot be effectively controlled by its owner or handler.
The fact, or evidence of the fact, that the factors alleged to have caused the
animal to be a nuisance are inherent and/or natural behavior for such animal,
or the action of the owner or animal are otherwise legal, shall not negate or
excuse a charge of nuisance. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.030: ANIMAL NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   A.   Authority: If the director has reasonable grounds to believe that an
animal constitutes a "public nuisance animal", as defined herein, and that such
nuisance necessitates immediate abatement, he/she may issue an abatement order,
by mail or posting, giving the animal owner or keeper seven (7) days to abate
the animal nuisance. If the animal nuisance is not abated within seven (7) days
after delivery of the abatement notice, an animal control officer may seize the
animal pending delivery of an order concerning the disposition of the animal by
a court of competent jurisdiction. Each day that an owner or keeper allows an
animal nuisance to persist beyond seven (7) days following delivery of an
abatement notice will constitute a separate violation of this title.
   B.   Costs: If the court determines that the animal in question is not a
nuisance and/or need not be abated for the public health and safety, the city
shall cause the animal to be returned to the owner or handler forthwith, and
shall assume the responsibility for the costs incurred while the animal is
under the care and keeping of the city. If the court determines that the animal
in question constitutes a public nuisance, the owner or handler shall be liable
to the city for the cost incurred by the city for the animal's care and keeping
while the matter is before the courts, and for the cost of destroying the
animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.040: ANIMAL BITES; REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Time Limit For Reporting: Persons who obtain knowledge that an animal
has bitten another animal or a human shall report the facts to the director
within twenty four (24) hours of the bite, regardless of whether the biting
animal is of a species subject to rabies.
   B.   Medical Personnel: A physician, or other medical personnel, who renders
professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report that fact
to the director and the health department within twenty four (24) hours of his/
her first professional attendance. Said report shall include the name, sex and
address of the person bitten as well as the type and location of the bite. If
known, the person making the report shall give the name and address of the
owner of the animal that inflicted the bite, and any other facts that may
assist the director in ascertaining the immunization status of the animal.
   C.   Veterinarians: A veterinarian, or other person who treats an animal
bitten, injured or mauled by another animal shall report that fact to the
director. The report shall contain the name and address of the owner of the
injured animal, the name and address of the owner, if known, of the animal
which caused the injury, and a description of the animal, if known, which
caused the injury, and the location of the incident.
   D.   Violation: Any person not conforming with the requirements of this
section shall be in violation of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.050: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It shall be a violation of this title for an owner or handler of a dangerous or
vicious animal to allow or permit said animal to go or be off his/her premises
unless such animal is under secure restraint and muzzled and/or confined so as
to prevent it from injuring any person, property, or other animal. The owner of
any dangerous or vicious animal shall microchip the animal and register the
microchip number with the director. Every animal so vicious and dangerous that
it cannot be controlled by reasonable restraints, and every dangerous and
vicious animal not effectively controlled by its owner or person having charge,
care or control of such animal, so that it shall not injure any person or
property, is a hazard to public safety, and the director may take the same
action in regards to such animal as is permitted in section
8.06.030 of this chapter, or may seek a court order for destruction of or
muzzling of the animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.060: CONTROL AND FENCING OF LIVESTOCK:
   A.   At Large: It is unlawful for an owner or handler of livestock to allow,
either negligently or wilfully, the same to run at large in an area where such
is not permitted by any law or regulation.
   B.   Trespassing: It is unlawful for an owner or handler of livestock to
allow, either negligently or wilfully the same to be herded, pastured, or to
otherwise enter upon the land of another person without the consent of that
person.
   C.   Fencing: In areas where livestock are not permitted to run at large,
the owner or handler of livestock shall construct adequate fencing and shall
maintain said fencing to prevent livestock animals' escape from the owner's or
handler's premises.
   D.   Adequate Fencing Defined: For the purposes of this section, "adequate
fencing" means, at a minimum, mesh, barbed wire, chainlink, rail, or post
fencing; or metal fence panels.
   E.   Stallions: Because of the unusual hazards presented by stallions, such
animals shall be confined in a fenced enclosure with a minimum fence height of
eight feet (8').
   F.   Failure To Comply: Failure by an owner or handler to erect and maintain
the fencing required by this section, thus permitting the escape of, or injury
to persons, property or other domesticated animals, shall be a violation of
this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.070: HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS; UNLAWFUL CONFINEMENT OR CONCEALMENT OF
ANIMALS:
   A.   Harboring Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, except an
animal welfare society incorporated or otherwise qualified to do business
within Utah and licensed under this title, to harbor or keep any lost or stray
pet, unless otherwise allowed by Utah law. A person who assumes and maintains
control of a lost or strayed pet longer than twenty four (24) hours, without
notifying the director of the presence and location of said animal, shall be
presumed to have violated this section.
   B.   Unlawful Confinement: It shall be unlawful for any person to take an
animal, without the permission of the owner or handler thereof, and/or to
confine an animal in a place unknown to the owner or handler; or to conceal an
animal's whereabouts from the owner or handler thereof. The offense described
herein is committed irrespective of the period of time of such unlawful
confinement or concealment. This section shall not apply to animal control
officers legally taking an animal in an emergency or under protection from its
owner or handler. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.080: DOGS OR FERRETS RUNNING AT LARGE; OWNER LIABILITY:
It is unlawful for the owner or handler of any dog or ferret to allow such dog
or ferret at any time to run at large. The owner or handler of a dog or ferret
shall be liable in damages for injury committed by such dog or ferret and it
shall not be necessary in any action brought thereof to allege or prove that
such dog or ferret was of a vicious or mischievous disposition or that the
owner or keeper thereof knew that it was vicious or mischievous. (Ord. 2012-16,
6-21-2012)
8.06.090: ANIMAL TRESPASS:
It is unlawful for the owner or handler of an animal to allow such animal to
trespass on the property of another. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.100: STAKING DOGS IMPROPERLY:
   A.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether
any dog on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go
beyond the property line unless such person has permission of the owner of the
affected property.
   B.   Access To Necessities Required: It is unlawful for any person to chain,
stake out or tether any dog on any premises in a manner that prevents the dog
from having access to food, water or shelter. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.110: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any female dog
in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog from running at large, cause
such dog to be constantly confined in a building or other structure so as to
prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other dogs and
creating a nuisance. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.120: DOGS PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED AREAS:
   A.   Restaurants And Similar Places: It is unlawful for any person to take
or permit any animal, whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about any
establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or
displayed, or served, including, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery
stores, meat markets and fruit or vegetable stores.
   B.   Watershed Areas: It is unlawful for any person keeping, harboring or
having charge or control of any dog or cat to allow such animal to be within
protected watershed areas as designated by either the health department or any
public water district.
   C.   Staking In Public Place: It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake
out or tether any animal in a public place unless the owner or handler of the
animal is continually present and the animal is properly restrained so that the
animal poses no threat of contact with a person engaged in a normal and
expected activity.
   D.   Public Parks: It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any
unrestrained animal in any public park located within the city. Any animal in a
public park must be continually kept on a leash, not over eight feet (8') in
length, which is of sufficient strength to ensure that the animal's owner or
handler shall at all times have absolute control over the animal. The director
may grant exceptions to this subsection for a licensed animal exhibition.
   E.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to dogs provided for in
subsection
8.04.090B of this title, or when the director of the health department adopts
rules and regulations, which are subsequently ratified by the city council,
which set forth the times and places where the dog or dogs may be allowed
without compromising the health and safety of humans, causing a nuisance, or
damaging property. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.130: ATTACKS BY ANIMALS; OWNER LIABILITY; DESTRUCTION AUTHORIZED WHEN:
   A.   Attacking, Chasing Or Worrying: It is unlawful for the owner or person
having charge, care, custody or control of any animal to allow such animal to
attack, chase or worry any human, domesticated animal, any species of hoofed
wildlife protected by any law or ordinance, or any pet or companion animal.
"Worry", as used in this section, means to harass or intimidate by barking or
baring of teeth, growling, biting, shaking or tearing with the teeth; or
approaching any person in an apparent attitude of attack or any aggressive
behavior which would cause a reasonable person to feel they were in danger of
immediate physical attack.
   B.   Penalty Additional: Any penalty imposed as a result of prosecution of a
person under subsection A of this section shall be in addition to any penalties
or liabilities imposed upon such person by any other law or ordinance.
   C.   Owner Liability: The owner in violation of subsection A of this section
shall be strictly liable for violation of this section. In addition to being
subject to prosecution under subsection A of this section, the owner of such
dog shall also be liable in damages to any person injured or to the owner of
any animal(s) injured or destroyed thereby.
   D.   Mitigating Circumstances: The following shall be considered in
mitigating the penalties or damages, or in dismissing a charge brought under
subsection A of this section:
      1.   That the animal was properly confined on the premises; or
      2.   That the animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
   E.   Authorized Action For Protection: Any person may kill (or take other
protective action against) an animal while it is committing any of the acts
specified in subsection A of this section, while such animal is being pursued
after committing any of such acts, or to protect him/herself, or members of the
public, from any threat of death or personal injury then being posed by the
animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.06.140: FEEDING OF WILD MAMMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it is unlawful for
any person intentionally to feed nondomesticated (wild) mammals, specifically
including deer or make food available for consumption by such mammals on
private or public property, including any fruit, grain, mineral, salt,
vegetable, or other material placed outdoors with the specific intent of
consumption by them.
   B.   1. Each property owner shall remove any materials placed on the owner's
property for the purpose of feeding wild mammals. Failure to remove such
materials within twenty four (24) hours of notice from the city shall
constitute an infraction.
      2.   Any materials placed for the purpose of feeding wild mammals are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated summarily, by
civil action, or by criminal prosecution.
   C.   1. The restrictions contained in this section do not apply to city
police officers, animal control officers, or federal or state wildlife
officials who are acting within the scope of their authority.
      2.   This section does not apply to naturally growing vegetation, or to
planted vegetation growing in yards, gardens or beds. (Ord. 2015-13, 10-22-
2015)
CHAPTER 8.07
IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
8.07.010: Animal Shelter And Facilities
8.07.020: Impoundment Authorized; When
8.07.030: Impoundment; Recordkeeping Requirements
8.07.040: Redemption Of Animals; Restrictions
8.07.050: Term Of Impoundment; Destruction Or Other Disposition Of Animals
8.07.060: Sterilization Of Adopted And Impounded Animals
8.07.010: ANIMAL SHELTER AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Shelter: The city shall be responsible, within its legislative
discretion, to provide (by contract with the division or otherwise) suitable
premises and facilities to be used as an animal shelter where impounded animals
can be kept.
   B.   Destruction: The city, through the division, shall provide for the
destruction of dogs, cats, ferrets, and other animals for which destruction is
authorized by this title or by Utah law. Destruction shall be accomplished in
accordance with standards established by the American Veterinary Medical
Association, or in accordance with any other nationally recognized standards
established for the proper destruction of animals; or by any method which, in
the discretion of the director or the division, is proper under the then
existing circumstances.
   C.   Medical Treatment: The city or the division may furnish, when deemed
necessary at the discretion of the director or division personnel, medical
treatment to animals impounded pursuant to this title. Prior consent for such
treatment from the owners of such animals shall not be required.
   D.   Cost Recovery: The city or the division shall be entitled to recover
from the owner of any affected animal the cost of the care and keeping, medical
treatment, and euthanasia provided or performed under the authority of this
title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.07.020: IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED; WHEN:
   A.   Impoundment: An animal control officer may impound, or leave an animal
in the custody of its owner or handler, according to said officer's discretion,
whenever such animal is found to be in circumstances which violate the
requirements of this title. If left in the custody of the owner or handler,
said owner or handler shall nevertheless be required to respond to a notice of
violation issued by the animal control officer.
   B.   Impounding Without Criminal Complaint: An animal found in the following
circumstances may be impounded by an animal control officer without the filing
of a criminal complaint or obtaining a prior order from a court of competent
jurisdiction:
      1.   The animal is running at large outside its owner's or handler's
premises;
      2.   The animal is outside its owner's or handler's premises and is not
licensed as required by this title. An animal not wearing a license tag shall
be presumed to be unlicensed for the purpose of this subsection;
      3.   The animal is sick or injured and its owner cannot be immediately
located;
      4.   The animal's owner or handler requests the division to impound the
animal and pays, in advance, a fee reasonably calculated to pay for the cost
the division will reasonably incur during impoundment and possible destruction
of the animal;
      5.   The animal is abandoned;
      6.   The animal is outside its owner's or handler's premises and is known
by the animal control officer to be without the rabies vaccination required by
this title. For the purpose of this subsection, an animal not wearing a rabies
tag shall be presumed to be unvaccinated;
      7.   The animal is known by the animal control officer to have been
exposed to rabies or bitten by a rabid animal;
      8.   The animal is to be otherwise held for quarantine;
      9.   The animal is a vicious animal and not properly confined or
restrained as required by section
8.06.050 of this title; or
      10.   The animal is not being kept or maintained as required by any other
provision of this title, and as a result thereof, the animal poses an imminent
threat to the health and safety of persons, other animals, or itself.
   C.   List Not Exhaustive: The circumstances set forth above in this section
are not intended to be a complete list of those in which the city, the
division, and/or an animal control officer may impound an animal without a
prior order from a court of competent jurisdiction; and said officers are
authorized to act as necessary to maintain the peace and safety of the city
under the requirements of this title and all other applicable law. (Ord. 2012-
16, 6-21-2012)
8.07.030: IMPOUNDMENT; RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The impounding facility shall keep record of each animal impounded, which shall
include the following information:
   A.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers;
   B.   The manner and date of impound;
   C.   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal;
   D.   The manner and date of disposal;
   E.   The name and address of the person who redeems, purchases or adopts the
animal;
   F.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility;
   G.   All fees received on behalf of the animal; and
   H.   All costs of impoundment allocable to the animal which accrue during
its impoundment. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.07.040: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Payment Of Fees: The owner of any impounded animal or his/her
authorized representative (a legally responsible adult of age 18 or more) may
redeem such animal before disposition, provided he/she pays:
      1.   The impound fee;
      2.   The daily board charge;
      3.   Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including
rabies vaccination or rabies vaccination deposit;
      4.   License fee, if required;
      5.   A transportation fee if transportation of an impounded animal by
specialized equipment is required. "Specialized equipment" is that equipment,
other than the usual patrol and operation vehicles of animal control, which is
designed for specific purposes such as, but not limited to, livestock trailers
and carcass trailers. The director shall determine this fee at a level that
approximates the cost of utilizing the specialized equipment in the particular
situation;
      6.   Any other expenses incurred to impound an animal in accordance with
state or local laws;
      7.   Any unpaid (past due) fees and fines incurred by the owner; and
      8.   If any dog or cat is fertile, the owner shall also pay a
sterilization deposit and comply with any other requirements established by
Utah Code Annotated section 11-46-204 et seq., as amended, or other applicable
state law and implemented by the division. For the purposes of this subsection,
the term "recipient" contained in the referenced state statute shall include an
owner or his/her authorized representative who is redeeming his/her animal
after impound.
If an animal is impounded on two (2) or more occasions without wearing
identification or license tags, the owner may be required to purchase microchip
identification in addition to impound fees.
   B.   Establishment Of Fees: The director, with the city council's approval
by resolution, shall set, and periodically revise when necessary, maximum
impound fees and daily board charges for the impounding of animals. Such fees
shall be published in the current fee schedule. Such fees may take into account
the type of animal impounded, the owner's compliance with animal licensure
requirements, the number of confinements in the preceding year, and the
duration of the confinement. No impound fees will be charged the reporting
owners of suspected rabid animals if they comply with
chapter 8.05 of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.07.050: TERM OF IMPOUNDMENT; DESTRUCTION OR OTHER DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Term: Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of three (3) business
days before further disposition unless the animal is wearing a license tag or
other identification, in which case it shall be held a minimum of five (5)
calendar days. Reasonable efforts shall be made to notify the owner of any
animal wearing a license or other identification during that time. Notice shall
be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed owner. Any
animal voluntarily relinquished to the animal control facility by the owner
thereof for destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum
holding period before release or other disposition.
   B.   Destruction, Disposal Or Adoption: All animals, except those
quarantined or confined by court order, or those subject to Utah Code Annotated
section 4-25-4, as amended, which are held longer than the minimum impound
period, and all animals voluntarily relinquished to the division's animal
facility, may be destroyed or disposed of as the director or the division shall
direct. Any healthy pet may be adopted to any qualifying person desiring to
adopt such animal, for a price as published in the current fee schedule. The
division shall require the sterilization of any healthy dog, cat, ferret or
rabbit sold or released under this chapter and shall also comply with any
applicable requirements established by Utah Code Annotated section 11-46-204 et
seq., as amended, or other applicable state law.
   C.   Injured Animals Release To Veterinarian: Any licensed animal impounded
and having or suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease
requiring medical attention may, in the division's discretion, be released to
the care of a veterinarian.
   D.   Destruction Without Time Limitations: When, in the division's judgment,
it is determined that an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons or to
protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may
be destroyed without regard to any time limitations otherwise established in
this title, and without court order.
   E.   Destruction Upon Request Of Owner: The division may destroy an animal
upon the request of an owner without transporting the animal to the division's
animal facility. An appropriate fee shall be charged the owner for the
destruction and any subsequent disposal of the carcass performed by the
division. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.07.060: STERILIZATION OF ADOPTED AND IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   Sterilization Required: A dog, cat, ferret or rabbit adopted from the
division's animal facility shall be sterilized.
   B.   Conditional Adoption: The division may allow the conditional adoption
of an unsterilized dog, cat, ferret or rabbit, because of the age of the
animal, or as otherwise deemed necessary by the division. Said conditional
adoption shall become final upon proof to the division that the animal has been
sterilized. Failure to sterilize results in forfeiture of the animal to the
division.
   C.   Owner Reclaiming: A dog or cat owner reclaiming an impounded pet shall
comply with any applicable requirements established by Utah Code Annotated
section 11-46-204 et seq., as amended, or other applicable state law and
implemented by the division to conform with said law. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.08
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
SECTION:
8.08.010: Care And Maintenance Responsibility
8.08.020: Keeping Of Diseased Or Painfully Crippled Animals
8.08.030: Abandonment Of Animals
8.08.040: Hobbling Animals
8.08.050: Animals In Vehicles
8.08.060: Physical Abuse Of Animals
8.08.070: Injury To Animals By Motorists; Duty To Stop And Assist
8.08.080: Poisoning Animals
8.08.090: Steel Jaw Traps
8.08.100: Mistreatment Of Animals
8.08.110: Baby Rabbits And Fowl; Restrictions
8.08.120: Selling Certain Turtles Prohibited
8.08.130: Killing Birds
8.08.010: CARE AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for an owner or handler of an animal to withhold food,
drink, care, adequate space and shelter from said animal, which is reasonably
necessary to maintain said animal in good health, comfort and safe from
potential hazards. To ensure the availability of adequate space for large
animals, notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, it shall be
unlawful to keep large livestock on a lot or other parcel of ground that is not
over one-half (1/2) acre in size. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.020: KEEPING OF DISEASED OR PAINFULLY CRIPPLED ANIMALS:
   A.   Abandonment: It is unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at
large any sick, diseased or disabled animal.
   B.   Disease Or Disability: It is unlawful for the owner or handler of an
animal rendered worthless to said owner or handler by reason of disease or
disability, to allow said animal to continue to live in a diseased or disabled
state. Said owner or handler shall dispose of such animal by killing the same
in a humane manner, or by contacting the director or the division. Upon such
contact, the division shall assume responsibility for disposition of the animal
provided that the owner or handler shall pay a fee, in advance, to the division
to pay for division's cost in disposing of the animal. If the owner or handler
fails to pay such fee, and fails to dispose of the diseased or disabled animal
as required above, such person shall be in violation of this title.
   C.   Veterinary Care Or Disposal Required: It is unlawful for an owner or
handler of an animal which is infected with a disease, or is in a painfully
crippled condition, to have, keep or harbor such animal without placing the
animal under veterinary care and/or to dispose of such animal as required in
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.030: ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the geographical
boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.040: HOBBLING ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to hobble livestock or other animals by any means
that may cause injury or damage to any animal. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.050: ANIMALS IN VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to carry or confine any animal in or upon any
vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not limited to, carrying
or confining such animal without adequate ventilation or for an unusual length
of time. Persons transporting an animal in the open bed of a vehicle must
physically restrain the animal in such a manner as to prevent the animal from
jumping or falling out of the vehicle. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.060: PHYSICAL ABUSE OF ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to kill without legal justification, maim,
disfigure, torture, beat, whip, mutilate, burn or scald, overdrive or in any
manner treat any animal in a cruel or malicious manner. Each instance of such
treatment shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.070: INJURY TO ANIMALS BY MOTORISTS; DUTY TO STOP AND ASSIST:
   A.   Required: The operator of a motor vehicle or other self- propelled
vehicle being operated upon the streets of the city shall, in the event said
vehicle should strike and injure or kill any domesticated animal, give
reasonable aid and assistance and/or protection to said animal, without placing
him or herself at unreasonable risk, and in the absence of the owner call and
report the facts pertaining to the incident to either of the following
authorities:
      1.   The Salt Lake County sheriff or other police agency having
jurisdiction in the city;
      2.   The director; or
      3.   The division.
   B.   Compliance With Instructions Given: After making the report required
above, the operator shall comply with the instructions given by the agency
contacted and shall, if instructed, remain at the scene until appropriate
police or animal control authority arrives. After arrival of appropriate
authority, the operator shall cooperate with said authority in the
investigation and reporting of the incident.
   C.   Transportation Alternative: As an alternative to complying with the
requirements set forth above, and in the absence of the owner the motor vehicle
operator may transport the animal which has been struck to the division's
animal facility, or, in the case of an animal which is injured and not dead, to
a veterinarian for treatment of the animal's injuries. If the operator chooses
the latter course of action, he/she shall be responsible for the cost of
treatment if required by the veterinarian. The division shall not be
responsible for the cost of treatment unless it has accepted responsibility
after the operator's compliance with any of the requirements of this section.
   D.   Exception For Emergency Vehicles: This section shall not apply to
operators of emergency vehicles if such vehicles are being operated in response
to a bona fide emergency situation at the time the animal is struck. Emergency
vehicle operators who strike an animal during a response to a bona fide
emergency situation shall notify the director or the division of the incident
as soon as is practicable thereafter. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.080: POISONING ANIMALS:
Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person by any means
to knowingly and recklessly make accessible to any animal, with intent to cause
harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been treated or prepared
with any harmful or poisonous substance. This provision shall not be
interpreted so as to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control
of vermin in furtherance of the public health, when applied in such a manner as
to reasonably prohibit access to other animals. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.090: STEEL JAW TRAPS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use steel jaw traps to trap animals,
unless authorized by the state. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.100: MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to provoke any animal, which is being kept,
housed or confined in compliance with this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.110: BABY RABBITS AND FOWL; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Age Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person to sell, to offer for
sale, offer to give as a prize, premium or advertising device, or display in
any store, shop, carnival or other public place, any baby rabbits or fowl under
eight (8) weeks of age in any quantity less than six (6).
   B.   Dates Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, barter or give away any baby rabbits or fowl under eight (8) weeks of age
during the two (2) week period preceding Easter in any quantity less than
twenty five (25).
   C.   Dye Or Color: It is unlawful to artificially dye or color any animal
under six (6) months of age.
   D.   Personal Use And Consumption: Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the purchase and raising of such rabbits and fowl by a
private individual for his/her personal use and consumption; provided, that he/
she shall maintain proper brooders and other facilities for the care and
containment of such animals while they are in his/her possession.
   E.   Adequate Care: It is unlawful to offer as an advertising device, or to
display, any animal without at all times keeping adequate food and water
available for the animal's use.
   F.   Offering Live Animal Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to offer
as a premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any
live animal. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the offering or sale
of animals in conjunction with the sale of food or equipment designed for the
care or keeping of such animals.
   G.   Separate Offense: Each day an offense of this section occurs or
continues shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.120: SELLING CERTAIN TURTLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to own or sell, barter or trade any Chrysemys scripta-elegans,
red-eared sliders, that are four inches (4") in length or smaller, or P.
troostii, family Testudinidae, "pet turtles". (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.08.130: KILLING BIRDS:
It is unlawful to kill any bird, or to rob or destroy any nest, egg or young of
any bird, in violation of state law. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.09
WILD, DANGEROUS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS
SECTION:
8.09.010: Prohibitions Relating To Wild, Dangerous And Exotic Animals;
Exceptions
8.09.010: PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO WILD, DANGEROUS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS;
EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Specified: It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
barter, give away, keep, own, harbor or purchase any wild, dangerous or exotic
animal (as defined in title 50 of the code of federal regulations, in state law
or regulation, or in sections
8.01.170,
8.01.250 and 8.01.620 of this title), or which is otherwise a "vicious animal"
or a "nuisance", as defined in this title.
   B.   Exceptions: The prohibitions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply to a person, animal shelter, zoological park, veterinary hospital,
internal revenue code section 501(c)(3) animal welfare shelter, public
laboratory, circus, sideshow, amusement show, or facility for education or
scientific research if such organizations are otherwise licensed or permitted
as provided in this title; provided, that said animals are restrained or
confined in such a manner as to prevent their escape and/or injury to the
public. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.10
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
8.10.010: Violation Of Title; Penalties
8.10.020: Issuance Of Citations; Notice Of Violation And Stipulation
8.10.030: Violation; Procedure For Court Orders
8.10.040: Pick Up Orders
8.10.010: VIOLATION OF TITLE; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty: Any person who violates any mandate or prohibition contained
in this title shall be penalized according to the provisions of this title or
the provisions of section
1.08.020 of this code.
   B.   Notice Of Violation Processing Fee: Any notice of violation issued
pursuant to this title shall subject the person to a processing fee as set
forth in the current fee schedule. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.10.020: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS; NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND STIPULATION:
   A.   Criminal Citation: An animal control officer is authorized to issue a
criminal citation to any person upon a charge of violating any provisions of
this title. The form of the citation, and proceedings to be handled upon the
basis of the citation, shall conform to the provisions of the Utah code of
criminal procedure, including, without limitation, Utah Code Annotated sections
77-7-18 through 77-7-22, as amended.
   B.   Notice Of Violation In Lieu Of Criminal Citation: Where violations of
this title are observed, an animal control officer may, in lieu of issuance of
the criminal citation and, with the consent of the person charged with a
violation, issue a notice of violation to any person. The notice of violation
shall state, with reference to the pertinent sections of this title, the
violation which must be remedied by the person charged and shall set forth a
compliance date by which the violator must comply with the remedial
requirements. It shall also set forth a waiver provision providing that the
person to whom the notice of violation is issued waives all rights to contest
the charge made against him/her in the notice of violation and further waives
the rights to a trial or hearing upon the charges. The notice of violation
shall also include the amount of an administrative and processing fee to be
paid to the division by the person charged in the notice of violation. Refusal
to execute the waivers defined herein, refusal and/or nonpayment of the
administrative and processing fee, or failure to comply with the notice of
violation and stipulation by the deadline set as the compliance date may result
in the issuance of a criminal citation to the person charged. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-
21-2012)
8.10.030: VIOLATION; PROCEDURE FOR COURT ORDERS:
Unless modified by the court, court orders pursuant to this title shall be
obtained according to the following minimum notice and procedure:
   A.   Petition For Action: The director or his/her authorized representative
shall petition the court for the desired action;
   B.   Service Prior To Hearing: The petition for the action, together with
supporting affidavits, shall be served on the party against whom the action is
taken at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.10.040: PICK UP ORDERS:
The director or his authorized representative may petition the court for a
"pick up order" for an animal within the premises of and/or under the control
of a person who is in violation of this title. This section may be used for,
but is not limited to, picking up of animals pursued but not captured by an
animal control officer, nuisance animals or for any other violation of this
title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.11
NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND STIPULATION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
8.11.010: Purpose And Authority
8.11.020: Definition
8.11.030: Administrative Procedure
8.11.040: Director Conference
8.11.010: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The use by the division of a notice of violation and stipulation in lieu of
issuance of a criminal citation is intended to provide an equitable and uniform
method for administering and resolving disputes between the division of animal
services and parties alleged to have violated one or more of the sections of
this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.11.020: DEFINITION:
"Notice of violation and stipulation" means a division determination, with the
consent of the person charged, to forego the criminal citation and enter into a
contractual stipulation to resolve the issue. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.11.030: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Conference: In lieu of issuing a criminal citation, and in an attempt
to resolve disputes at the lowest level, the division may convene, a conference
with the person charged and attempt to enter into a contractual settlement to
resolve the issue.
   B.   Deviation From Procedures: When good cause appears, the division may
permit a deviation from these procedures if it finds compliance to be
impractical or unnecessary or that such deviation furthers justice or purpose
of the division.
   C.   Construction Of Procedures: These procedures will be liberally
construed to secure a just, speedy, and economical determination of all issues
presented to the director or the division, as applicable.
   D.   No Review: Actions commenced in court, whether criminal or civil, are
not subject to review under these procedures.
   E.   Appeal Not Authorized: There is no appeal from the notice of violation
and stipulation procedure. Failure by the person charged to comply with the
provisions of the notice of violation and stipulation settlement agreement will
result in negation of the stipulation and issuance of the criminal citation,
or, at the director's option, the settlement agreement may be enforced in court
as provided in section
8.10.030 of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
8.11.040: DIRECTOR CONFERENCE:
   A.   Proceeding: In a director conference, the party shall be permitted to
testify and present evidence, and comment on the issues. Discovery shall be
limited. Intervention by a third party is prohibited. No recording will be made
of the conference. The conference will be private and not open to the public.
   B.   Settlement Agreement: Upon reaching agreement as to the issues,
requirements and penalties (if any), the director shall cause to be prepared a
binding settlement agreement and shall submit the agreement to the parties for
approvals and signature. The director or his or her designee may sign for the
city. After signing a settlement agreement, the parties waive all rights to
further hearings or appeals unless the terms are not honored, in which case the
director or designee may issue a criminal citation, or seek enforcement in
court as provided in section
8.10.030 of this title. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.12
CONFLICTS
SECTION:
8.12.010: Conflict Provisions
8.12.010: CONFLICT PROVISIONS:
The general authorization to own and keep animals and livestock within the city
is set forth in title 13 of this code. In the event of a conflict between any
provision of this title and provisions of title 13 of this code, the provisions
of title 13 of this code shall control. (Ord. 2012-16, 6-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8.13
BEEKEEPING
SECTION:
8.13.010: Regulations
8.13.010: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish certain
requirements of sound beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid
problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated
areas.
   B.   Certain Conduct Unlawful: Notwithstanding compliance with the various
requirements of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain
an apiary or to keep any colony on any property in a manner that threatens
public safety or creates a nuisance.
   C.   Colony Conditions: Notwithstanding compliance with the various
requirements of this section, it shall be unlawful for any beekeepers to keep
any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any
unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or
animal life of others or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any
public property or property of others.
   D.   Hive Registration: All honeybee colonies shall be registered with the
Utah department of agriculture and consumer services.
   E.   Setbacks And Fencing Of Flyways: No colony may be placed closer than
five feet (5') of any rear or side yard property line. Any colony situated
within twenty five feet (25') of a public or private property line shall
require the establishment of a flyway barrier at least six feet (6') in height
consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof.
Said barrier shall be parallel to the property line extending ten feet (10')
beyond the colony in each direction, forcing a flight pattern elevation of at
least six feet (6') above grade.
   F.   Water: A water source shall be provided on the property.
   G.   General Maintenance: Maintenance shall be such that no bee comb or
other materials are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon removal from
the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other beeproof enclosure.
   H.   Queens: The colony shall be promptly requeened if it exhibits unusual
aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due
provocation or swarming. Preferably, queens shall be selected from European
stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics.
   I.   Colony Densities: It shall be unlawful to keep more than the numbers of
colonies allowed by subsection
13.76.240D of this code on any tract, lot or parcel of land within the city of
Holladay.
   J.   Utah State Beekeeping Inspection Act: Each Utah apiary shall meet all
requirements and inspection schedules deemed necessary by the Utah department
of agriculture and consumer services.
   K.   Identification: The beekeeper shall conspicuously post a sign setting
forth the name and phone number or other identifying marks, such as a
registration number, of the responsible beekeeper.
   L.   Noncompliance: Upon receipt of information that any colony situated
within the city is not being kept in compliance with the conditions set forth
by this section, the community development director shall cause an
investigation to be conducted.
      1.   If the city finds that grounds exist to believe that one or more
violations have occurred he shall send written notice to the beekeeper to cure
the violation within a reasonable time frame as per the notice. If the
violation has not been corrected after notice having been given, a hearing
shall be scheduled before the city's hearing officer as set forth in title 7 of
this code.
      2.   If the hearing officer finds that the colony or colonies have been
kept in violation of this section, he may order that the bees be relocated on
the property, removed from the property, or if no other satisfactory remedy
exists, then he may order the bees destroyed.
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to require
the conduct of a hearing for the destruction of: a) any bee colony not residing
in a hive structure intended for beekeeping, or b) any swarm of bees, or c) any
colony residing in a standard or manmade hive which by virtue of its condition,
has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper. (Ord. 2014-08, 6-5-2014)
TITLE 9
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 9.08
HEALTH NUISANCES AND ABATEMENT
SECTION:
9.08.005: Definition
9.08.010: Nuisance Abatement; Investigation Of Complaints
9.08.020: Notification Of Nuisance; City Abatement Authority
9.08.030: Fly Control
9.08.040: Stagnant Water
9.08.005: DEFINITION:
   A.   A "nuisance" is anything which is injurious to health, indecent,
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. A nuisance may
be the subject of an action.
   B.   A nuisance may include the following:
      1.   Drug houses and drug dealing as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 78-38-9;
      2.   Gambling as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-1101 et
seq;
      3.   Criminal activity committed in concert with two (2) or more persons
as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-203.1;
      4.   Party houses which frequently create conditions defined in
subsection B1 of this section; and
      5.   Prostitution as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-1301
et seq. (1999 Code)
9.08.010: NUISANCE ABATEMENT; INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS:
The city or the board of health shall cause every nuisance dangerous to health
and human life, within its jurisdiction, to be abated. When complaint of such
nuisance is made to it, the city or the board of health shall cause the matter
to be investigated and shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is
detrimental to the public health. (1999 Code)
9.08.020: NOTIFICATION OF NUISANCE; CITY ABATEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   Notification; Order: Whenever the city or the board of health shall
determine that a nuisance detrimental to health exists, it shall in writing
notify the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance may be found,
and shall order the abatement or removal pursuant to such order. The city or
the board of health may summarily proceed to abate or remove the same, or the
city may cause an action to be brought in the name of the state or the city by
the city attorney for the abatement of such nuisance.
   B.   Abatement By City; Recovery Of Costs: In the event the city abates the
nuisance, the city may bring suit to recover costs, etc., in an appropriate
court.
   C.   Collection Of Expenses: In the event collection of expenses to abate
the nuisance are pursued through the courts, the city shall sue and receive
judgment for all expenses of abatement, together with reasonable attorney fees,
interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner
provided by law. (1999 Code)
9.08.030: FLY CONTROL:
It is unlawful for any person to permit, or have on his premises, whether owned
or occupied by him, either one or more of the following unsanitary conditions:
   A.   A privy, cesspool, sink, pit or like place that is not securely
protected from flies;
   B.   Garbage that is not securely protected from flies;
   C.   Vegetable waste, trash, litter, rags or refuse of any kind in which
flies may breed; or
   D.   Any horse, mule, burro, ass, cattle or other large animal on a lot or
other parcel of ground that is not over one-half (1/2) acre in size. (1999
Code)
9.08.040: STAGNANT WATER:
Any stagnant pool of water in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It
is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any such nuisance to
remain or exist on any property under his or its control. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.12
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
SECTION:
9.12.010: Report Requirements
9.12.020: Quarantine Rules
9.12.030: Disinfection; Clothing And Other Objects
9.12.040: Disinfection; Vehicles
9.12.010: REPORT REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the duty of every physician or other person caring for the sick in
the city to make a report to the board of health immediately after such person
becomes aware of the existence of any case of a communicable disease in his
charge, and it shall be the duty of each and every person, owner, agent,
manager or superintendent of any public or private institution, or dispensary,
hotel, boarding house or rooming house to make a report in like manner of any
inmate, occupant or boarder suffering from any communicable disease. (1999
Code)
9.12.020: QUARANTINE RULES:
The board of health is authorized and empowered to make all necessary rules to
properly quarantine any person who has a contagious disease or who has been
exposed to a contagious disease, and to prescribe the period of quarantine for
the various diseases. (1999 Code)
9.12.030: DISINFECTION; CLOTHING AND OTHER OBJECTS:
It is unlawful for any person to give, lend, sell, transmit or expose, without
previous disinfection in accordance with the rules of the board of health, any
bedding, clothing, rags or other objects that have been exposed to infection
from any of the communicable diseases. (1999 Code)
9.12.040: DISINFECTION; VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly convey a person afflicted with a
contagious disease in a vehicle or other means of transportation unless he
shall immediately thereafter disinfect his conveyance in a thorough manner.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.20
PARACHUTE JUMPING
SECTION:
9.20.010: Written Permission Required For Parachute Jumping
9.20.020: Jumps To Be In Compliance With Law
9.20.010: WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR PARACHUTE JUMPING:
It is unlawful for any person, except in an emergency, to make a parachute
jump, or for any pilot in command of an aircraft to allow a parachute jump to
be made from that aircraft, within the limits of the city, unless prior
permission in writing is first had and obtained from the city. (1999 Code)
9.20.020: JUMPS TO BE IN COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
Any such approved parachute jump shall be made strictly in compliance with all
pertinent federal, state and local rules and regulations. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.40
SEWERS
SECTION:
9.40.010: Connection To Public Sewer Required
9.40.020: Opening Manhole Covers; Restrictions
9.40.030: Discharging Surface Water Into Sewers
9.40.040: Obstruction Of Sewers; Prohibited Discharges
9.40.010: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED:
Connection with the public sewer must be made, unless proper vents and traps
are installed and approved by an authorized representative of the city or the
Salt Lake City suburban sanitary district no. 1. (1999 Code)
9.40.020: OPENING MANHOLE COVERS; RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to open any sewer manhole without permission from
an authorized representative of the city or the Salt Lake City suburban
sanitary district no. 1. (1999 Code)
9.40.030: DISCHARGING SURFACE WATER INTO SEWERS:
It is unlawful for any person to connect with the public sewer or with any
drain that discharges rainwater or surface water, or the contents of any
spring, creek, ditch or other watercourse, without a permit to do the same from
the city. (1999 Code)
9.40.040: OBSTRUCTION OF SEWERS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
It is unlawful for any person to empty or discharge into the public sewers any
solids, garbage, or other similar matter, or any matter or thing likely to
obstruct the sewer. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.42
BURIAL
SECTION:
9.42.010: Restrictions On Burial
9.42.010: RESTRICTIONS ON BURIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased person
(human remains), cremains excepted, within the city limits, except in a
cemetery. No cemeteries shall be established unless by permission of the city
council and in compliance with state law; and no person shall be buried in any
lot except in full compliance with this chapter and the law. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-
19-2012)
CHAPTER 9.44
OPEN WELLS, CESSPOOLS AND PRIVY VAULTS
SECTION:
9.44.010: Wells, Cesspools And Other Dangerous Openings Prohibited
9.44.020: Filling Of Dangerous Openings; Responsibility
9.44.030: City To Perform Work When
9.44.040: Costs For City Performance Of Work
9.44.010: WELLS, CESSPOOLS AND OTHER DANGEROUS OPENINGS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, permit or suffer to exist any
uncovered or open well, cesspool, privy vault or other dangerous or opened
crevice upon property within the city. (1999 Code)
9.44.020: FILLING OF DANGEROUS OPENINGS; RESPONSIBILITY:
Every owner, occupant or tenant of property within the city upon which
uncovered or open wells, cesspools, privy vaults or other dangerous or
potentially dangerous openings have been maintained or have existed shall
immediately fill in or cover the same securely. (1999 Code)
9.44.030: CITY TO PERFORM WORK WHEN:
Any owner, occupant or tenant of property within the city found in violation of
section
9.44.010 of this chapter who fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the direct supervision of the city, which shall, by
and through its agents, have the right to enter upon such land, and fill in or
securely cover any uncovered or open well, cesspool, privy vault or other
dangerous or open crevice. (1999 Code)
9.44.040: COSTS FOR CITY PERFORMANCE OF WORK:
In the event the city must fill or securely cover any uncovered or open well,
cesspool, privy vault or other opening, as provided in this chapter, an action
shall lie on the city's behalf against any violator of this chapter for the
costs so incurred. The city attorney shall, at the request of the city council,
proceed against any violator in a civil action to recover the same. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.48
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
9.48.010: Regulations, Adopted By Reference; Copies On File
9.48.020: Reserved
9.48.030: General Prohibition Of Noise
9.48.040: Indoors
9.48.050: Specific Noise Restrictions
9.48.060: Powered Model Mechanical Devices
9.48.070: Shouting And Loud Conversations
9.48.080: Snowmobiles
9.48.090: Sporting Equipment
9.48.100: Sporting Ramps (Rep. by Ord. 2021-13, 5-20-2021)
9.48.110: Swimming Pool Equipment
9.48.120: Water Features
9.48.130: Music And Sound Amplification
9.48.140: Exemptions
9.48.150: Interpretation Of Chapter
9.48.160: Violation Of Chapter
9.48.170: Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels
9.48.180: Appendix A
9.48.010: REGULATIONS, ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
The provisions of the Salt Lake Valley health department, health regulation 21
entitled "community noise pollution control", as currently adopted by the Salt
Lake Valley health department under authority of Utah Code Annotated section
26A-1-114, as amended, are hereby incorporated in their entirety by reference;
provided:
   A.   All referenced therein to the "seven o'clock (7:00) A.M." are hereby
amended to reference the time "eight o'clock (8:00) A.M."; and
   B.   No outside power equipment or construction related equipment, permitted
or non-permitted, shall be allowed between the hours of ten o'clock P.M. (10:
00) and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. unless a Temporary Noise permit is approved
and issued by Salt Lake County, Salt Lake Valley Health Department, in
accordance with Section 5 of regulation 21. (Modifies section 4.7.2 or
regulation 21). (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 3-12-2020)
9.48.020: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.030: GENERAL PROHIBITION OF NOISE:
   A.   In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause to be
made or continued any loud, unreasonable, unnecessary, or unusual noise that:
      1.   Disturbs the health or safety of a reasonable person of normal
sensitivity within any receiving property; or
      2.   Creates a "public nuisance" defined as an act or condition created
by a person who unlawfully commits or omits to perform any duty, which either:
         a.   Seriously injures, or endangers the health, or safety of any
person;
         b.   Seriously renders a person insecure in life; or
         c.   Endangers the environment.
   B.   Additionally, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or
continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise that is plainly audible
at a type A or type B receiving property between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.040: INDOORS:
   A.   No person shall emit, nor shall any person cause, allow, permit, or
fail to control the emission of any stationary noise source so as to exceed the
maximum sound pressure level set forth in section
9.48.170, table 1 of this chapter when measured indoors of a multi-dwelling
unit building or multiuse property. Measurements shall not be taken in areas
which receive only casual noise in nonhabitable areas such as hallways,
closets, and bathrooms.
   B.   The transmission of vibrations that cannot be measured with a sound
level meter are not restricted by this chapter. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.050: SPECIFIC NOISE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Bells And Clocks: No person shall sound, operate, or permit the
sounding or operation of an electronically amplified signal from any bell,
chime or clock between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. for longer than five (5) minutes in any one hour so as to cause a
noise nuisance.
   B.   Fixed Sirens, Whistles, And Horns: No person shall sound, nor shall any
person cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the sounding of any whistle,
horn, or siren used as a signal for commencing or suspending work, or for any
other purpose so as to cause a noise nuisance, except when used as a signal of
an emergency or imminent danger.
   C.   Hawkers And Peddlers: No person shall offer for sale, distribute,
solicit, or sell anything by shouting or outcry within three hundred feet
(300') of a type A or type B property use. The provisions of this section shall
not be construed to prohibit the selling by shouting or outcry of merchandise,
food, and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and
other similar public entertainment events.
   D.   Motor Vehicles:
      1.   Horns And Other Signaling Devices: No person shall sound any horn or
audible signaling device on any motor vehicle, except to prevent or avoid an
accident. Any advertisement or solicitation which encourages or requests a
person to honk their horn in violation of this chapter is expressly prohibited.
      2.   Motorsports: No person shall allow or conduct any sponsored or
sanctioned motorsport activities in such a manner that emits a sound pressure
level which exceeds the maximum allowable sound pressure levels set forth in
section
9.48.170, table 1 of this chapter when measured at a type A or type B property
use.
      3.   Standing Motor Vehicles: No person shall operate, nor shall any
person cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any motor
vehicle to remain in an idling mode or condition for:
         a.   A consecutive period of five (5) minutes or longer;
         b.   Any period of time while the vehicle is left unattended; or
         c.   So as to cause a noise nuisance. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.060: POWERED MODEL MECHANICAL DEVICES:
No person shall fly a model aircraft, whether tethered or not, or fire or
operate a model rocket vehicle or other similar noise producing device:
   A.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. within three hundred feet (300') of a type A or type B property use; or
   B.   So as to cause a noise nuisance. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.070: SHOUTING AND LOUD CONVERSATIONS:
No person shall vocalize at levels which amount to a plainly audible noise
within one hundred feet (100') of a type A or type B property use, for a
duration longer than one minute. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.080: SNOWMOBILES:
No person shall operate, nor shall any person cause, allow, permit or fail to
control the operation of any snowmobile:
   A.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M.;
   B.   Within three hundred feet (300') of a type A or type B property use, or
so as to cause a noise nuisance;
   C.   Within the public or private right of way or on public property unless
specifically designated for use by a federal, state, or local government entity
for such vehicle; or
   D.   That is not in good mechanical working condition so as to emit
excessive or unusual sounds. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.090: SPORTING EQUIPMENT:
No person shall use, nor shall any person cause, allow, permit, or fail to
control the impulsive sound from any toy, sporting ramp or piece of sporting
equipment between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:
00) A.M., if such usage creates a plainly audible noise at a type A or type B
property use so as to cause a noise nuisance. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012; amd.
Ord. 2021-13, 5-20-2021)
9.48.100: SPORTING RAMPS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-13, 5-20-2021)
9.48.110: SWIMMING POOL EQUIPMENT:
No person shall operate or maintain, nor shall any person cause, allow, permit,
or fail to control the operation or maintenance of any swimming pool equipment
used to operate a swimming pool or spa, including, but not limited to, the
heater, pump, filter, water conditioner, disinfection equipment, hydrojets or
other accessory equipment that exceeds the maximum allowable sound pressure
levels set forth in section
9.48.170, table 1 of this chapter when measured at a type A or type B property
use so as to cause a noise nuisance. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.120: WATER FEATURES:
No person shall install, operate, or maintain, nor shall any person cause,
allow, permit, or fail to control the installation, operation, or maintenance
of any manmade water feature or equipment associated with any manmade water
feature including, but not limited to, ponds, waterfalls, fountains,
recirculating pumps, aerators, or other similar features or equipment so as to:
   A.   Be plainly audible at a type A or type B property use between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. so as to cause a
noise nuisance. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.130: MUSIC AND SOUND AMPLIFICATION:
With the exception of declaring an emergency, no person shall operate, play,
nor shall any person cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the operation or
playing of any personal or commercial sound amplification, or sound
reproduction equipment, or musical instruments, or similar devices in such a
manner:
   A.   So as to exceed the maximum allowable sound pressure levels set forth
in section
9.48.170, table 1 of this chapter when measured at a type A or type B property
use;
   B.   Which emits a plainly audible noise at a type A or type B property use
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
   C.   That causes a crowd noise nuisance at a type A or type B property use
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
(Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.140: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Agricultural Practices: Noise resulting from the use of farm equipment
or activities or off highway implement of husbandry for recognized and
acceptable agricultural practices shall be exempt from this chapter provided
that:
      1.   All reasonable efforts have been made to minimize the impact on the
community;
      2.   The equipment is operating within manufacturer's specifications;
      3.   All noise control systems are in constant use, in good working
order, and in compliance with this chapter;
      4.   All equipment is in good mechanical working condition so as to not
emit excessive or unusual sounds;
      5.   The equipment is used between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.; and
      6.   This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit noises resulting
from agricultural equipment between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. within three hundred feet (300') of a type A or type
B property use that result from harvesting a crop or other similar activity
within an agriculturally zoned area.
   B.   Human Voice: Noise resulting from the unamplified human voice shall be
exempt from this chapter, provided the person is not in a public entertainment
venue and is not shouting.
   C.   Military Operations: Noise resulting from the emission of sound in the
performance of military operations, exclusive of travel by individuals to or
from military duty shall be exempt from this chapter.
   D.   Railway And Interstate Highways: Noise resulting from railways and
interstate highway traffic noise, when operating in accordance with all local,
state and federal laws shall be exempt from this chapter.
   E.   Road Sweepers: Noise resulting from road sweepers when operated for the
purposes of cleaning highways or any other public right of way shall be exempt
from this chapter.
   F.   Sporting Events: Noise resulting from activities directly related to
the field of play (e.g., whistles, shouting plays, revving engines) during a
sporting contest including, but not limited to, football, soccer, baseball,
drag racing, or similar event that are sanctioned by the Utah High School
Activities Association (UHSAA), National Collegiate Athletic Association
(NCAA), other professional organization, or organized sport association shall
be exempt from this chapter. Events continuing after curfew will be exempted
provided the event began sufficiently early that it would be reasonably
expected that ninety five percent (95%) of a similar class of events would have
been completed by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. This subsection shall not apply to
any amplified sound sources, fireworks, or the maximum sound pressure level
restrictions set forth in section
9.48.170, table 1 of this chapter.
   G.   Swimming And Spa Pools: Noise resulting from the splashing of water
caused by reasonable swimming associated activities within a spa or swimming
pool between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. shall be exempt from this chapter.
   H.   School Events: Noise resulting from activities directly related to any
school event including, without limitation, school sporting events and/or
school dances shall be exempt from this chapter.
   I.   Holladay City Sponsored Events: Noise resulting from activities
directly related to any public event or private event that is permitted by or
sponsored by the city of Holladay shall be exempt from this chapter.
   J.   Holladay City Road Construction Projects: Noise resulting from
construction related activities within a public right of way which is shared by
jurisdictional boundary of an abutting municipality or State, Public Lands.
(Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 3-12-2020)
9.48.150: INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum required for the purposes set
forth. Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the provisions of this chapter
conflict with any other ordinances pertaining to the same subject, the more
restrictive provisions shall prevail. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.160: VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
Violation of any noise ordinance shall constitute a class B misdemeanor, as
defined by the Utah Code Annotated. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be
punishable as such. (Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.170: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS:
TABLE 1
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS (Leq) TABLE
 
Receiving Property Use1 Between 10:00 P.M. And 8:00 Between 8:00 A.M. And 10:00
                        A.M.                        P.M.
Type A                  5 dBA above ambient sound   10 dBA above ambient sound
                        not to exceed 50 dBA        not to exceed 60 dBA
Type B                  5 dBA above ambient sound   10 dBA above ambient sound
                        not to exceed 55 dBA        not to exceed 65 dBA
Type C                  5 dBA above ambient sound   10 dBA above ambient sound
                        not to exceed 70 dBA        not to exceed 70 dBA
Type D                  5 dBA above ambient sound   10 dBA above ambient sound
                        not to exceed 75 dBA        not to exceed 75 dBA
 
Note:
    1.    See section
9.48.180, "Appendix A", of this chapter referencing property use examples.
(Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
9.48.180: APPENDIX A:
NOISE AREA CLASSIFICATIONS
Type A Property use activities/examples:
       Single-family residential structure that does not share a common wall
       with residential or any other use
Type B Property use activities/examples:
       All other residential uses not included in type A including, but not
       limited to:
        Apartment/condominium/twin home/poli-plex
        Group home, community living
        Mobile home park or court
        Residential hotel/motel
        Transient lodging
       Camping and picnicking areas (designated)
       Correctional institution
       Cultural activity and nature exhibition
       Medical/other health service
       Religious, church activity
       Resort, group camp
       School, educational institution activity
       Other cultural, recreational activity
Type C Property use activities/examples:
       Retail trade:
        Aircraft and accessories
        Apparel and accessories
        Automotive and accessories, gas stations
        Building materials
        Farm equipment
        Food, eating and drinking, other recreation (bar, discotheques, clubs)
        Furniture, home furnishings and equipment
        General merchandise
        Hardware
        Marine craft and accessories
       Other retail trade:
        Amusements (except fairgrounds and amusement parks)
        Automobile parking
        Business services
        Contract construction services
        Finance, insurance, and real estate services
        Governmental services (except correctional institutions)
        Legal services
        Miscellaneous services (except religious activities)
        Parks
        Personal services
        Repair services
        Other professional services
Type D Property use activities/examples:
       Agricultural
       Agricultural and related activities
       Aircraft transportation (except passenger terminals)
       Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather and
       similar materials - manufacturing
       Chemicals and allied products - manufacturing
       Event and entertainment venues
       Fabricated metal products - manufacturing
       Fairgrounds and amusement parks
       Fishing activities and related services
       Food and kindred products - manufacturing
       Forestry activities and related services (including commercial forest
       land, timber production, and other related activities)
       Furniture and fixtures - manufacturing
       Highway and street right of way communication (except telegraph message
       centers)
       Lumber and wood products (except furniture) - manufacturing
       Marine craft transportation (except passenger and freight terminals)
       Mining activities and related services
       Miscellaneous manufacturing (except motion picture production)
       Motor vehicle transportation (except passenger terminals)
       Noncommercial forest development
       Other resource production and extraction
       Other transportation, communication and utilities (except transportation
       services and arrangements)
       Other undeveloped land and water areas
       Paper and allied products - manufacturing
       Petroleum refining and related industries
       Primary metal industries
       Printing, publishing, and allied industries
       Professional, scientific, and controlling instruments, photographic and
       optical goods, watches and clocks - manufacturing
       Racetracks
       Railroad, rapid transit, and street railway transportation (except
       passenger terminals)
       Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products - manufacturing
       Stone, clay, and glass products - manufacturing
       Textile mill products - manufacturing
       Under construction
       Undeveloped and unused land area (excluding noncommercial forest
       development)
       Utilities
       Vacant floor area
       Water areas
       All other activities not otherwise listed
       All other property uses not previously identified
 
(Ord. 2012-25, 12-13-2012)
CHAPTER 9.52
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
9.52.010: Definitions
9.52.020: Board Of Health Powers And Duties
9.52.030: Complaint Investigation; Public Nuisances
9.52.040: Containers; Condemnation And Replacement
9.52.050: Dumping; Consent And Disposal Requirements
9.52.060: Dumping; Interpretation Of Language
9.52.070: Reserved
9.52.080: Garbage Hauling; Covering Of Vehicles
9.52.090: Garbage Hauling; Spilling On Streets Or Premises Prohibited
9.52.100: Garbage Hauling; Damaging Containers Or Littering Prohibited
9.52.110: Garbage Hauling; Dumping Area Limitations
9.52.120: Waste Disposal; Permission For Feed, Fill, Burning Or Other Acts
9.52.130: Waste Disposal; Rules And Regulations
9.52.140: Reserved
9.52.150: Waste Disposal; Receptacles To Be Provided
9.52.160: Receptacle Location Restrictions
9.52.170: Waste Disposal; Notice And Compliance
9.52.180: Waste Disposal; Dumping Restrictions
9.52.190: Accumulation Of Wastes Prohibited
9.52.200: Reserved
9.52.210: Reserved
9.52.220: Reserved
9.52.230: "No Dumping" Signs Furnished By City
9.52.240: Reserved
9.52.250: Placing Animals In Streams And Reservoirs Prohibited
9.52.260: Wind Blown Refuse Prohibited
9.52.270: Loose Trade Waste
9.52.280: Uncovered Garbage Prohibited
9.52.290: Loaded Vehicles On Streets
9.52.300: Spilling Refuse From Vehicles
9.52.310: Burning Of Waste
9.52.320: Collection Services Refused When; Evidence
9.52.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings given in this section:
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building comprising four (4) or more dwelling units designed
for separate housekeeping tenements.
CINDERS: The residue of materials burned in boilers, furnaces and heating
plants of public buildings, places of business, apartment houses, hotels and
manufacturing plants.
COMMUNITY WASTE: Lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and shrubs, leaves,
sweepings from yards, tin cans, boiler ashes, newspapers, magazines, cardboard
cartons and stove ashes, but not building materials.
GARBAGE: Swill and all animal, vegetable and food refuse from kitchens of
residences, hotels, cafes, restaurants and places where food is prepared for
human consumption.
MARKET WASTE: Condemned or decayed or unsound vegetables, meat, fish and fruit,
and all waste and offal thereof from markets, stores and factories, and all
vegetable waste from such markets, stores and factories.
NIGHT SOIL: The contents from privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks, grease
tanks and water closets.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried
on principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation by any person or
persons for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PLACES: Office buildings, theaters, garages, auto camps,
hotels, clubs, churches, schools, hospitals or other places of similar
character.
REFUSE:
   A.   1.   Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper,
newspapers, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard
trimmings, wood furniture, bedding;
      2.   Noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metal, tin
cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete,
glass, crockery, other mineral wastes; and
      3.   Street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings,
dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, and contents of litter receptacles.
   B.   "Refuse" shall not, however, include earth and wastes from building
operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial
processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler
house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
RESIDENCES: Buildings or dwellings comprising not more than three (3) dwelling
units designed for separate housekeeping tenements, and where no business of
any kind is conducted except such "home occupations" as are defined in the land
use ordinances of the city. Condominiums shall be deemed residences for the
purposes of this chapter.
STOVE ASHES: The residue of material burned in stoves and furnaces in private
residences, but not the residue from furnaces in apartment houses, hotels,
business houses, heating or manufacturing plants.
TRADE WASTE: All discarded wooden boxes, barrels, broken lumber, cardboard
boxes, cartons, waste paper, leather, rubber, excelsior, cuttings, sweepings,
rags and other inflammable waste materials, and all discarded trade or
manufacturing refuse from stores, factories or other places of business which
are not included within the definition of garbage, stove ashes and marked
waste.
WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR: A person or persons engaged in the business of
collecting, hauling or transporting through the streets of the city any
garbage, community waste, dishes, cinders, trade waste, market waste, night
soil, manure, dead animals, bones, or any noxious or offensive material or
matter for disposal or for any other purpose. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
9.52.020: BOARD OF HEALTH POWERS AND DUTIES:
All waste disposal shall be subject to the discretion and control of the board
of health. It shall be the particular duty of the board of health to make rules
and regulations and to enforce the provisions of this chapter in reference to
garbage, scavenger and waste disposal work. (1999 Code)
9.52.030: COMPLAINT INVESTIGATION; PUBLIC NUISANCES:
It shall be the duty of the board of health, or other appointed officials, to
answer and investigate all complaints and, when necessary in its judgment, to
declare the unsanitary condition a public nuisance. (1999 Code)
9.52.040: CONTAINERS; CONDEMNATION AND REPLACEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the board of health, or other appointed officials, to
declare worn out, rusted or filthy containers, as described in this code,
public nuisances; and it is unlawful for any person, group of persons or
commercial establishment to continue to use such containers. It shall be the
duty of such persons or commercial establishment to clean or replace said
containers with adequate containers, as described in this code. (1999 Code)
9.52.050: DUMPING; CONSENT AND DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person, association, corporation, fraternity or
religious order, or any group or single person, whether a legal entity or not,
to dump, put, place or abandon any cinders, common waste, garbage, market
waste, trade waste, organic material, refuse, stove ashes, building materials,
machinery, equipment, automobiles, furniture, junk or waste of any nature, or
to dump, put, place or deposit upon any private property any of the above items
without the consent of the owner; and even though the consent is obtained, if
the materials placed upon the property have a tendency to become obnoxious, a
nuisance or a danger to the health, welfare, peace or safety, or which annoy
the repose of any party, that said property shall be immediately, as soon as
physically feasible under the circumstances, covered or conditioned in such a
manner as to remove the objectionable features of the materials deposited.
(1999 Code)
9.52.060: DUMPING; INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE:
It determining the meaning of any terms used in this section and section
9.52.050 of this chapter, reference shall be made to section
9.52.010 of this chapter for the definition of such words insofar as they are
defined, and they shall have the meaning as set forth in section
9.52.010 of this chapter. Any other words used, unless having a special
connotation, will be construed in the usual and ordinary sense, in accordance
with the normal parlance insofar as possible. (1999 Code)
9.52.070: RESERVED:
9.52.080: GARBAGE HAULING; COVERING OF VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to haul, convey or transport through or upon any
of the public streets, any garbage, ashes, market wastes, trade wastes, manure,
night soil, loose paper, scrap lumber, excelsior, tree limbs, bush clippings,
lawn clippings, house refuse, yard refuse, liquid wastes, or any other refuse
materials, in open trucks, open trailers or other open conveyances, unless
covered completely with a heavy duty canvas or other heavy acceptable material
at all times when the vehicle is being used for the collection of, or carrying,
transporting or hauling of garbage, manure, market waste, night soil, dead
animals or other refuse, and is to be driven for a distance of five (5) blocks
or more without making a stop. (1999 Code)
9.52.090: GARBAGE HAULING; SPILLING ON STREETS OR PREMISES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Collection: It is unlawful for any person, firm, private or public
corporation engaged in the collection and transportation of garbage, trade
waste, rubbish or other matter of any kind, to permit, allow or cause any of
such matter to fall and remain on any property, place, building, premises,
street, road or highway.
   B.   Disposal: It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the collection of garbage, market waste, trade waste, rubbish or
matter of any kind to see and ensure that all such matter is procured and
disposed of by himself, his agents or employees in a manner which shall not be
offensive or filthy in relation to any person, place, building, premises,
street, road or highway. (1999 Code)
9.52.100: GARBAGE HAULING; DAMAGING CONTAINERS OR LITTERING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:
   A.   Wilfully or negligently break, deface or injure any receptacle used to
contain garbage or other refuse, or to do or permit to be done in connection
with such receptacles anything which shall be damaging to the property of
another; or
   B.   Litter or cause to be littered any property, place, building, premises,
street, road or highway with the contents of such receptacles in a manner which
shall be offensive or filthy in relation to any person, place, building,
premises, street, road or highway. (1999 Code)
9.52.110: GARBAGE HAULING; DUMPING AREA LIMITATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to dispose of materials mentioned in this chapter
at any place except in a sanitary landfill which has previously been approved
by the board of health and which operates daily by covering over all the
materials received each day. (1999 Code)
9.52.120: WASTE DISPOSAL; PERMISSION FOR FEED, FILL, BURNING OR OTHER ACTS:
   A.   Disposal: It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause or permit
to be deposited any garbage, market waste, stove ashes, trade waste, or any
other refuse, in or upon any street or alley, or upon any premises in the city,
without express permission from the board of health.
   B.   Feed, Fill, Burning Or Other Acts: The board of health, with the
approval and consent of the city, may give permission for the feeding of
garbage upon premises properly equipped and maintained so as to prevent the
emanation of noxious or offensive odors or stenches or the creation of a
nuisance, or for the depositing of ashes and other dry material for filling
purposes, or for the burning of paper and other dry waste at such places as the
board of health may designate and under such restrictions as the commission may
impose, or for the sorting, baling and marketing of trade waste upon premises
properly equipped and maintained so as not to cause the emanation of noxious or
offensive odors or stenches. (1999 Code)
9.52.130: WASTE DISPOSAL; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to make collections of or to haul or transport
garbage, market waste or trade waste in or from any part of the city, except as
provided by the rules and regulations of the board of health and/or Salt Lake
County special service district no. 1. (1999 Code)
9.52.140: RESERVED:
9.52.150: WASTE DISPOSAL; RECEPTACLES TO BE PROVIDED:
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee or occupant of any building,
premises or place of business to provide, at such places as the board of health
may direct, suitable and sufficient receptacles, as approved by the board of
health and by Salt Lake County special service district no. 1, for receiving
and holding garbage, trade waste and other refuse that may accumulate from such
building, place of business or upon such premises, or the portion thereof under
the control of such person. (1999 Code)
9.52.160: RECEPTACLE LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person, group of persons or commercial establishment to
place receptacles for the storage of garbage, market waste, trade waste or
other refuse within twenty feet (20') of any occupied dwelling, or to place
such containers in such a locality or position that they shall be filthy,
unsightly or offensive to any person inhabiting premises contiguous to such
storage facility. Such conditions shall be deemed to constitute a public
nuisance. (1999 Code)
9.52.170: WASTE DISPOSAL; NOTICE AND COMPLIANCE:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to remove all garbage, manure, night
soil, ashes, dead animals and other refuse and offal to a place designated by
the board of health within a reasonable time after notice is given by the board
of health to do so. (1999 Code)
9.52.180: WASTE DISPOSAL; DUMPING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to dump or dispose of any refuse or garbage of any description
anywhere in the city except in a lawfully established garbage or refuse dump,
as defined in section
9.52.110 of this chapter. Such material not so properly disposed of shall be
placed in containers for collection by Salt Lake County special service
district no. 1. (1999 Code)
9.52.190: ACCUMULATION OF WASTES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Removal Required: All garbage, ashes, market waste, trade waste,
manure, night soil and other refuse not collected and hauled away by the Salt
Lake County special service district no. 1 in its regular garbage and refuse
collections must be regularly hauled away and disposed of by the licensed
collectors at the expense of the owners or occupants of the premises wherein
such waste materials are produced.
   B.   Failure To Comply After Notice: It is unlawful for any person to allow
garbage, ashes, market waste, trade waste, manure, night soil or other refuse
to accumulate upon premises under his control, or to fail to remove same within
twenty four (24) hours after notification from the marshal or the board of
health to do so.
   C.   Accumulation Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to cause or
permit junk, scrap metal, scrap lumber, waste paper products, discarded
building materials, or any unused, abandoned vehicle, vehicles or abandoned
parts, machinery or machinery parts, or any appliances or appliance parts, or
other waste materials, to be in or upon any yard, garden, lawn, outbuilding or
premises in the city, unless in connection with a business enterprise lawfully
situated and licensed for the same.
   D.   Containers; Door Removed: It is unlawful for any person to store or
leave outside, any unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container without first removing therefrom any door attached thereto. (1999
Code)
9.52.200: RESERVED:
9.52.210: RESERVED:
9.52.220: RESERVED:
9.52.230: "NO DUMPING" SIGNS FURNISHED BY CITY:
The city will furnish to any person who shall apply for the same a "no dumping"
sign at cost, to be placed on any lot where offensive or other refuse is likely
to be deposited. (1999 Code)
9.52.240: RESERVED:
9.52.250: PLACING ANIMALS IN STREAMS AND RESERVOIRS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any dead animal or fowl, or
any live animal or fowl for the purposes of drowning, in any reservoir, canal,
creek or other stream or body of water within the city. (1999 Code)
9.52.260: WIND BLOWN REFUSE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate in the city, except in a
covered container, any dust, ashes or trash of such material that it can be
blown by the wind. (1999 Code)
9.52.270: LOOSE TRADE WASTE:
It is unlawful for any person or place to cause to be placed upon any street or
alley, for the purpose of collection or otherwise, any loose paper, excelsior
or similar trade waste. All such trade waste must be baled or placed in
adequate receptacles for receiving and holding such refuse. (1999 Code)
9.52.280: UNCOVERED GARBAGE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or
other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass, except in a
tightly covered container, as specified by the rules and regulations of the
Salt Lake County special service district no. 1. (1999 Code)
9.52.290: LOADED VEHICLES ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, permit or allow any vehicle loaded
with garbage, manure, slop, swill, market waste or other refuse to be or remain
standing upon any public street within the city any longer than may be
necessary for the purpose of loading and transporting the same. (1999 Code)
9.52.300: SPILLING REFUSE FROM VEHICLES:
It is unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle, any garbage,
refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the city; provided, that this
section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or ashes for
collection in a manner complying with the prescribed rules and regulations of
the Salt Lake County special service district no. 1. (1999 Code)
9.52.310: BURNING OF WASTE:
It is unlawful to burn any garbage, trash or other wastes, except as approved
by the board of health. (1999 Code)
9.52.320: COLLECTION SERVICES REFUSED WHEN; EVIDENCE:
   A.   Failure To Pay: When an occupant of any premises fails to pay the fee
for removal of garbage, refuse or ashes, the Salt Lake County special service
district no. 1 shall notify the occupant of this fact and shall refuse further
collection until the required fee is paid.
   B.   Responsibility For Violation: The fact that garbage, night soil, dead
animals, refuse or ashes remain on any occupant's premises in the city in
violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of
such premises is responsible for the violation of the chapter occurring. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 9.56
LITTER CONTROL
SECTION:
9.56.010: Definitions
9.56.020: Keeping Property Clean
9.56.030: Solid Waste Storage And Disposal Facilities; New Buildings
9.56.040: Household Solid Waste
9.56.050: Commercial, Business And Multiple Residential Solid Waste
9.56.060: Loading And Unloading Operations
9.56.070: Public Waste Containers; Provision Required
9.56.080: Public Waste Containers; Use Required
9.56.090: Commercial Handbills And Advertising; Restrictions
9.56.100: Vehicles Transporting Loose Materials
9.56.110: Construction And Demolition Project Requirements
9.56.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CONTAINERS: Board of health and collection agency approved metal, heavy duty
paper or plastic receptacles used for the disposal and storage of solid waste.
LITTER: Any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or
miscellaneous solid waste which may be classed as trash, debris, rubbish,
refuse, garbage or junk.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Means and includes, but is not limited to, the following
exterior locations owned by private individuals, firms, corporations,
institutions or organizations: yards, grounds, driveways, entranceways,
passageways, parking areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots and
recreational facilities.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Means and includes, but is not limited to, the following
exterior locations: streets, street medians, roads, road medians, catch basins,
sidewalks, strips between streets and sidewalks, lanes, alleys, public rights
of way, public parking lots, school grounds, publicly owned vacant lots, parks,
playgrounds and other recreational facilities, and publicly owned waterways and
bodies of water. (1999 Code)
9.56.020: KEEPING PROPERTY CLEAN:
   A.   Required: It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant or lessee
to keep exterior private property free of litter. This requirement applies not
only to removal of loose litter, but to materials that already are, or become,
trapped at such locations as fence and wall bases, grassy and planted areas,
borders, embankments and other lodging points.
   B.   Property Facing Municipal Sidewalks: Owners, agents, occupants or
lessees whose properties face on municipal sidewalks and strips between streets
and sidewalks shall be responsible for keeping those sidewalks and strips free
of litter.
   C.   Litter Not Placed In Streets: It is unlawful to sweep or push litter
from sidewalks and steps into streets. Sidewalk and step sweepings must be
picked up and put into household or commercial solid waste containers.
   D.   Removal By City: Litter not removed from private property under the
provisions of this chapter may be removed by the city pursuant to the
provisions of
chapter 9.60 of this title, with costs and expenses for such cleaning or
removal assessed in accordance with such provisions. (1999 Code)
9.56.030: SOLID WASTE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES; NEW BUILDINGS:
   A.   Approval Required: Before building permits shall be issued for
construction of commercial buildings and multiple dwelling units, plans for the
adequacy, location and accessibility of solid waste containerization and
storage facilities must be approved by the department of public works.
   B.   Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy; Condition: No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for such premises until the department's approval of
these facilities has been obtained. (1999 Code)
9.56.040: HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE:
All residents located in the city shall comply with the rules and regulations
of the Salt Lake County special service district no. 1 in all matters
pertaining to containerization and removal of solid wastes. (1999 Code)
9.56.050: COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS AND MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Requirements: Solid waste generated or stored for collection at
commercial establishments and institutions, businesses, apartment houses,
multiple dwelling units and public buildings shall be:
      1.   Kept containerized and covered or enclosed at all times; and
      2.   Removed at the direction of the owners of such establishments or
institutions at least once each week and on such additional occasions as are
necessary to prevent nuisance or adverse health conditions.
   B.   Deposit Prohibited: It is unlawful for any owner, manager or employee
of a commercial establishment or institution, business, apartment house,
multiple dwelling unit or public building to deposit solid waste from that
establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at
any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. (1999 Code)
9.56.060: LOADING AND UNLOADING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Containers Required: Any owner or occupant of an establishment or
institution at which litter is attendant to the packing and unpacking and
loading and unloading of materials at exterior locations shall provide suitable
containers for the disposal and storage of such litter, and shall make
appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof.
   B.   Removal Of Loose Litter: Further, it shall be the duty of the owner or
occupant to remove at the end of each working day any litter that has not been
containerized at these locations. (1999 Code)
9.56.070: PUBLIC WASTE CONTAINERS; PROVISION REQUIRED:
To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and motorists, publicly
patronized or used establishments and institutions shall provide adequate
containers that are regularly emptied and maintained in good condition, and
that meet standards prescribed in this chapter. The requirement shall be
applicable, but not limited to, fast food outlets, shopping centers,
convenience stores, supermarkets, service stations, commercial parking lots,
mobile canteens, motels, hospitals, schools and colleges. (1999 Code)
9.56.080: PUBLIC WASTE CONTAINERS; USE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any
manner or amount on any public or private property within the city except in
containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. (1999 Code)
9.56.090: COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISING; RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to post or cause to be posted
or otherwise affixed, any handbills, leaflets, flyers, advertising devises,
notices, unsolicited newspapers, papers, information material, or circulars on
vehicles, utility poles, signs, fences, doors, trees, or any public property.
If any of the above items are found upon public property contrary to the
provisions of this section, the item may be removed by any city employee. This
section shall not apply to official government documents, election materials,
or materials specifically allowed in other city code sections. (1999 Code)
9.56.100: VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LOOSE MATERIALS:
   A.   Cargo Covered And Secured: It is unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, institution or organization to transport any loose cargo by truck
or other motor vehicle within the city unless the cargo is covered and secured
in compliance with
chapter 9.52 of this title, so as to prevent depositing of litter on public and
private property.
   B.   Applicability: The duty and responsibility imposed by subsection A of
this section shall be applicable alike to the owner of the truck or other
vehicle and the operator thereof. (1999 Code)
9.56.110: CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION PROJECT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Accumulation Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner, agent or
contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site to cause, maintain,
permit or allow to be caused, maintained or permitted the accumulation of any
litter on the site before, during or after completion of the construction or
demolition project.
   B.   Containers; Removal: It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or
contractor to have on the site adequate containers for the disposal of litter
and to make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof or for
transport by himself to an authorized facility for final disposition.
   C.   Proof May Be Required: The owner, agent or contractor may be required
by a city building inspector, its contract provider, if any, or board of health
inspector to show proof of appropriate collection or, if transported by
himself, of final disposition at an authorized facility. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.60
WEEDS AND REFUSE
SECTION:
9.60.010: Responsibility To Keep Property Clean
9.60.020: Weed Control Standards
9.60.030: Examination Of Property For Compliance
9.60.040: Violation; Notice To Owner
9.60.050: Property Cleaned By City When; Costs
9.60.060: Costs; Methods Of Compelling Payment
9.60.070: Costs; Collection By Lawsuit
9.60.080: Reserved
9.60.090: Costs; Appeal
9.60.010: RESPONSIBILITY TO KEEP PROPERTY CLEAN:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or legal entity owning
or occupying real property in the city to let the height of weeds on such
property to grow beyond the maximum permitted, or to fail to remove from the
property any such weeds or refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures, after having been given written notice by the city or the board of
health. (1999 Code)
9.60.020: WEED CONTROL STANDARDS:
Weeds shall not be permitted to reach a height of more than six inches (6") at
any time, and shall be cleared from all real property in the city. (1999 Code)
9.60.030: EXAMINATION OF PROPERTY FOR COMPLIANCE:
The city and the board of health shall be authorized to make examination and
investigation of all real property in the city to determine whether the owners
of such property are complying with the provisions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
9.60.040: VIOLATION; NOTICE TO OWNER:
Upon a determination that a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists,
the city or the board of health shall ascertain the name of the owner and a
description of the premises where the violation exists. The city or the board
of health shall serve notice in writing upon the owner or occupant of such
property, either personally or by mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to
the owner or occupant at the last known post office address as disclosed by the
records of the county assessor, requiring such owner or occupant, as the case
may be, to eradicate, destroy or remove the weeds, refuse, objects or
structures causing the violation within such time as the city or the board of
health may designate, which shall be no less than ten (10) days from the date
of service of such notice. (1999 Code)
9.60.050: PROPERTY CLEANED BY CITY WHEN; COSTS:
   A.   Removal Authorized: If any owner or occupant of property described in
the notice provided in this chapter fails to eradicate or destroy and remove
such weeds, refuse, objects or structures in accordance with such notice, the
city or the board of health is authorized to employ necessary assistance and
cause such weeds, refuse, objects or structures to be destroyed or removed at
the expense of the city or the board of health, respectively.
   B.   Itemized Statement; Demand For Payment: The city or the board of health
shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and
destruction of same and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner demanding
payment within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing. Such notice shall be
deemed delivered when mailed by registered mail and addressed to the last known
address of the property owner. (1999 Code)
9.60.060: COSTS; METHODS OF COMPELLING PAYMENT:
In the event the owner fails to make payment of the amount set forth in such
statement to the city treasurer within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing,
the city or the board of health may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate
court of law. (1999 Code)
9.60.070: COSTS; COLLECTION BY LAWSUIT:
In the event collection of expenses of destruction and removal are pursued
through the court, the city shall sue for and receive judgment for all expenses
of destruction and removal, together with reasonable attorney fees, interest
and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by
law. (1999 Code)
9.60.080: RESERVED:
9.60.090: COSTS; APPEAL:
   A.   Statement Of Costs: Upon receipt of the itemized statement of the costs
of destroying or removing the weeds, refuse, objects or structures, the city
treasurer shall forthwith mail one copy to the owner of the land from which the
same was removed, together with a notice that objection in writing to the city
may be made within thirty (30) days as to the whole or any part of the
statement so filed. The city treasurer shall, at the same time, deliver a copy
of the statement to the city recorder.
   B.   Due And Payable; Objection; Hearing: If no objection to a statement is
timely filed with the city, the sums due under the statement shall be due and
payable. If a written objection is timely filed with the city, the mayor shall
set a date for hearing, giving notice thereof, and upon the hearing of the
matter, fix and determine the actual cost of destruction or removal, reporting
his findings to the city treasurer, and such amount shall be immediately due
and payable. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.64
RAT CONTROL
SECTION:
9.64.010: Definitions
9.64.020: Ratproofing; Standards And Specifications
9.64.030: Ratproofing; Owner Responsibility
9.64.040: Closing Of Openings Required
9.64.050: Building Plan Review
9.64.060: Construction Or Repair Of Buildings
9.64.070: Food Storage Buildings; Compliance Required
9.64.080: Food Containers For Animals; Ratproofing
9.64.090: Wire And Guy Wire Ratproofing
9.64.100: Building Maintenance
9.64.110: Inspection For Compliance
9.64.120: Notice To Comply; Issuance; Effect
9.64.130: Work Performed By City When; Costs
9.64.140: Buildings; Closure For Abatement Authorized When
9.64.150: Buildings; Destruction Authorized When
9.64.160: Stacking Of Loose Materials Prohibited
9.64.170: Trash Accumulations Prohibited
9.64.180: Garbage; Covered Containers Required
9.64.190: Garbage; Dumping Prohibited
9.64.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following phrases, terms and words shall
have the meanings given in this section:
BUSINESS BUILDING: Any structure, whether public or private, regardless of the
type of material used in its construction, located within the boundaries of the
city, that is adapted to occupancy for the transaction of business, whether
vacant or occupied, for the rendering of professional services, or for the
display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance
of work or labor, including hotels, rooming houses, boarding houses, apartment
houses, taverns, breweries, office buildings, public buildings, stores,
markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops,
factories, junkyards, scrap iron businesses or places, lumberyards, coal yards,
automobile tire yards, sheds or buildings used for the storage of tires, and
any or all similar places.
HEALTH OFFICER: The director of health of the board of health, or any duly
authorized representative.
OCCUPANT: The individual, partnership or corporation that uses or occupies any
building, or part or fraction thereof, whether as the actual owner or tenant.
In case of vacant buildings or vacant portions thereof, the owner, agent or
custodian shall have the responsibility of an occupant.
OWNER: The actual owner, agent or custodian of a building, whether individual,
partnership or corporation. The lessee shall be construed as the "owner" for
the purpose of this chapter when business or residential building agreements
hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
RAT ERADICATION: The elimination or extermination of rats within buildings or
premises by any or all of the accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigation,
trapping, clubbing, etc.
RAT HARBORAGE: Any condition that provides shelter or protection for rats, thus
favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside of
any structure.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Any structure built for occupancy for living quarters.
VENT STOPPAGE OR RATPROOFING: A form of ratproofing to prevent the ingress of
rats into buildings from the exterior or from one building to another. (1999
Code)
9.64.020: RATPROOFING; STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Closing Of Openings: Ratproofing consists of the closing and keeping
closed of all openings in the exterior walls, grounds or first floors,
basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, foundations, elevator
shafts, fire escapes, and other places that may be reached and entered by rats
by climbing, burrowing or otherwise.
   B.   Material: The material to be used for ratproofing shall include cement,
concrete, brick masonry laid in cement, concrete mortar, sheet metal, and
hardware cloth of not less than nineteen (19) gauge having a mesh not larger
than one-half inch (1/2"). All material for ratproofing shall be of such
strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat gnawing.
   C.   Windows And Doors: Windows and other openings for light or ventilation,
the seals of which are less than thirty inches (30") from the ground or
accessible to rats by means of climbing wires or pipes, shall, if open, be
covered by hardware cloth conforming to the above gauge and dimensions. All
exterior doors shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by the use of
materials prescribed above. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a
maximum clearance between doors, doorsills and jambs of not exceeding three-
eighths inch (3/8"). In all side and rear doors that are left open at night and
those that are left open during the day, but infrequently used, shall be
installed hardware cloth doors conforming to the above dimensions and equipped
with a self-closing device. All concrete floors and curtain walls shall be at
least four inches (4") in thickness. (1999 Code)
9.64.030: RATPROOFING; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
All buildings in the city shall be ratproofed by the owner and freed of rats
and maintained in a ratproof and rat free condition by the occupant or tenant
to the satisfaction of the director of health. (1999 Code)
9.64.040: CLOSING OF OPENINGS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful under the provisions of this chapter for the occupant, owners,
contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other person to remove and
fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing from any building for any
purpose. Further, it is unlawful for any person or agent to make any new
openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. (1999
Code)
9.64.050: BUILDING PLAN REVIEW:
When, in the opinion of the building inspection division, plans for building,
remodeling or renovating indicate that such changes or construction will affect
the ratproof condition of a building or structure, the building inspection
division shall forward such plans or specifications to the board of health for
their recommendations with regard to ratproofing or vent stopping. This shall
apply both to new buildings or the renovating of existing structures. (1999
Code)
9.64.060: CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF BUILDINGS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation hereafter to construct,
repair or remodel any building, dwelling, stable or market, or other structure
whatsoever, unless such construction, repair, remodeling or installation shall
render the building or other structure ratproof in accordance with the
regulations prescribed in this chapter and hereunder; provided, that only such
repairs, remodeling or installation as affect the ratproof condition of any
building or other structure shall be considered as subject to the provisions of
this chapter. (1999 Code)
9.64.070: FOOD STORAGE BUILDINGS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation hereafter to occupy any
building or structure wherein foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold,
held or offered for sale without complying with the ratproof regulations
prescribed in this chapter for existing buildings and structures. No license
from the city to conduct or carry on a business will be issued to any person,
firm or corporation until the requirements of this chapter have been complied
with. (1999 Code)
9.64.080: FOOD CONTAINERS FOR ANIMALS; RATPROOFING:
All food and feed within the city for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses and
other animals shall be stored in rat free and ratproof containers, compartments
or rooms, unless stored in a ratproof building. (1999 Code)
9.64.090: WIRE AND GUY WIRE RATPROOFING:
Utility companies shall place all wires and/or guy wires attached to buildings
at least eighteen inches (18") away from openings, and/or attach rat guards, as
defined by rules and regulations of the board of health. (1999 Code)
9.64.100: BUILDING MAINTENANCE:
When a building or other structure shall have been ratproofed in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, the owner shall, without a
specific order of the health officer and regardless of the need for remodeling,
repair or installation, maintain such building or structure in a ratproof
condition. (1999 Code)
9.64.110: INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE:
The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the interior
and exterior of any building located within the city to determine full
compliance with this chapter and the health officer shall make periodic
inspections of all ratproofed buildings to determine evidence of rat
infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in their ratproofing and,
when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats, or openings through
which rats may again enter buildings, the health officer shall serve the owners
or occupants with notice and/or orders to abate the conditions found. (1999
Code)
9.64.120: NOTICE TO COMPLY; ISSUANCE; EFFECT:
Upon the discovery of evidence of a violation of this chapter or of rat
infestation of any building, written notice shall be given to the owner or
occupant of the building to take immediate measures to correct the violation
and remove the infestation. The notice shall specify that the work must be
completed within the time specified in the notice which shall in no event be
less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice. It is unlawful for any
person to fail to comply with the terms of the notice. (1999 Code)
9.64.130: WORK PERFORMED BY CITY WHEN; COSTS:
Whenever the health officer notifies the occupants of a business building that
there is evidence of rat infestation of the building, the occupants shall
immediately institute appropriate measures for freeing the premises each
occupies of all rats, and, unless suitable measures for freeing the building of
rats are instituted within fifteen (15) days after receipt of notice, and
unless continuously maintained in a satisfactory manner until the building is
free of rats, the city or the board of health is hereby authorized and directed
to free the building of rats at the expense of the owner thereof. The city or
the board of health shall submit bills for the costs thereof to the owner or
occupant of the building, and if the same are not paid, the city or the board
of health shall certify the amount due from the owner or occupant to the city
attorney and the city attorney shall bring suit to collect the same. (1999
Code)
9.64.140: BUILDINGS; CLOSURE FOR ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED WHEN:
Whenever conditions inside or under occupied business buildings provide
extensive harborage for rats in the opinion of the health officer, the health
officer or the city is empowered, after due notification in accordance with
section
9.64.120 of this chapter, to close the business buildings until such time as
the conditions are abated by ratproofing and harborage removal, including, if
necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or
replacement of wooden ground floors with concrete or other major repairs
necessary to facilitate rat eradication. (1999 Code)
9.64.150: BUILDINGS; DESTRUCTION AUTHORIZED WHEN:
Whenever conditions inside or under unoccupied business buildings provide
extensive harborage for rats, in the opinion of the health officer or the city,
the health officer or the city is empowered to require compliance with the
provisions of section
9.64.120 of this chapter and, in the event that such conditions are not
corrected in a period of sixty (60) days, or within the time to which a written
extension may be granted by the health officer, the health officer is empowered
to institute condemnation and destruction proceedings. (1999 Code)
9.64.160: STACKING OF LOOSE MATERIALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels,
bottles, cans, containers, junk or other materials that may be permitted to
remain thereon unless the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated
not less than eighteen inches (18") above the ground and evenly piled or
stacked. (1999 Code)
9.64.170: TRASH ACCUMULATIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate any
garbage, rubbish, trash or junk in any building or on any premises, improved or
vacant, or any open lot or alley or elevated loading platforms in the city, so
that the same shall or may afford food or harborage for rats. (1999 Code)
9.64.180: GARBAGE; COVERED CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
Within the city, all garbage or refuse consisting of waste animal or vegetable
matter upon which rats may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed
and stored until collected in covered containers of a type prescribed by the
health officer. (1999 Code)
9.64.190: GARBAGE; DUMPING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or place on any
premises, land or waterway, any dead animals, or waste vegetable or animal
matter of any kind. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.72
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
SECTION:
9.72.010: Open Burning; Restrictions And Permit Requirements
9.72.020: Dust And Particulate Matter
9.72.010: OPEN BURNING; RESTRICTIONS AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Community Waste Disposal: No open burning shall be done at sites used
for disposal of community trash, garbage or other wastes, except when
authorized for specific periods of time by the board of health and the city on
the basis of justifiable circumstances reviewed and weighed in terms of
pollution effects and other relevant considerations following written
application.
   B.   General Prohibitions: No person shall burn any trash, garbage or other
wastes, nor shall they conduct any salvage operations in any open fire except
in conformity with the provisions of subsection C of this section.
   C.   Permissible Burning: When not prohibited by other laws or by other
officials having jurisdiction, and provided that a public nuisance is not
created, the following types of open burning are permissible without the
necessity of securing a permit:
      1.   In devices for the primary purpose of preparing food, such as
outdoor grills and fireplaces. In all cases, manufacturer recommendations must
be followed.
      2.   Campfires and fires used solely for recreational purposes where such
fires are under the control of a responsible person. Anyone planning a fire
that can be safely confined to a fire ring no larger than five feet (5') in
diameter will not be required to obtain a special permit. Flames shall not
exceed two feet (2') in height. Bonfires, fires built to burn Christmas trees,
rally fires and similar fires are prohibited.
      3.   Recreational fire must be constantly attended. Extinguishing methods
must be in place and available to extinguish such a fire. A "recreational fire"
is defined as an outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the
fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
portable outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel
area of three feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height
for pleasure, religious, ceremonial cooking, warmth or similar purposes.
      4.   Indoor fireplaces.
      5.   Properly operated industrial flares for combustion of flammable
gases.
      6.   All such burning must be located at least fifteen feet (15') from
the nearest property line unless contained in a fireplace.
      7.   In an area which is highly combustible, such as, but not limited to,
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Open burning of trees and bushes within public road rights of
way, provided that dirt is removed from stumps before burning, and that tires,
heavy fuel oil or other materials that cause severe air pollution are not used
to start the fires or keep fires burning;
         b.   Open burning of solid or liquid fuels or structures for the
removal of hazards or eyesores or for firefighter training purposes, when
conducted under the direct control and supervision of organized fire
departments;
         c.   Open burning in remote areas of highly explosive or other
dangerous materials for which there is no other known practical method of
disposal;
         d.   Open burning for special purposes, or under unusual
circumstances, when approved by the board of health following formal request.
   D.   Public Safety Officials May Extinguish Fires: Fire and/or police public
safety officials may extinguish a fire or require the responsible party to
extinguish a fire if, in their judgment, such fire is creating a public
nuisance. (Ord. 2013-08, 4-18-2013)
9.72.020: DUST AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
   A.   Emissions: No person shall cause, allow or permit the emission of
fugitive particulate matter from any process, including any material handling
or storage activity, that is visible beyond the property line of the emission
source.
   B.   Buildings: No person shall cause, allow or permit a building or its
appurtenances or open areas to be used, constructed, repaired, altered or
demolished without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter
from becoming airborne. Dust and other types of particulates shall be kept to a
minimum by such measures as wetting down, covering, landscaping, paving,
treating, or by other reasonable means.
   C.   Roadway Construction: No person shall cause, allow or permit the
repair, construction or reconstruction of a roadway or an alley without taking
reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.
Dust and other particulates shall be kept to a minimum by employing temporary
paving, dust palliatives, wetting down, detouring, or by other reasonable
means. Earth or other material that has been transported onto paved streets by
trucking or earthmoving equipment, erosion by water, or by other means, shall
be promptly removed.
   D.   Commercial Establishments: The owner or operator of a commercial
establishment or industrial plant shall maintain control of the establishment
premises or plant premises, and establishment or plant owned, leased or
controlled access roads, by paving, oil treatment, or other suitable measures.
   E.   Crushing And Similar Operations: No person shall cause, allow or permit
crushing, screening, drying, handling, conveying of materials, stockpiling or
other operations likely to give rise to airborne dust without taking reasonable
precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. Dust and
other types of particulates shall be kept to a minimum by such means as spray
barriers, or other suitable means.
   F.   Sandblasting And Similar Operations: No person shall cause, allow or
permit sandblasting or related abrasion operations unless sufficient
containment measures are taken to prevent the sand and/or abrasive materials
from traveling beyond the property line where the operation is being conducted.
   G.   Topsoil: No owner, operator or lessee of any real property located or
situated within the city shall, after the topsoil has been disturbed or the
natural cover removed, allow the same to remain unoccupied, unused, vacant or
undeveloped, without taking all reasonable precautions to prevent fugitive dust
from becoming airborne. Dust and other particulates shall be controlled by
compacting, chemical sealers, resin sealers, asphalt sealers, planting or
vegetation, or other reasonable means. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.76
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
9.76.010: Adoption Of Fire Code
9.76.020: Amendments
9.76.030: Storage Of Hazardous Materials
9.76.040: Fees
9.76.050: Contract For Administration, Enforcement And Interpretation
9.76.010: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
   A.   In order to prescribe regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire and explosion, the city hereby adopts by this
reference the 2009 edition of the international fire code and the international
fire code standards, and any subsequent editions ("IFC"), including appendices
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J, but not appendix A thereof, with such amendments
as are set forth below.
   B.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 10-3-711, a copy of the IFC has been
filed in the office of the city recorder for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 2010-12, 6-17-2010)
9.76.020: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The city hereby adopts by reference and incorporates herein the
amendments to the IFC adopted by the Utah state legislature pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 58-56-4 enacted in HB 308 (2010 general session).
   B.   Section 903.4.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible devices shall be connected to every automatic
sprinkler system serving more than 20 fire sprinkler heads. Such sprinkler
water flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the
flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the
system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building and
interior spaces per NFPA 72 in an approved location. With the exception of R-
3 occupancies where a fire alarm system is installed, activation of the
automatic sprinkler system shall activate the building fire alarm system.
   C.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 15A-1-103.7(a), the city
requires an automatic fire sprinkler system for a structure built in accordance
with the international residential code as adopted in the Utah construction
code when any one of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The structure:
         a.   Is located in an urban-wildland interface area as provided in the
Utah wildland urban interface code adopted as a construction code under the
state construction code; and
         b.   Does not meet the requirements described in Utah code, subsection
65A-8-203(4)(a) and Utah administrative code, R652-122-200, minimum standards
for wildland fire ordinance;
      2.   The structure is in an area where a public water distribution system
with fire hydrants does not exist as required in Utah administrative code,
R309-550-5, water main design;
      3.   The only fire apparatus access road has a grade greater than ten
percent (10%) for more than five hundred (500) continual feet;
      4.   The total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls
of the dwelling unit exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet; or
      5.   The total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls
of the dwelling unit is double the average of the total floor area of all floor
levels of unsprinklered homes in the subdivision that are no larger than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-17-2010; amd. Ord. 2021-30, 12-
2-2021)
9.76.030: STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The storage of class I and class II hazardous materials in aboveground or
belowground tanks, inside and outside of buildings is prohibited unless allowed
by the land use provisions applicable to the location in which the proposed
tanks are to be located. In addition, the storage of class I and class II
hazardous materials pursuant to this section is subject to the provisions of
NFPA 30, 58 and 59A. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-17-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
9.76.040: FEES:
In accordance with IFC section 113, the city adopts the fees for hazardous
materials permitting and inspection, fire inspection, fire watch, reinspection-
delay in preparation at work site, and blasting permitting as set forth below.
All fees as adopted in Appendix C shall be collected by and paid to the unified
fire authority (or other fire and emergency services provider for the city) at
the time, the permit, inspection, reinspection, or fire watch staffing is
requested and shall be a condition for issuance of the permit and scheduling of
the inspection, reinspection or fire watch staffing. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-17-2010;
amd. Ord. 2021-30, 12-2-2021)
9.76.050: CONTRACT FOR ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND INTERPRETATION:
The city contracts with the unified fire authority for fire code enforcement,
administration, code interpretation and fire protection services. In the event
of any conflict between the provisions of the applicable fire code and the
provisions of any other applicable ordinance, statute, rule or regulation, the
more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-17-2010; amd. Ord.
2021-30, 12-2-2021)
CHAPTER 9.80
FIRE FEES
SECTION:
9.80.010: Fees; Inspection
9.80.020: Fees; Permits
9.80.010: FEES; INSPECTION:
All nursing, convalescent and group homes, nurseries, daycare centers,
hospitals, retirement centers, preschools and all other occupancies which
require annual fire clearance certificates for city, county, state and federal
purposes shall be inspected annually by the fire prevention bureau of the Salt
Lake County fire department. The annual fee for said inspection shall be as
required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
9.80.020: FEES; PERMITS:
The fee schedule for permits shall be as required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
CHAPTER 9.92
PYROTECHNICS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
9.92.010: Definitions
9.92.020: Sale Or Use Of Pyrotechnics Prohibited; Exceptions
9.92.030: Times For Sale And Discharge Of Fireworks
9.92.040: Public Display; Permit Required; Fee
9.92.050: Public Display; Permit Application
9.92.060: Public Display; Location And Procedures
9.92.065: Permit Fees
9.92.010: DEFINITIONS:
All words used in this chapter shall mean the same as they are defined in Utah
Code Annotated sections 53-7-202 et seq., and 53-7-222 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
9.92.020: SALE OR USE OF PYROTECHNICS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   All sales shall comply with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
section 53-7-222, as amended.
   B.   Except as provided under Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-222(1)(b), as
amended, class C dangerous explosives, as defined in section
9.92.010 of this chapter, may not be possessed, discharged, sold or offered for
retail sale.
   C.   Unclassified fireworks may not be sold, or offered for sale.
   D.   Holladay City incorporates all of the same rules and standards of
retail related to the National Fire Protection Association as laid out in Utah
Code Annotated section 53-7-222(3) et seq., as amended.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to the possession or use
of signaling devices for consumption by railroads and others requiring them.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to the possession, sale
or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealer
in photographic supplies. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
9.92.030: TIMES FOR SALE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS:
   A.   Class C common state approved explosives may be sold beginning on June
26 and ending on July 26 and beginning on December 26 and ending on January 1;
three (3) days before and on Chinese New Year as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 53-7-222 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Class C common state approved explosives may be discharged beginning on
June 26 and ending on July 26 and beginning December 31 and on January 1 and on
the Chinese New Year as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-222 et
seq., as amended. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
9.92.040: PUBLIC DISPLAY; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   Permit, Bond Or Insurance Required: The city may, upon written
application and the posting of a suitable bond or the filing of a public
liability insurance policy in amounts to be determined by the city, grant a
permit for the public display of pyrotechnics by religious, educational,
fraternal or civic organizations, fair associations, amusement parks, or other
organizations or groups of individuals. After such permit shall have been
granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of pyrotechnics for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
   B.   Fee: The permit fee for public display of pyrotechnics shall be as
required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
9.92.050: PUBLIC DISPLAY; PERMIT APPLICATION:
All applications for permission to operate a public display of pyrotechnics
shall be in writing and shall set forth:
   A.   The name of the organization or person sponsoring the display, together
with the name, age and qualifications of such persons actually in charge of
firing the display;
   B.   The date and time of day at which the display is to be held;
   C.   The exact location planned for the display; and
   D.   The manner and place of storage of fireworks prior to the display.
(Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
9.92.060: PUBLIC DISPLAY; LOCATION AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Distance From Buildings Or Obstructions: The actual point at which the
fireworks are to be fired shall be at least two hundred feet (200') from the
nearest permanent building, public highway or railroad, and fifty feet (50')
from the nearest telegraph, telephone or electric power pole or line, tree, or
other overhead obstruction.
   B.   Spectators: Spectators shall be restrained behind lines at least two
hundred feet (200') from the point at which the pyrotechnics are discharged.
   C.   Projectile In Vertical Direction: All pyrotechnics that fire a
projectile shall be so set up that the projectile will go into the air as
nearly as possible in a vertical direction. In no event shall such pyrotechnics
be set off so as to cause the projectile to go in the direction of or over the
spectators. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
9.92.065: PERMIT FEES:
Fees for permits required pursuant to articles 77, 78 and 80 of the uniform
fire code shall be as required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code.
Each of the permits referenced above shall be issued for a twelve (12) month
period effective from the date of issuance. (Ord. 2011-12, 6-16-2011)
CHAPTER 9.94
COST RECOVERY; FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
9.94.010: Purpose
9.94.020: Definitions
9.94.030: Recovery Authorization And Procedure
9.94.040: No Admission Of Liability
9.94.050: Action To Recover Expenses
9.94.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by the city
or the fire department for assistance rendered by the city or the fire
department in responding to hazardous materials emergencies, aggravated fire
emergencies and aggravated emergency medical responses. (1999 Code)
9.94.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY: A. A fire proximately caused by the owner or
occupier of property or a structure, which presents a direct and immediate
threat to public safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat,
and the fire:
      1.   Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an order
from any city agency, department or official; or
      2.   Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of the
ordinances or regulations of the city; or
      3.   Is caused by arson;
   B.   An alarm that results in a fire unit being dispatched, and the person
transmitting, or causing the transmission of, the alarm, knows at the time of
said transmission that no fire or fire related emergency exits.
AGGRAVATED MEDICAL EMERGENCY: An alarm that results in a fire unit or an
emergency medical unit being dispatched, and the person transmitting, or
causing the transmission of, the alarm, knows at the time of said transmission
that there are no reasonable grounds for believing that a medical emergency
exists.
EXPENSES: The actual costs of government and volunteer personnel including
worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs
of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of disposal and the cost of
any contract labor and materials.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake County fire department or other entity providing
fire protection services to the city.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected release of any substance
that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
(1999 Code)
9.94.030: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Procedure: The city is hereby empowered to recover expenses incurred by
virtue of the city's or the fire department's response to a hazardous materials
emergency, aggravated fire emergency or an aggravated medical emergency from
any person, corporation, partnership or other individual or entity who caused
such an emergency, pursuant to the following procedure:
      1.   The fire department shall determine responsibility for the emergency
or response as defined above and notify the responsible party by mail of the
department's determination of responsibility and the expenses to be recovered.
      2.   The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may
appeal the fire department's decision before the mayor or a hearing officer
designated by the city and specify a date by which the notice of appeal shall
be filed. The appeal date shall be no less than fifteen (15) days from the date
of the notice.
   B.   Appeal; Hearing: In the event the determined responsible party appeals
the determination, the mayor or a hearing officer shall hold a hearing to
consider any issues raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party
and the city shall be entitled to present evidence in support of their
respective positions.
   C.   Hearing Officer Recommendation; Mayor Decision: If the hearing is
before a hearing officer, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to
the mayor, who shall issue a decision determining responsibility and assessing
expenses. The mayor may adopt, modify or remand the recommendation of the
hearing examiner for further proceedings. The mayor may, in his sole
discretion, hear additional evidence prior to issuing its decision. (1999 Code)
9.94.040: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this chapter does not
constitute:
   A.   An admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for
damages; or
   B.   A criminal fine. (1999 Code)
9.94.050: ACTION TO RECOVER EXPENSES:
In the event the parties determined to be responsible for the repayment of
expenses incurred due to the city's or the fire department's response to such
an emergency fail to make payment to the city within thirty (30) days after a
final administrative determination of any appeal to the city or thirty (30)
days from the deadline for appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the city may
initiate legal action to recover from the determined responsible parties the
expenses determined to be owing, including the city's reasonable attorney fees.
(1999 Code)
HO823   9-95.TXT ()
CHAPTER 9.95
CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
9.95.010: Definitions
9.95.020: Alcohol Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 2010-28, 12-9-2010)
9.95.030: Offense; Infraction
9.95.010: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Shall have the same meaning as "beer" and "liquor" and
"wine" as defined by title 32A, chapter 1, section 105, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended, or its successor.
OPEN BOTTLE, CAN, OR OTHER RECEPTACLE: A container having within it an
alcoholic beverage, which container has been opened, its seal broken, or the
contents of which have been partially consumed.
PUBLIC PLACE: Public parks, public school grounds and other publicly owned
property excluding streets and sidewalks. (Ord. 08-03, 3-27-2008)
9.95.020: ALCOHOL PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-28, 12-9-2010)
9.95.030: OFFENSE; INFRACTION:
An offense under this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to
exceed two hundred ninety nine dollars ($299.00) for a first offense with all
subsequent offenses the fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 08-17, 7-17-2008)
CHAPTER 9.96
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL AREAS AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
9.96.010: Definitions
9.96.020: Prohibited Activities
9.96.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CITY HALL, CITY PARKS, RECREATIONAL AREAS, AND PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS
(COLLECTIVELY "CITY FACILITIES"): City owned plazas, parks (including any
streets and interior sidewalks not adjacent to a public street located
therein), playgrounds, baseball diamonds, soccer fields, bleachers and
spectator areas, trails, picnic pavilions and shelters, and other recreational
areas, and publicly owned school playgrounds or facilities. (Ord. 2013-28, 12-
5-2013)
9.96.020: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
Unless otherwise permitted by special permit, the following activities are
prohibited at or on city facilities:
   A.   Consumption of alcohol or possession of open containers of alcohol;
   B.   Smoking, at any time, except in designated areas;
   C.   Littering;
   D.   Camping or lodging (except by special permit);
   E.   Animals unleashed or leashed with leashes greater than eight feet (8')
in length;
   F.   Golfing or hitting golf balls;
   G.   Flying of remote model airplanes or launching of model airplanes or
rockets of any kind;
   H.   Discharge firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other
fireworks or explosives;
   I.   Fires, charcoal barbecues or similar devices, except in approved
locations; use of propane barbecues are not prohibited;
   J.   Archery;
   K.   Selling or trading merchandise without an appropriate permit or
license;
   L.   Playing any game which uses devices for betting, gambling or gaming;
   M.   Skateboarding or riding scooters; bicycles must be walked (interior
sidewalks, patio, plaza);
   N.   Off road vehicle (ATV) driving or riding;
   O.   Cut, break, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building,
cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, or other structure, apparatus or property;
or pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower; or
mark or write upon any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure;
   P.   Cut, remove, injure, or destroy any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand
or gravel;
   Q.   Occupying a city facility between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, except for city activities;
   R.   Engage in any activity which would be considered disorderly conduct or
could cause imminent harm or injury to persons or property. (Ord. 2013-28, 12-
5-2013)
CHAPTER 9.97
SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES
SECTION:
9.97.010: Definitions
9.97.020: Smoking Prohibited In City Parks, Recreational Areas And Certain
Other Public Areas
9.97.030: Penalty
9.97.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CITY PARKS, RECREATIONAL AREAS, AND PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS: City owned parks
(including any streets and sidewalks located therein), playgrounds, baseball
diamonds, soccer fields, bleachers and spectator areas, trails, picnic
pavilions and shelters, and other recreational areas, and publicly owned school
playgrounds.
SMOKING: Possession of, carrying, or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, or
cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting
or emitting or exhaling of smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or
of any other lighted smoking equipment. (Ord. 08-03, 3-27-2008)
9.97.020: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS, RECREATIONAL AREAS AND CERTAIN
OTHER PUBLIC AREAS:
Smoking is prohibited at all times in all city parks and recreational areas and
public school playgrounds. (Ord. 08-03, 3-27-2008)
9.97.030: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed
twenty five dollars ($25.00). Police officers shall have the discretion to
issue a warning for the first offense if they deem it is in the best interests
of the city to do so. (Ord. 08-03, 3-27-2008)
CHAPTER 9.98
ADOPTION OF SALT LAKE COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE
SECTION:
9.98.010: Purpose
9.98.020: Regulations Adopted
9.98.030: Copies On File
9.98.010: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the
city to adopt portions of the Salt Lake County health regulations to clarify
the authority of the city to enforce provisions of such regulations for
violations occurring within the city. (1999 Code)
9.98.020: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The following Salt Lake County health regulations, as adopted by the board of
health, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted in their entirety. The
regulations shall be construed to apply only to the incorporated areas of the
city and references in the regulations including reference to personnel and
officers of the board of health shall be interpreted and construed, where
necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and title, to personnel and
officers of the city:
   A.   Solid waste management facilities;
   B.   Design, construction and operation of public swimming pools;
   C.   Housing;
   D.   Reserved;
   E.   Food service establishments;
   F.   Preparation of meat, food products, etc.;
   G.   General sanitation;
   H.   Honeybees and invenomating invertebrates;
   I.   Kennels, catteries and groomeries;
   J.   Reserved;
   K.   Individual water systems;
   L.   Subdivisions;
   M.   Wastewater disposal systems
   N.   Watersheds;
   O.   Mobile home parks;
   P.   Recreational vehicle parks;
   Q.   Mass gatherings;
   R.   Massage establishments, bathhouses, health salons and outcall massage
services;
   S.   Tattoo establishments;
   T.   Barber shops and beauty salons;
   U.   Reserved;
   V.   Motor vehicle emission inspection and maintenance;
   W.   Reserved;
   X.   Asbestos;
   Y.   Commercial tanning facilities;
   Z.   Diesel emissions control fee standard;
   AA.   Bed and breakfast;
   AB.   Diesel vehicle emissions I/M program. (1999 Code)
9.98.030: COPIES ON FILE:
Copies of the Salt Lake city-county health regulations shall be filed for use
and examination by the public in the offices of the city recorder. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 9.99
PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
SECTION:
9.99.010: Penalty For Violation
9.99.020: Abatement, Suspension Or Waiver Of Certain Fines
9.99.010: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any provision or provisions of this title shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished by imprisonment in the county jail
not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine in any sum less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or both, except that in all cases where a corporation,
limited liability company or other entity other than a natural person is
convicted of an offense for the commission of which a natural person would be
punishable as for a misdemeanor, such entity is punishable by a fine not
exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (1999 Code)
9.99.020: ABATEMENT, SUSPENSION OR WAIVER OF CERTAIN FINES:
The mayor is authorized to abate, suspend or waive fines incurred for violation
of
chapters 9.56 and/or 9.60 of this title in circumstances where: a) the
violation has been cured to the city's satisfaction; b) all out of pocket costs
(excluding staff time and mailing costs) incurred by the city in connection
with such violations have been recovered by the city; and c) the mayor
determines that immediate payment of such fine by the violator is unnecessary
to assure the violator's prompt and continuing future compliance with such
ordinances. (1999 Code)
TITLE 10
PUBLIC WELFARE
CHAPTER 10.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10.01.010: Definitions
10.01.020: Severability
10.01.030: Misdemeanor
10.01.040: Minors; Unlawful Procurement
10.01.050: Fines Not Set By Uniform Bail Schedule
10.01.010: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT TOY: Any object or device primarily used to facilitate sexual pleasure.
ALCOHOLIC PRODUCT: Defined in Utah Code § 32B-1-102.
CODE BLUE ALERT: Defined in Utah Code § 35A-16-701.
CUSTODIAN: The parent, guardian, caretaker, or other custodian legally tasked
with the care, supervision, and responsibility of a minor.
DELINQUENT ACT: An act which would constitute an infraction, misdemeanor, or
felony if committed by an adult.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Any institution which provides educational services,
including schools, colleges, and universities.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel taken to prevent or mitigate an
emergency. Examples include obtaining medications for illness and seeking
assistance from emergency responders for injury, disaster, or criminal
activity.
FURNISH: Defined in Utah Code § 32B-1-102.
GAMBLING PLACE: Any real or personal property where gambling is played,
conducted, or dealt upon.
GRAFFITI: Defined in Utah Code § 76-6-101.
GRAFFITI INSTRUMENT: Any tool, substance, or other article designed or commonly
used to create or place illustrations, inscriptions, or other markings.
LOITERING: Idling, wandering, lingering, or otherwise remaining in a location
without clear purpose for an extended time.
MINOR: Any unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed forces of the
United States and who is under the age of 18 unless (1) otherwise specified; or
(2) modified by statute.
PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIAL: Defined in Utah Code § 76-10-1203.
PROOF OF AGE: Defined in Utah Code § 32B-1-102.
PUBLIC GROUNDS: Any real property owned-in whole or in part-by the U.S. or
state of Utah, upon which camping or sleeping has not been authorized.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place open to the public-whether publicly or privately owned-
such as streets, sidewalks, and commercial establishments. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
10.01.020: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this title is deemed invalid, the remaining provisions
shall remain in full effect. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.01.030: MISDEMEANOR:
Unless otherwise specified, a “misdemeanor” denotes a Class-B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.01.040: MINORS; UNLAWFUL PROCUREMENT:
For any provision of this code that restricts a minor’s access to items or
services, it is a misdemeanor for (1) a minor to solicit the help of an adult
to procure these restricted items or services; or (2) an adult to procure these
restricted items or services for a minor. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.02
INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OFFICERS
SECTION:
10.02.010: Obstructing A Legal Process
10.02.010: OBSTRUCTING A LEGAL PROCESS:
In addition to obstruction of justice in a criminal proceeding per Utah Code §
76-8-306, it is a misdemeanor to knowingly resist or obstruct (1) the
authorized service or execution of any civil or criminal process; or (2) any
court order. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.03
GAMBLING
SECTION:
10.03.010: Gambling Places
10.03.020: Seizure and Sale of Property
10.03.010: GAMBLING PLACES:
   A.   Knowingly allowing one’s property to be used as a gambling place is a
misdemeanor.
   B.   Revocation of Certificates: If property is determined to be a gambling
place, all licenses, permits, or other certificates related to the business of
the property shall be void. No voided certificate shall be reissued (1) to the
property within 60 days of the voidance; or (2) to any person convicted of
keeping a gambling place within one year of their conviction.
   C.   Public Nuisance: A gambling place is a public nuisance per Utah Code §
78B-6-1107(1)(b) and may be proceeded against accordingly. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
10.03.020: SEIZURE AND SALE OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Seizure of Property: Per Utah Code § 76-10-1112, the city may seize
gambling debts, funds, proceeds, or devices obtained or provided in violation
of the Utah Code or this chapter.
   B.   Sale of Real Property: Per Utah Code § 77-11b-202, the court may order
seized property pending to a forfeiture proceeding to be sold, leased, or
rented to cover any unsatisfied judgment or fine levied under this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.04
SEX OFFENSES
SECTION:
10.04.010: Sex Paraphernalia; Distribution, Display, And Promotion To Minors
10.04.020: Production And Distribution Of Pornography
10.04.010: ADULT TOYS; DISPLAY AND PROMOTION TO MINORS:
   A.   Advertising or otherwise promoting adult toys to minors is a
misdemeanor for each day of violation.
   B.   Exceptions
      1.   Placing an adult toy on its designating shelving does not violate
this section if the toy is not visible from outside the establishment.
      2.   This section does not apply to the custodian of the minors involved.
      3.   This section is not designed to restrict minors’ access to over-the-
counter contraceptives. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.04.020: PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF PORNOGRAPHY:
Willfully producing, contributing to the production of, distributing, or
contributing to the distribution of any pornographic material is a misdemeanor
for each day of violation. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.05
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
SECTION:
10.05.010: Educational Institutions; Unlawful Acts
10.05.020: Consumption or Possession of Open Alcoholic Products in a Public
Place
10.05.030: Loitering
10.05.040: Camping or Sleeping on Public Grounds
10.05.050: Fighting
10.05.010: EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; UNLAWFUL ACTS:
The following acts each constitute a misdemeanor:
   A.   Preventing Orderly Conduct: Preventing or attempting to prevent the
orderly conduct of the activities, administration, or classes of any
educational institution.
   B.   Disturbing Students or Employees: Annoying, assaulting, molesting, or
otherwise disturbing the students or employees of any educational institution
on the grounds thereof.
   C.   Loitering: Loitering in or about the grounds of any educational
institution-either on foot or in a vehicle-without lawful business in
connection with the institution, such as taking lawful custody of a student or
having written permission from anyone authorized to grant such.
   D.   Obscene Conduct: Conducting lewd, wanton, lascivious, or otherwise
obscene speech or behavior in or about any educational institution.
   E.   Vehicle Conduct: Positioning a vehicle in the immediate vicinity or on
the grounds of any educational institution for the purpose of (1) disturbing
the students as described in paragraph B; or (2) inducing or soliciting
students or employees to enter the vehicle for unlawful purposes. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
10.05.020: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF OPEN ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS IN A PUBLIC
PLACE:
Consumption or possession of an open alcoholic product in a public place not
authorized by statute or permit is an infraction. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.05.030: LOITERING:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: In addition to the unlawful acts provided in Utah Code
§§ 76-9-702.8 and 76-9-903, the following acts of loitering are prohibited:
      1.   Loitering under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity.
      2.   Loitering in or about a school, college, or university as described
in
10.05.010 .
      3.   Loitering in any public or private place-on foot or in a vehicle-
under circumstances which suggest a crime is imminent or taking place.
      4.   Loitering in any public place for the purpose of begging.
   B.   Police Inquiry and Request to Vacate: Upon reasonable suspicion of
unlawful loitering, a police officer shall inquire as to the apparent
loiterer’s purpose. This person must present the police officer with an
explanation of their lawful business. If not reasonably sufficient, the
apparent loiterer must vacate the premises at the request of the police
officer. An explanation is not reasonably sufficient if the person’s activity:
      1.   Causes a breach of the peace;
      2.   Causes an obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
      3.   Is reasonably consistent with or suggestive of any prohibited act of
loitering in paragraph A.
   C.   Penalty: Each prohibited act of loitering is a misdemeanor if the
apparent loiterer fails to comply with the police officer’s request to vacate
the area.
   D.   Exception: No person shall be convicted under this section if (1) the
person’s explanation of their lawful business to the police officer was true;
and (2) such explanation would have dispelled the alarm if believed by the
police officer. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.05.040: CAMPING OR SLEEPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS:
   A.   Placing or utilizing any sort of shelter or camping equipment-including
tents, sleeping bags, cookware, fires, or other camping equipment-or sleeping
on public grounds is prohibited. Any violator of this section must remove the
equipment and/or cease sleeping on the premises at the request of a police
officer.
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section is a misdemeanor if the violator
fails to comply with the officer’s request within five minutes of issuance.
   C.   Exception: Per Utah Code § 35A-16-703, when enforcing this ordinance
during a code blue alert, law enforcement may not seize any item used for
survival in cold weather-including clothing, blankets, tents, and sleeping
bags-from homeless individuals. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.05.050: FIGHTING:
   A.   It is unlawful for two or more persons to engage in physical combat.
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this ordinance is a Class C misdemeanor.
   C.   Exception: Per Utah Code § 76-2-402, an individual engaged in such
physical combat is not guilty of violating this ordinance if done so in self-
defense. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.06
PROPERTY DAMAGE AND TRESPASS
SECTION:
10.06.010: Property Destruction; Offensive-Smelling Compounds
10.06.020: Graffiti; Removal Process And Presumptive Evidence
10.06.030: Trespass On City Property
10.06.040: Trespass From A Public Recreational Trail
10.06.050: Placing Printed Matters On Vehicles
10.06.010: PROPERTY DESTRUCTION; OFFENSIVE-SMELLING COMPOUNDS:
In addition to the unlawful acts provided in Utah Code Title 76, Chapter 6,
Part 1, the knowing deposition of any offensive-smelling compound-such as skunk
spray, stink bombs, or deterrent sprays-on property without the permission of
the owner constitutes property destruction, a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
10.06.020: GRAFFITI; REMOVAL PROCESS AND PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE:
   A.   Removal Process: Graffiti shall be removed according to the following
provisions:
      1.   Notice: The owner of graffitied property must remove such graffiti.
Per Utah Code § 76-6-107, if the owner fails to remove the graffiti within five
days, the city shall issue the owner a notice detailing (1) the presence of the
graffiti; (2) the requirements of removal provided by this section; (3)
resources available to assist the owner with removal; and (4) that the graffiti
will be removed by the city at the expense of the owner if the owner fails to
remove the graffiti within seven days of the date of this notice. The notice
shall be issued in person or by certified mail to the owner’s last known
address.
      2.   Appeal: The owner may object to the required graffiti cleanup by
filing an appeal with the city manager or their designee within five days of
the date of the notice.
         a.   Per Utah Code § 76-6-107, if the property owner is unable to
remove the graffiti due to physical or financial hardship, the city (1) may not
issue a citation or assess a fee to the property owner for failing to remove
the graffiti; and (2) shall provide the assistance necessary to remove the
graffiti.
      3.   Owner Liability: If the time for appeal has lapsed and the city has
removed the graffiti, the owner shall pay the city for the removal within 20
days of the billing date.
         a.   If the owner fails to pay, the city may sue for the costs of
removal and suit, including interest, attorney fees, and court fees.
      4.   Volunteer Services: The city may seek cleanup supplies and volunteer
labor to provide graffiti cleanup services under this chapter.
   B.   Presumptive Evidence: Possessing any graffiti instrument-such as a
spray paint can-under circumstances reasonably suggesting an intent to use such
instrument to graffiti another’s property-such as possession in a public
building, alley, or park-constitutes presumptive evidence of such an intent.
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.06.030: TRESPASS ON CITY PROPERTY:
Entering or remaining on city property after being ordered to keep off or
vacate by a police officer is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.06.040: TRESPASS FROM A PUBLIC RECREATIONAL TRAIL:
Willfully leaving the boundaries of a public recreational trail and traveling
across private property which has been clearly marked as such with signage is a
misdemeanor for each day of violation. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.06.050: PLACING PRINTED MATTERS ON VEHICLES:
   A.   Directly or indirectly distributing any printed matter-including
pamphlets, handbills, cards, booklets, or placards-in or on any vehicle is a
misdemeanor for each day of violation.
   B.   Exception: This ordinance does not apply to notices of parking
violations or the distribution of any matter the vehicle owner has consented
to. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.07
PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS
SECTION:
10.07.010: Proof Of Age; Refusing Service
10.07.010: PROOF OF AGE; REFUSING SERVICE:
   A.   To avoid violating the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Utah Code Title
32B), any establishment licensed to furnish alcoholic products may refuse to
sell such products to any individual who is (1) unable to produce valid proof
of age; (2) actually or apparently intoxicated; (3) a known habitual drunkard;
or (4) a known interdicted person.
   B.   To avoid violating Utah Code Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 1, any
establishment licensed to furnish cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine products may
refuse to sell such products to any individual who fails to produce valid proof
of age. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.08
CURFEW
SECTION:
10.08.010: Curfew for Minors
10.08.020: Curfew for Minors Under 16
10.08.030: Custodial Liability
10.08.040: Business Liability
10.08.050: Exceptions
10.08.060: Enforcement
10.08.010: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
A minor shall not remain or loiter in any public place between the hours of 1:
00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.08.020: CURFEW FOR MINORS UNDER 16:
A minor under the age of 16 shall not remain or loiter in any public place
between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.08.030: CUSTODIAL LIABILITY:
The custodian of any minor shall not allow the minor to violate the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.08.040: BUSINESS LIABILITY:
A business owner shall not allow a minor to remain on the premises in violation
of the minor’s applicable curfew unless the minor is an employee. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
10.08.050: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstances wherein the
minor is:
   A.   Accompanied by a custodian.
   B.   Working in an occupation which requires the minor’s presence in public
places for work or travel.
   C.   Conducting an emergency errand directed by the minor’s custodian.
   D.   Traveling on an interstate.
   E.   Traveling between the minor’s residence and a place where any
religious, municipal, social, entertainment, sporting, political, library, or
school function is occurring.
   F.   Within the immediate vicinity of the minor’s residence. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
10.08.060: ENFORCEMENT:
Arrest and Citation Of Minor: Any minor who violates the provisions of this
chapter is subject to arrest and citation.
Return to Custody Of Parent: Following arrest and citation (if issued), the
minor shall be returned to the custodian.
Refusal to Take Custody: If a minor violates this chapter and is arrested by a
police officer in accordance with this section, it is unlawful for the minor’s
custodian to refuse to take custody of the minor within a reasonable time of
the police officer’s request to do so.
Penalty: Unless otherwise specified, any violation of this chapter is a
misdemeanor for the specified parties. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.09
FAILURE TO SUPERVISE A MINOR
SECTION:
10.09.010: Intent And Purpose
10.09.020: Failure To Supervise A Minor
10.09.030: Affirmative Defenses
10.09.040: Minor’s Conviction Not Required
10.09.050: Penalty; Counseling
10.09.010: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The increasing number of criminal episodes committed by children demonstrates a
threat to family stability and a breakdown of meaningful parental supervision.
Guardians who fail to effectively guide, teach, and control their children
should be held accountable. Those who need assistance and training in
fulfilling their parental duties should be aided, and those who neglect their
duties should be criminally sanctioned. This chapter should be construed to
achieve these remedial objectives. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.09.020: FAILURE TO SUPERVISE A MINOR:
A custodian commits failure to supervise a minor if the custodian:
   A.   Fails to provide reasonable supervision of the minor or aids,
contributes, or becomes responsible for the neglect, abuse, or delinquent acts
of the minor. This failure occurs if:
      1.   Within a two-year period, the minor commits three or more delinquent
acts;
      2.   The custodian fails to fulfill counseling requirements ordered by a
court;
      3.   The custodian fails to take reasonable disciplinary or remedial
action in response to the minor’s delinquent acts; or
      4.   The custodian’s acts or failures to act demonstrate a willful lack
of commitment to prevent the minor’s future commission of delinquent acts.
   B.   Contributes to the delinquency of the minor per Utah Code § 76-4-206.
   C.   Aids, contributes to, or becomes legally responsible for the neglect,
abuse, or delinquent acts of the minor.
   D.   Abuses, neglects, or abandons the minor in any manner likely to cause
the minor unnecessary suffering or serious injury to health or morals. (Ord.
2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.09.030: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES:
The following are affirmative defenses against violations of this chapter:
   A.   The custodian was a victim of the minor’s delinquent act.
   B.   The custodian reported the minor’s delinquent act to an appropriate
governmental authority at or near the time of the act.
   C.   The custodian provided reasonable supervision of the minor given the
totality of the circumstances. When assessing the reasonableness of
supervision, the court shall consider:
   1.   The severity of the minor’s delinquent act(s);
   2.   The amount of prior delinquent acts committed by the minor;
   3.   The custodian’s knowledge of the minor’s delinquent act(s);
   4.   The discipline, counseling, or other remedial measures taken by the
custodian after obtaining knowledge of the minor’s delinquent acts; and
   5.   Any other action by the custodian which demonstrates a reasonable
effort to prevent the minor from committing future delinquent acts. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
10.09.040: MINOR’S CONVICTION NOT REQUIRED:
A conviction for the minor’s delinquent act(s) is not required to convict a
custodian for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.09.050: PENALTY; COUNSELING:
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, and convicted custodians shall be
punished accordingly:
   A.   Counseling: Upon first conviction, the court shall require the
custodian to complete an appropriate counseling program.
   B.   Community Service; Counseling: Upon subsequent conviction, the court
may require the custodian to perform community service and complete an
appropriate counseling program. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.10
WEAPONS
SECTION:
10.10.010: Minors; Liability Of Custodian
10.10.020: Discharge Prohibited Within City Limits; Exceptions
10.10.010: MINORS; LIABILITY OF CUSTODIAN:
In addition to the penalties provided in Utah Code §§ 76-10-509.5, 76-10-509.6,
and 76-10-509.7, any custodian or person with control of any minor who allows
the minor to possess a dangerous weapon in violation of Utah Code § 76-10-509.4
is liable for any damages caused by the minor’s use of the dangerous weapon.
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
10.10.020: DISCHARGE PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY LIMITS; EXCEPTIONS:
In addition to the restrictions of Utah Code §§ 76-10-508 and 76-10-508.1, it
is a misdemeanor to discharge any firearm within city limits unless done by (1)
an individual in self-defense, defense of property, or at a licensed shooting
range; or (2) a police officer in the performance of their duty. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.11
DEFERENCE TO STATE CODE
SECTION:
10.11.010: Deference To State Code
10.11.010: DEFERENCE TO STATE CODE:
Notwithstanding any authorized additions or modifications made by this city
code, the city may defer to the Utah Code-and the sections designated herein-
for the following unlawful activities. This list is not exhaustive.
A.   ABUSE OF PSYCHOTOXIC CHEMICAL SOLVENTS: § 76-10-107
B.   ADMISSION OR PRESENCE OF MINORS IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS
   1.   Dance or Concert Halls: § 32B-6-406.1
   2.   Dining Club Licensees & Bar Licensees: § 32B-66-406
   3.   Hospitality Amenity Licensees: § 32B-6-1005
   4.   Small Beer-Only Restaurant Licensees: 32B-6-905.3
   5.   State Stores: § 32B-2-503
   6.   Unlawful Admittance or Attempt to Gain Admittance to Taverns or Bar
Licensees: § 32B-4-410
C.   ANIMAL CRUELTY: § 76-9-301
D.   ASSAULT: § 76-5-102
E.   CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR: § 76-4-206
F.   CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
   1.   Aggravated Arson: § 76-6-103
   2.   Arson: § 76-6-102
   3.   Causing a Catastrophe: § 76-6-105
   4.   Damage or Destruction: § 76-6-106.1
   5.   Damage Resulting in Economic Disruption: § 76-6-113
   6.   Damage to or Interruption of a Communication Device: § 76-6-108
   7.   Graffiti: §§ 76-6-107 and 76-6-107.5
   8.   Reckless Burning: § 76-6-104
   9.   Tampering with or Destruction of Critical Infrastructure: § 76-6-106.3
   10.   Tampering: § 76-6-106(2)
G.   CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND: § 76-6-206 et seq.
H.   DISORDERLY CONDUCT: § 76-9-102
I.   DISRUPTING A MEETING OR PROCESSION: § 76-9-103
J.   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION HARASSMENT: §§ 76-9-201 and 13-25a-108
K.   EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS TO SELL, OFFER, OR FURNISH ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS: §§
32B-5-308, 32B-6-406, and 32B-7-202
L.   EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS TO SELL, OFFER, OR FURNISH TOBACCO, CIGARETTE, OR
NICOTINE PRODUCTS: § 26B-7-511
M.   EXPOSING A MINOR TO HARMFUL MATERIALS: § 76-10-1206
N.   FAILING TO AID A POLICE OFFICER: § 76-8-307
O.   FAILURE TO DISPERSE: § 76-9-104
P.   GAMBLING: Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 11
   1.   Generally: § 76-10-1102
   2.   Fraud: § 76-10-1103
   3.   Promotion: § 76-10-1104
   4.   Advertisement or Solicitation for Lotteries: § 76-10-1104.5
   5.   Possessing Gambling Devices or Records: § 76-10-1105
Q.   IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER: § 76-8-512
R.   INDECENT PUBLIC DISPLAYS: § 76-10-1228
S.   INTERFERENCE WITH A POLICE OFFICER: § 76-8-305
T.   INTOXICATION: § 76-9-701
U.   LEWDNESS: § 76-9-702
V.   LOITERING
   1.   Gang Loitering: § 76-9-903
   2.   In a Privacy Space: § 76-9-702.8
W.   OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE: § 76-8-306
X.   PRODUCTION, SOLICITATION, DISTRIBUTION, AND POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES: § 58-37-8
Y.   PROFANE AND ABUSIVE LANGUAGE: § 10-8-50
Z.   PROSTITUTION: § 76-10-1302
AA.   PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION
   1.   To a Law Enforcement Officer, Government Agency, or Specified
Professional: § 76-8-506
   2.   To a Police Officer: § 76-8-507
BB.   PROVIDING TOBACCO, NICOTINE, OR CIGARETTE PRODUCTS TO A MINOR: §§ 76-10-
104 or 76-10-114
CC.   PURCHASE, POSSESSION, AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS BY MINORS: §
32B-4-409
DD.   PURCHASE, POSSESSION, AND CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE, OR CIGARETTE
PRODUCTS BY MINORS: § 76-10-105
EE.   RIOT: § 76-9-101
FF.   SALE OF ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS TO MINORS: §§ 32B-4-403, 32B-5-306, and 32B-2-
503
GG.   SEXUAL OFFENSES COMMITTED AGAINST A MINOR: Title 76, Chapter 5, Part 4; §
76-4-401
   1.   Invalid Defenses
      a.   Consent: § 76-5-406
      b.   Entrapment: § 76-4-401
      c.   Mistake of Age: § 76-2-304.5
HH.   STALKING: § 76-5-106.5
II.   TARGETED RESIDENTIAL PICKETING: § 76-9-109
JJ.   THEFT: Title 76, Chapter 6, Part 4
   1.   Unlawful Acts
      a.   Generally: § 76-6-404
      b.   By Custodian of Property: § 76-6-410
      c.   By Deception: § 76-6-405
      d.   By Extortion: § 76-6-406
      e.   By Receiving Stolen Property: § 76-6-408
      f.   Creation, Provision, or Possession of an Unlawful Device Used for
Theft: § 76-6-409.1
      g.   Manufacture of Unlawful Telecommunication Device: § 76-6-409.9
      h.   Of Lost, Mislaid, or Mistakenly Delivered Property: § 76-6-407
      i.   Of Motor Vehicle Fuel: § 76-6-404.7
      j.   Of Rental Vehicles: § 76-6-410.5
      k.   Of Service: § 76-6-409
      l.   Of Utility or Cable TV Services: § 76-6-409.3
      m.   Possession of Unlawful Telecommunication Device: § 76-6-409.7
      n.   Resulting in Economic Disruption: § 76-6-414
      o.   Sale of Unlawful Telecommunication Device: § 76-6-409.8
      p.   Unauthorized Possession: § 76-6-404.5
      q.   Use of Telecommunication Device to Avoid Payment: § 76-6-409.6
   2.   Evidence: § 76-6-403
   3.   Presumptions: 76-6-402
KK.   TRANSFERRING OR PRESENTING FALSE EVIDENCE OF AGE: § 32B-1-403
LL.   WEAPONS
   1.   Weapons: Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 5
   2.   Explosives: Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 3
   3.   Weapons of Mass Destruction: Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 4 (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10.12
FINES NOT SET BY UNIFORM BAIL SCHEDULE
SECTION:
10.12.010: Fines Not Set By Uniform Bail Schedule
10.12.010: FINES NOT SET BY UNIFORM BAIL SCHEDULE:
For any violation not currently set by the uniform bail schedule, the suggested
fine is $110. This section does not prohibit the court from in its discretion
imposing no fine, or a fine in any amount up to and including the maximum fine,
for the offense. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
TITLE 11
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 11.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11.01.010: Definitions
11.01.020: Enabling Statute; Role of the City and City Engineer
11.01.030: Applicability
11.01.040: Traffic Control Devices
11.01.050: Local Law Enforcement Agency; Authority
11.01.060: Local Law Enforcement Agency; Obedience Required
11.01.070: Prosecution Documents
11.01.080: Penalties
11.01.010: DEFINITIONS:
ALLEY: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-102.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES: Ambulances and emergency vehicles of the United
States, state and municipal governments as may be operated on the streets of
the city.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is over twenty inches (20") in
diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle, though
equipped with more than one front or rear wheel.
BICYCLE LANE: means a portion of a highway that has been designated by a
highway authority through striping, signage, pavement markings, or barriers for
the preferential or exclusive use of bicycle, electric assisted bicycle, and
motor assisted scooter traffic.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the city or the appointed agent of any
entity providing engineering services to the city.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; also, any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
CROSSWALK LINE: A single white line, not less than six inches (6") in width,
painted on a street marking the outlying limits of a pedestrian crossing.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
HIGHWAY: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-
102.
INTERSECTION:
   A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines or the roadway of two (2)
streets that join one another at, or approximately at, right angels, or the
area within which vehicles, traveling upon different streets joining at any
other angle, come in conflict.
   B.   Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an
intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
LIMITED ACCESS STREET, HIGHWAY OR ROADWAY: Every highway, street or roadway,
with respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have no legal right of access except at such points and in such manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway,
street or roadway.
LOW-PROFILE MOTORIZED VEHICLE: For purposes of this section, a low-profile
motorized vehicle shall mean any motorized or electric vehicle that is not
regulated by the state or by any other city ordinance provision and is not
otherwise permitted upon city or public property. This definition includes, but
is not limited to, pocket bikes, miniature motorcycles, and any other motor or
electric vehicles less than thirty-six inches in height when in its normal
operating position, notwithstanding any flag, antenna, or other attachment or
modifications made thereto. Low-Profile Motorized vehicle shall not include a
motorized or electric device standing less than thirty-six inches, but designed
to be operated or ridden in a standing position such that the rider stands
higher than thirty-six inches while in operation of the vehicle.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a
motor that produces more than five (5) horsepower, and every bicycle with a
motor attached.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle that is self-propelled, but not operated upon
rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle
for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3)
wheels in contact with the ground.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle or, in the event a
vehicle is subject to an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof
with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purpose of this title.
PARK: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not used by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary
rails.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a
public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
SAFETY ZONE: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 41-
6a-102.
SIDEWALK AREA: That portion of a street or highway between the curb lines of
the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines.
STOP: Complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR LIMIT LINE: A single white line not less than twelve inches (12") in
width behind which vehicles must stop when directed by the Local Law
Enforcement Agency’s department or a traffic control device.
STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING WHEN PROHIBITED: Any stopping or standing of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Local Law Enforcement
Agency’s officer or traffic control device.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: All signs, signals, traffic markings and devices of the
state placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.01.020: ENABLING STATUTE; ROLE OF THE CITY AND CITY ENGINEER:
   A.   Per Utah Code Ann. § 10-8-30, the city is authorized to regulate the
movement of traffic. Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-207, the city-as the “Highway
Authority” defined in Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-102-may adopt any ordinance
consistent with or not in conflict with Title 41, Chapter 6a, Section 102 of
the Utah Code.
   B.   The City Engineer is responsible for executing all decisions made by
the city in accordance with this title and the Utah Code. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
11.01.030: APPLICABILITY:
All vehicles using the roads and highways of the city are subject to this
title. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.01.040: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-906, the City Engineer, as authorized by the city,
shall place and maintain traffic control devices upon city roads and highways
as necessary for the provisions of this title. Each traffic control device must
conform to the Utah Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
11.01.050: LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; AUTHORITY:
Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-102, any peace officer is authorized to enforce the
traffic provisions of this title and the Utah Code, including directing
traffic, issuing citations, and making arrests as required by this title. (Ord.
2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.01.060: LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer.
   B.   A peace officer shall direct all traffic in accordance with the
provisions of this title.
   C.   Fires: An officer of the fire department in command, or any firefighter
designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of an officer of the
Local Law Enforcement Agency’s department in directing traffic at the scene of
any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so
long as fire department equipment is on the scene in the absence of the local
law enforcement agency, or while assisting the local law enforcement agency in
discharging its duties. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.01.070: PROSECUTION DOCUMENTS:
The heading on prosecution documents may designate the plaintiff(s) as state of
Utah, the city or any other appropriate party, and such documents will operate
as a prosecution in the name of the state or in the name of the city, as may be
appropriate. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.01.080: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise stated in this city code or the Utah State Code, any violation
of this title is an infraction. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.02
TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11.02.010: Unauthorized Traffic Control Devices Prohibited; Removal
11.02.020: Turning at Intersections
11.02.030: School Zones; Designation
11.02.040: Crosswalks, Safety Zones, and Traffic Lanes; Designation
11.02.050: One-Way Highways; Designation
11.02.060: Limited-Access Highways; Prohibited Use
11.02.070: Recreational Activities on City Roads
11.02.080: Emergency Vehicles; Equipment and Operation; Duty of Driver
11.02.090: Funeral Processions; Escort; Right-Hand Driving Requirement
11.02.100: Highway Use; Restrictions
11.02.110: Vehicle Size and Weight; Restrictions
11.02.120: Avoiding Intersections; Annoying Patrons
11.02.130: Safety Zone Intrusions
11.02.140: Obstruction of View Prohibited
11.02.150: Truck Routes
11.02.010: UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED; REMOVAL:
Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-309, unauthorized traffic control devices are public
nuisances that the city may remove-or cause to be removed-without notice. (Ord.
2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.020: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The City Engineer, as authorized by the city, may place-or require the
placement of-markers or signage at any intersection that (1) direct vehicles to
turn in accordance with the marker’s or sign’s instruction; or (2) prohibit
vehicles from turning altogether. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.030: SCHOOL ZONES; DESIGNATION:
Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-303, the City Engineer shall establish reduced-speed
school zones at elementary schools. The City Engineer may also establish these
zones for secondary schools. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.040: CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES, AND TRAFFIC LANES; DESIGNATION:
The City Engineer, as authorized by the city, may designate:
   A.   Crosswalks wherever deemed necessary-including to protect pedestrians
from danger while crossing the roadway-per Utah Code Ann. § 10-8-25.
   B.   Safety zones wherever deemed necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
   C.   Traffic lanes wherever deemed advisable and consistent with this title
per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-710. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.050: ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS; DESIGNATION:
Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-709, the City Engineer may designate any highway,
roadway, part of a roadway, or specific lanes under the highway authority’s
jurisdiction for one direction of vehicle travel at all times as indicated by
traffic-control devices. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.060: LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAYS; PROHIBITED USE:
   A.   Per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-715, the City Engineer may regulate or
prohibit the use of any controlled-access highway within its respective
jurisdiction by any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible
with the normal and safe movement of traffic. These regulations and
prohibitions shall be indicated via traffic-control devices.
   B.   No person shall violate these regulations or prohibitions. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.070: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES ON CITY ROADS:
   A.   Per Utah Code Ann. § 10-8-69, no person may conduct or participate in
any recreational activity on roadways, highways, or sidewalks if the conduct
interferes with or impedes traffic, including sled riding; skateboarding;
playing ball; flying a kite; or riding a bicycle in a manner that impedes
traffic.
   B.   The city may allow these otherwise prohibited activities in designated
areas-indicated by signage-where precautions have been taken to protect the
safety of the participants. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.080: EMERGENCY VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT & OPERATION; DUTY OF DRIVER:
   A.   Equipment & Operation: All emergency vehicles-including police cars,
firetrucks, and ambulances-shall be equipped and are authorized to operate
during emergencies per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-212.
   B.   Duty of Driver: Despite these emergency privileges, the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle shall drive with regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway and exercise care to avoid colliding with a
pedestrian per Utah Code Ann. § 41-6a-1004. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.090: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS; ESCORT; RIGHT-HAND DRIVING REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Escort: A peace officer may provide an escort for funeral processions
to ensure public safety or prevent disruption described in Utah Code Ann. § 76-
9-108.
   B.   Right-Hand Driving Requirement: A driver in a funeral procession shall
drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as reasonable unless a left
turn is contemplated. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.100: HIGHWAY USE; RESTRICTIONS:
The City Engineer, as authorized by the city, may prohibit the operation of all
vehicles upon any highway or road of the city or impose restrictions as to the
weight of vehicles thereon for a period up to ninety (90) days in a calendar
year, whenever a highway or road might otherwise be seriously damaged by
deterioration or climatic conditions. All such restrictions shall be designated
by appropriate signs and markings at each end of that portion of the highway
affected by this chapter and shall not be effective until and unless such signs
are erected and maintained. The City Engineer may prohibit the operation of
trucks or other commercial vehicles, or impose limitations as to the weight
thereof, on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations shall be
designated by appropriate signs or markings. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.110: VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT; RESTRICTIONS:
All vehicles, combinations of vehicles, or combinations of vehicle and load
having a length of more than forty-five feet (45'), or a width of more than
eight feet (8'), or a height of more than fourteen feet (14') with or without
load, are restricted vehicles.
Special permits of duration of more than one month may be issued by the city,
or temporary permits for a duration of less than one month may be issued by the
Local Law Enforcement Agency’s department, upon application in writing and good
cause being shown therefore, authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
restricted vehicle upon the street of the city, or to park a vehicle in
violation of city ordinances.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move upon the roads or highways of
the city any vehicle of a size or weight exceeding the limitations as provided
for in this chapter. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.120: AVOIDING INTERSECTIONS; ANNOYING PATRONS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle through a private driveway, lot, or
similar area-regardless of vacancy-to avoid obeying a traffic regulation or to
annoy the area’s owner or its patrons. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.130: SAFETY ZONE INTRUSIONS:
No person shall drive, park, or otherwise intrude in a safety zone with a motor
vehicle. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.140: OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW PROHIBITED:
When the City Engineer determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that a traffic hazard exists, the city shall notify the owner or
occupant and order that the hazard be removed within ten (10) days. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
11.02.150: TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   Terms Defined: The definition of truck, truck tractor semitrailer and
trailer shall have the same meaning as provided in Utah Code Annotated Section
41-6-1.
   B.   Streets Designated: The following streets are designated as truck
routes:
      1.   2300 East as extended by Holladay Boulevard from the northern city
boundary to 6200 South;
      2.   6200 South from Holladay Boulevard to the I-215 interchange at 6200
South;
      3.   4500 South from the eastern city boundary to the western city
boundary;
      4.   Highland Drive from the northern city boundary to the southern city
boundary;
      5.   I-215; and
      6.   Wasatch Boulevard from the northern city boundary to the southern
city boundary.
   C.   Trucks Required To Use Designated Routes: All trucks, truck tractors,
semitrailers and trailers and all vehicles carrying flammable liquids in excess
of three thousand (3,000) gallons, explosives and corrosives, shall, except as
provided herein, follow such designated truck routes and not depart therefrom.
The City Manager may designate in writing temporary alternative truck routes
and authorize said trucks to depart from the truck routes herein designated,
for a temporary period not to exceed thirty (30) days when road repairs or
other obstacles block said truck routes. The City Manager shall report such
temporary authorization to the city council at the next regular scheduled
council meeting.
   D.   Exception: The above truck routes shall not apply to said trucks
delivering to or returning from construction sites where it is not possible to
use a designated truck route, or to said trucks delivering merchandise to or
from local business or local residents.
   E.   Going To Or Returning From Retail Fuel Outlet: An unladen truck or
tractor may, for the sole purpose of going to or returning from a retail fuel
outlet, depart from the truck routes designated herein; provided, however, said
route of travel to a retail fuel outlet must be as reasonably direct as
possible.
   F.   Signage Required: The City Manager shall install signs on said truck
routes which indicate in words or pictures that such street is a “truck route”
and install signs on major streets not designated as truck routes which
indicate in words or in pictures that “trucks are prohibited”. Where signs are
installed indicating that trucks are prohibited, the City Manager or his
designee may install additional signs to the effect that “local deliveries are
permitted” in accordance with these provisions. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.03
VEHICLE CONTROL RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
11.03.010: Improper Lookout
11.03.020: Low-Profile Motorized Vehicles; Public Property Prohibition
11.03.030: Owner’s Responsibility For Improper Use Of Vehicle
11.03.040: Driving When Ill Or Fatigued
11.03.050: Negligent Collision
11.03.010: IMPROPER LOOKOUT:
A person shall not drive a vehicle on a road without keeping a proper lookout
for other traffic, persons, or objects on or adjacent to the road. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
11.03.020: LOW-PROFILE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITION:
   A.   Violation
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a low-profile motorized
vehicle upon any public property within the city including, but not limited to,
public right of ways sidewalks, parks and parking lots where there is a posted
speed limit in excess of 25 miles per hour.
      2.   It is unlawful to operate a motorized or electric vehicle that is
not regulated by the state or by any other city ordinance provision and is not
otherwise permitted upon city or public property which vehicle stands less than
36 inches high but is designed to be operated and ridden in a standing position
such that the rider stands higher than 36 inches while in operation of the
vehicle upon any public property within the city, including but not limited to,
public right of ways, sidewalks, parks and parking lots where there is a posted
speed limit in excess of 25 miles per hour.
      3.   It is unlawful for an owner to knowingly permit the operation of a
low-profile motorized vehicle in violation of subsection 1 above.
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section is an infraction. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
11.03.030: OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROPER USE OF VEHICLE:
No owner or person in control of a vehicle shall knowingly permit the vehicle
to be operated by any person who is physically or mentally disabled to such an
extent that such person’s judgment or driving ability is impaired. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
11.03.040: DRIVING WHEN ILL OR FATIGUED:
No driver shall operate a vehicle if there is uncertainty caused from having a
physical, mental, or emotional impairment-including fatigue-that may affect
driving safety. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.03.050: NEGLIGENT COLLISION:
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care as to cause the
same to collide with any vehicle, person or object. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.04
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
11.04.010: Designation By City Engineer
11.04.020: Minimum Speed Regulations
11.04.030: Speed Limits In Public Parks
11.04.040: Speed Contests On Highway Prohibited
11.04.010: DESIGNATION BY CITY ENGINEER:
   A.   Alteration Or Changing Speed Limits: The City Manager, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer may alter or change the prima facie speed
limits within the city in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
§41-6a-603.
      1.   The prima facie speed therein declared may be found greater than is
reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection, and
upon the erection of appropriate signs giving notice thereof, the speed limit
may be changed to one deemed reasonable and safe.
      2.   Higher speeds than those therein authorized may be substituted upon
through highways or portions thereof where there are no intersections or
between widely spaced intersections, provided appropriate signs are erected
giving notice of the authorized speed.
      3.   If the City Manager, upon advice from the City Engineer, determines
that the prima facie speed permitted upon any highway outside a business or
residential district is greater than is reasonable or safe under conditions
found to exist the Manager may direct the posting of appropriate signs and
notices, to declare a reasonable and safe limit which shall, in no event, be
less than thirty five (35) miles per hour. Wherever the drop is ten (10) miles
per hour, it must be preceded by a sign giving advance notice of such
reduction.
   B.   Investigation Required: No changes shall be effective until the City
Engineer has made a full investigation of engineering and traffic conditions
demanding such change. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.04.020: MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation or because upon a grade or in compliance with
law. The City Engineer may determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that slow speeds on any part of a road or highway of the city
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and constitute a traffic
hazard requiring the declaration of a minimum speed limit below which no person
shall drive except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
All such minimum speed limits shall be properly posted. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
11.04.030: SPEED LIMITS IN PUBLIC PARKS:
The City Engineer shall have authority to regulate the speed of vehicles in all
public parks in the city upon posting appropriate signs and markings. (Ord.
2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.04.040: SPEED CONTESTS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or
exhibition of speed on a highway, and no person shall aid or abet in any such
contest or exhibition on any highway. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.05
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
11.05.010: Erection Of Traffic Control Devices
11.05.020: Curb Markings
11.05.030: Regulation Of Parking
11.05.040: Bus Zones
11.05.050: Neighborhood Parking Program
11.05.060: Parking Of Trucks And Commercial Vehicles
11.05.070: Approach To Parking Space
11.05.080: Vehicle Left Unattended
11.05.090: Parallel Parking; Required; Exception
11.05.100: Angle Parking; Restrictions
11.05.110: Double Parking, Standing Or Stopping Prohibited; Exception
11.05.120: Obstructing Traffic Prohibited
11.05.130: Parking Prohibited When
11.05.140: Prohibited Parking In Front Yards On Residential Property
11.05.150: Cars Displayed For Sale Upon Vacant Lots Prohibited
11.05.160: Liability
11.05.170: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicle
11.05.010: ERECTION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to cause traffic signs and other
traffic control devices to be erected and to regulate, warn and guide traffic
of the city. No traffic control device shall be placed or maintained by the
city upon any highway under the jurisdiction of the Utah Department of
Transportation. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.020: CURB MARKINGS:
   A.   Authorized; Designation Of Colors: The City Engineer is authorized to
place and maintain appropriate signs or traffic markings to indicate standing
or parking regulations, and the traffic markings shall designate the zones and
shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter:
      1.   “Red” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time.
      2.   “Yellow” means no stopping, standing or parking except as stated on
the signs or markings giving notice thereof.
   B.   Violation Prohibited: When appropriate signs or traffic curb markings
have been erected or placed according to this section, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle in any zone in violation of the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.030: REGULATION OF PARKING:
   A.   Placement Of Signs: The City Engineer may place signs or markings on
all roads and highways prohibiting or restricting the parking of vehicles
where, in his opinion, as evidenced by an order entered in his records, such
parking is dangerous to those using the roads or where the parking of vehicles
would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon.
   B.   Off Street Parking Facility Or Property: The City Engineer may
prohibit, restrict or regulate the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles on
any off street parking facility or property that the city owns or operates.
   C.   Notice Required: No such regulations shall apply until signs or
markings giving notice thereof have been erected or installed.
   D.   The provisions of this section concerning regulation of parking shall
be construed so as not to conflict with the provisions of
11.05.050 , Neighborhood Parking Program. In any situation where the provisions
of this section appear to conflict with the provisions of section
11.05.050 , the provisions of section
11.05.050  shall prevail. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.040: BUS ZONES:
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or
park in an officially designated bus stop. No person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle, other than a bus, in a bus loading and unloading area when the area
has been designated as a loading area by City Engineer, School District or
designee and identified by appropriate signs or other marking. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, the driver of a passenger vehicle may stop
temporarily therein for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading
or unloading passengers, where the stopping does not interfere with any motor
bus entering or leaving the loading or unloading area. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
11.05.050: NEIGHBORHOOD PARKING PROGRAM:
   A.   In the Olympus High School and Crown Colony Baseball Playing Field
area, the City Manager is authorized and instructed to create and administer a
neighborhood parking program on the public streets to consist of the following
elements:
      1.   It shall be indicated illegal to park a motor vehicle or guest
parking on a public street between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and
four o’clock (4:00) P.M. on school days, except with a neighborhood parking
permit on portions of the following streets and as set forth in exhibit A,
which is on file in the City and incorporated herein by reference:
         a.   Camille Street (east side) Capricorn Way to Lincoln Lane;
         b.   Capricorn Way (north side) 2491 E. Capricorn Way to Milky Way;
         c.   Evening Star Drive (north and south sides) Mercury Drive to Milky
Way;
         d.   Mercury Drive (east and west sides) 4035 S. Mercury Drive to
Capricorn Way;
         e.   Milky Way (east side) Evening Star Drive to Capricorn Way;
         f.   Lincoln Lane (south side) Camille Street to 2300 East;
         g.   Solar Drive (south side) Mercury Drive to 2492 Solar Drive;
         h.   Suada Drive (north and south sides) 2300 East to 2218 E. Suada
Drive.
      2.   It shall be indicated illegal to park a motor vehicle or guest
parking on a public street from March 1 to August 31, except with a
neighborhood parking permit on that portion of Kings Row Drive (north side)
from 1300 East to Rebecca Circle.
      3.   Resident neighborhood parking permit stickers shall be issued upon
request to the owners or occupants of the homes located on the streets
specified above for each vehicle owned by such owners or occupants.
      4.   Guest neighborhood parking permits (mirror hangers) shall be issued
upon request to the owners or occupants of homes located on the streets
specified above up to two (2) permits per home.
   C.   The City Manager is authorized to take such further actions as may be
necessary or appropriate to implement this neighborhood parking program.
   D.   The City Manager is authorized to take further actions as may be
necessary or appropriate to regulate parking in the Olympus High School and
Crown Colony Baseball Playing Field areas.
   E.   Vehicles parked contrary to the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the provisions and penalties of
chapter 11.12  of this title. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.060: PARKING OF TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle in excess of one ton capacity of whatever make or
type used for commercial or agricultural purposes. The term “commercial
vehicle” includes, without limitation, all so called “semi” truck tractors and
“semi” truck trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit other than a mobile home, primarily
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use,
which is either self-propelled or pulled by another vehicle. Recreational
vehicle also includes a boat, a snowmobile, a personal watercraft, an all-
terrain vehicle, a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a motor home, and a fifth
wheel trailer.
TRAILER: Any truck trailer or other trailer designed or adapted primarily for
the transportation of materials, debris or property of whatever kind,
including, without limitation, boats, personal watercraft, snowmobiles, all-
terrain vehicles or motorcycles.
TRAVEL TRAILER, CAMPING TRAILER OR FIFTH WHEEL TRAILER: A portable vehicle
without motive power, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
or vacation use that does not require a special highway movement permit when
drawn by a self-propelled motor vehicle.
TRUCK: Any truck tractor, tractor trailers, panel truck, pickup or other truck
in excess of one-ton capacity.
   B.   Restriction: No person shall park any:
      1.   Commercial vehicle, agricultural vehicle, recreational vehicle,
occupied or empty trailer, or truck on any public street adjacent to a lot or
parcel containing a residential dwelling, or on any public street within a
residential zone of the City for a period of time longer than two (2) hours
within any twenty four (24) hour period;
      2.   Agricultural vehicle, recreational vehicle, occupied or empty
trailer, or truck within the front yard area of any residential zone of the
City; or
      3.   Commercial vehicle on any lot or parcel within any residential zone
of the City.
   C.   Exception: The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to vehicles
actively being used in the servicing of adjacent properties or streets. (Ord.
2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.070: APPROACH TO PARKING SPACE:
   A.   Every driver about to enter a parking space being vacated shall stop
his vehicle and wait to the rear of the vehicle in the actual process of
vacating the parking space and having so waited shall have prior right to the
parking space over all other drivers.
   B.   No other driver shall stop his vehicle ahead of a parking space vacated
and attempt to interfere with a driver who has waited properly to the rear of a
parking space being vacated.
   C.   No driver shall stop and wait for a parking space unless the vehicle
vacating the space is actually in the process of vacating. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
11.05.080: VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person having control of a motor vehicle to
permit such vehicle to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, and removing the key.
   B.   Neither shall any person allow a vehicle to stand upon any perceptible
grade without effectively setting the brakes thereon and turning the front
wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.090: PARALLEL PARKING; REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the
curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
11.05.100: ANGLE PARKING; RESTRICTIONS:
The City Engineer may, after placement of appropriate signs and markings,
designate certain areas as suitable for angle parking, except that no angle
parking shall be permitted or indicated at any place where passing traffic
would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street
or where any vehicle would extend from the curb or edge of the roadway a
distance greater than one-third (1/3) of the width of the roadway. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.110: DOUBLE PARKING, STANDING OR STOPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle upon the roadway side of another
vehicle that is parking, standing or stopped, except while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers, or in compliance with directions of any
officer of the Local Law Enforcement Agency’s Department or traffic control
device, or when necessary to avoid other traffic. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.120: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.130: PARKING PROHIBITED WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody or control of
any vehicle to park or knowingly allow to be parked any vehicle on any street:
   A.   When it is snowing or snow is on the street during the months of
November, December, January, February, March, and April; or
   B.   For a period longer than twenty four (24) consecutive hours; or
   C.   For any period longer than that allowed by appropriate signs, markings
or parking meters giving notice of such parking time limitation. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
11.05.140: PROHIBITED PARKING IN FRONT YARDS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Front Yard Area Defined: “Front yard area” means the open space, on the
same lot with a building used as a dwelling, between the line of the building
and the lot line adjacent to any public street and extending across the full
width or length of the lot.
   B.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle, trailer or boat
in a front yard area on any residential property.
   C.   Exception: This Section shall not prohibit the parking of any vehicle
upon concrete slab, compacted gravel/rock, asphalt, permeable surface which is
approved by the City Engineer in accordance with
13.14.080 C or upon a driveway which leads to legal parking to the rear or side
of the building, which slab or driveway is in compliance with the requirements
of this title, either under existing provisions or as a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.150: CARS DISPLAYED FOR SALE UPON VACANT LOTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor vehicle or trailer to park it or
allow it to be parked on a vacant lot, parking lot or other real property owned
by another person for the purpose of displaying it for sale, unless the owner
or lessee of the property on which it is parked has a City business license to
engage in the business of selling motor vehicles or trailers at that location.
It shall also be unlawful for the owner or lessee of such property to allow
another person to park a motor vehicle or trailer on the property for the
purpose of displaying it for sale unless such owner or lessee has a City
business license to engage in the business of selling motor vehicles or
trailers at that location. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.160: LIABILITY:
The fact that an automobile is illegally parked shall be sufficient to
constitute a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner was in control of
the automobile at the time it was parked. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.05.170: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE:
Whenever any officer of the Local Law Enforcement Agency’s Department or City
finds a vehicle parked or standing upon a street in violation of this title,
the officer is authorized to move the vehicle or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move it to a position not in violation of
this title. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.06
TRAFFIC AND PARKING ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
SECTION:
11.06.010: Rules and Regulations Adopted
11.06.020: Applicable Regulations Enforced
11.06.030: Maximum Speed Limit
11.06.040: Limitation Of Vehicular Traffic
11.06.050: Vehicles Restricted To Roadways
11.06.060: Parking Prohibited Where
11.06.070: Regulations Applicable To Students
11.06.080: Signposting
11.06.090: Enforcement; Liability
11.06.010: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Utah Code Annotated Section 53A-3-504,
city enacts and adopts the rules and regulations provided in this chapter
relating to control of traffic and parking on school grounds. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-
20-2025)
11.06.020: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS ENFORCED:
The applicable state, county, or city traffic and parking regulations shall be
enforced upon school and school district property. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.030: MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT:
Maximum speed on school and district premises is ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord.
2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.040: LIMITATION OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC:
Vehicular traffic is limited to entering, exiting and parking. No cruising or
loitering will be permitted. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.050: VEHICLES RESTRICTED TO ROADWAYS:
All vehicles are restricted to designated roadways. Motorized vehicles will not
be driven on lawns, paths or other prohibited areas. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.060: PARKING PROHIBITED WHERE:
   A.   Designated No Parking Areas: No parking will be allowed in the areas
where the curb is painted red, designated “no parking” or where such parking
would obstruct regular vehicular traffic.
   B.   Reserved Areas: Students, staff and faculty shall not park in areas
designated “for visitors” or “reserved”. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.070: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO STUDENTS:
The following rules and regulations relate to the registration, parking and
control of vehicles by students:
   A.   Regulations Distributed: All district traffic and parking regulations
and individual school regulations (if any) will be distributed to every student
and faculty member at or before the beginning of each school year.
   B.   Registration; Decal: Students must register with the school all motor
vehicles that will be driven or parked on school property. A registration decal
must be displayed on the vehicle as follows:
      1.   Cars; left side of rear window or hanging from the rearview mirror;
      2.   Trucks, rough terrain vehicles (jeeps, etc.); lower right side of
front window;
      3.   Motor bikes and cycles; rear frame or rear fender.
   C.   Operator’s License Required: Prior to vehicle registration at the local
high school and issuance of the decal, the student must possess a valid
operator’s license issued by Utah or some other state.
   D.   Documents Required: Prior to vehicle registration at the local high
school and issuance of the decal, the student must provide the following:
      1.   A parent’s or guardian’s written permission for the student to bring
a motor vehicle to school;
      2.   A signed statement by the parent and student that they understand
that when any car is on school property, the car may be searched if the school
authorities have reasonable cause to suspect that materials that are in
violation of the state, county, city or school code are stored therein and they
further understand that any materials found may be seized and used as evidence
in school disciplinary hearings and/or legal proceedings.
      3.   A valid Utah or other state driver’s license.
   E.   Parking Areas: Students are to park in the designated student parking
areas and within parking spaces as directed by painted lines and signs.
   F.   Prohibited Parking Areas: Faculty and staff parking shall be designated
and students are not to park in these areas. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.080: SIGNPOSTING:
All regulatory signs utilized on district or school property shall be placed in
conspicuous and appropriate areas of the grounds. All regulatory signs must be
approved by the district prior to posting. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.06.090: ENFORCEMENT; LIABILITY:
The rules and regulations provided in this chapter shall be enforced by the
appropriate area law enforcement agencies. Enforcement may include, but shall
not be limited to, the following: citations, towing away at owner’s expense
and/or revocation of the privileges to park and drive on school property. The
board of education assumes no responsibility for damage to cars, lost articles,
damage to property, or injury to persons by the automobile or its driver while
on school district property. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.07
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS
SECTION:
11.07.010: Incorporation Of State Code Provisions Relating To Driving While
Intoxicated
11.07.010: INCORPORATION OF STATE CODE PROVISIONS RELATING TO DRIVING WHILE
INTOXICATED:
Utah Code Annotated Sections 41-6a-501, 502.5, and 504 of the Utah Motor
Vehicle Act, and their successors, are hereby adopted and incorporated by this
reference as violations of city ordinances. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.08
BICYCLES
SECTION:
11.08.010: Adoption By Reference
11.08.010: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The City hereby adopts by reference the provisions of Utah Code Ann. §§41-6a,
Part 11, Bicycles and Other Vehicles, Regulation of Operations. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.09
SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES
SECTION:
11.09.010: Use Prohibited
11.09.010: USE PROHIBITED:
Except in designated areas, no person upon rollerskates, rollerblades, in-line
skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, sled, toy wagon, scooter,
skateboard or similar device, shall go upon any park, plaza or city hall
property, or within the Holladay Village zone as defined in
chapter 13.71 ,
figure 13.71.3  of this code, or its successor, and made a part hereof by
reference, or on any other area where prohibited by signs. Violation of this
section shall be an infraction. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.10
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
11.10.010: Responsibility Of Driver To Exercise Caution
11.10.020: Pedestrian Right Of Way At Crosswalk
11.10.030: Use Of Right Hand Side Of Crosswalks And Sidewalks Required
11.10.040: Yield Of Right Of Way When
11.10.050: Walking On Or Along Roadways
11.10.060: Standing In Roadway Prohibited When
11.10.010: RESPONSIBILITY OF DRIVER TO EXERCISE CAUTION:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any incapacitated person upon a
roadway. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.10.020: PEDESTRIAN RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALK:
   A.   Driver To Yield Right Of Way: When traffic control signals are not in
place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of
way, slowing down or stopping if necessary, to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within the crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the
roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger. Pedestrians shall not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
and walk or run into the path of a vehicle that is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield. This provision shall not apply where the
pedestrian is crossing at a place other than a crosswalk.
   B.   Vehicles Approaching From Rear: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a
marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle on either side.
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.10.030: USE OF RIGHT HAND SIDE OF CROSSWALKS AND SIDEWALKS REQUIRED:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks
and sidewalks. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.10.040: YIELD OF RIGHT OF WAY WHEN:
   A.   No Crosswalk: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection shall do so only if no crosswalk exists within three hundred fifty
feet (350') of the desired point of crossing.
   B.   Yield To Vehicles: When so crossing, the pedestrian shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   C.   Pedestrian Tunnel Or Overhead Crossing: Any pedestrian crossing a
roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing
has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
   D.   Between Adjacent Intersections: Between adjacent intersections at which
traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any
place except in a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.10.050: WALKING ON OR ALONG ROADWAYS:
   A.   When Prohibited: Where sidewalks, walkways or paths are provided, it is
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon any adjacent roadway.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left
side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic that may approach from the
opposite direction. In no event shall more than two (2) persons walk abreast
alongside any city roadway. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.10.060: STANDING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED WHEN:
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment, the parking, watching or guarding of a vehicle, or other business
from the occupant of any vehicle. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.11
ABANDONED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES
SECTION:
11.11.010: Seizure - Circumstances Where Prohibited, Impound Lot Standards
11.11.020: Vehicles Deemed Nuisance
11.11.010: SEIZURE - CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE PROHIBITED, IMPOUND LOT STANDARDS:
The City hereby adopts the provisions of Utah Code Ann. § 41-1a-1101, Seizure -
Circumstances Where Prohibited, Impound Lot Standards. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-
2025)
11.11.020: VEHICLES DEEMED NUISANCE:
   A.   Specified: In addition to vehicles parked in violation of any ordinance
of the city or the laws of the state, the following are declared to be
nuisances:
      1.   Any unattended vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of
any of the provisions of this title;
      2.   Any vehicle found upon the streets or alleys of this city with
faulty or defective equipment;
      3.   Any vehicle left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or at any
subway where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
      4.   Any vehicle upon a street so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic, when the persons in charge of the vehicle are, by
reason of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal;
      5.   Any vehicle left unattended upon a street or alley and parked
illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic;
      6.   Any vehicle left parked in the same place on any street or alley
continuously for twenty four (24) hours;
      7.   Any vehicle wherein the driver has been taken into custody by the
Local Law Enforcement Agency’s department under circumstances so as to leave
such vehicle unattended in a street, alley or restricted parking area;
      8.   Any vehicle being driven on the streets which is not in a proper
condition to be driven; or
      9.   Any vehicle found so parked as to constitute a fire hazard or an
obstruction to firefighting apparatus.
   B.   Abatement: Such nuisances may be summarily abated by removal by, under
the direction of, or at the request of an officer of the Local Law Enforcement
Agency’s department, to a place of storage within the city, by means of towing
or otherwise. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.12
PENALTIES, PARTIES AND PROCEDURES ON ARREST
SECTION:
11.12.010: Parties Guilty Of Criminal Offense
11.12.020: Appearance Upon Arrest For Misdemeanor; Setting Bond
11.12.030: Notice To Appear
11.12.040: Notice To Appear In Court; Contents; Promise To Comply; Signing;
Release From Custody; Official Misconduct
11.12.050: Violation Of Promise To Appear As Misdemeanor; Appearance By Counsel
11.12.060: Willfully Failing To Appear
11.12.010: PARTIES GUILTY OF CRIMINAL OFFENSE:
Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or
abets in the commission of any act declared in this chapter to be unlawful,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other person or as a
principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of the offense; and every person
who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces,
requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this title is
likewise guilty of such offense. Every person who knowingly and willfully gives
false information concerning the identity of anyone who has committed any act
to an officer of the Local Law Enforcement Agency’s department investigating
such act, known by the officer to have been committed and believed by the
officer to have been unlawful shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2025-05,
3-20-2025)
11.12.020: APPEARANCE UPON ARREST FOR MISDEMEANOR; SETTING BOND:
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this title punishable as a
misdemeanor, the arrested person, for the purpose of setting bond, shall in the
following cases, be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate in the
county or city in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed
and who has jurisdiction of such offense and who is nearest or most accessible
with reference to the place where the arrest was made in any of the following
cases:
   A.   Demand Of Immediate Appearance: When a person arrested demands an
immediate appearance before a magistrate; or
   B.   Driving While Intoxicated: When a person is arrested on the charge of
driving while intoxicated as prescribed in
chapter 11.07  of this title; or
   C.   Failure To Stop: When a person is arrested on the charge of failure to
stop in the event of an accident causing death, personal injuries, or damage to
property; or
   D.   Refusal To Promise To Appear: In any other event when the person
arrested refuses to give his written promise to appear in court as hereinafter
provided, or when in the discretion of the arresting officer, a written promise
to appear is insufficient. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.12.030: NOTICE TO APPEAR:
Upon any violation of this title, whenever a person is not immediately taken
before a magistrate as provided in section 11.12.020 of this chapter, the
officer shall prepare a written notice to appear in court which shall be
prepared and delivered in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
Sections 77-7-18, 77-7-20 and 77-7-21. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.12.040: NOTICE TO APPEAR IN COURT; CONTENTS; PROMISE TO COMPLY; SIGNING;
RELEASE FROM CUSTODY; OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT:
Utah Code Annotated Section 41-6-167 of the Utah Motor Vehicle Act 1, and its
successors, is hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference as a city
ordinance. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.12.050: VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR AS MISDEMEANOR; APPEARANCE BY
COUNSEL:
   A.   Violation: Any person willfully violating his promise to appear in
court, given as provided in this title, is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless
of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally cited.
   B.   Appearance By Counsel: A written promise to appear may be complied with
by an appearance by counsel. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.12.060: WILLFULLY FAILING TO APPEAR:
   A.   Misdemeanor Violation: Any person who willfully fails to appear before
a court pursuant to a misdemeanor citation issued consistent to the provisions
of Section 77-7-18, Utah Code Annotated, and any successor sections, or
pursuant to a criminal summons or any other order of a court, is guilty of a
class C misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which the
person was originally cited.
   B.   Appearance By Counsel: A written promise to appear in court may be
complied with by appearance of counsel. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.13
MOTOR VEHICLE IDLING WITHIN CITY LIMITS
SECTION:
11.13.010: Purpose
11.13.020: Definitions
11.13.030: Property Subject To This Chapter; Enforcement
11.13.040: Idling Restriction Within City Limits
11.13.050: Penalties
11.13.060: Appeals
11.13.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is primarily education, as well as to protect the
public health and improve the environment by reducing emissions while
conserving fuel. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.13.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, these definitions shall apply:
DRIVER: Any driver who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
IDLE: The operation of a vehicle engine while the vehicle is stationary or not
in the act of performing work or its normal function.
VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle that is required to be registered and
requires an annual or biannual emissions inspection, and have a license plate
by the Utah department of motor vehicles. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.13.030: PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THIS CHAPTER; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   This chapter shall be enforceable on all public property and on private
property that is open to the general public, unless the private property owner:
      1.   Has a private business that has a drive-through service as a
component of the private property owner’s business operations and posts a sign
provided by or acceptable to the city informing its customers and the public of
the city’s time limit for idling vehicle engines; or
      2.   Adopts an idle reduction education policy approved by the city.
   B.   Law enforcement personnel shall exercise reasonable caution and utilize
customary safety procedures in their enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-
05, 3-20-2025)
11.13.040: IDLING RESTRICTION WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
No driver, while operating a vehicle within city limits, shall cause or permit
a vehicle’s engine to idle for more than two (2) minutes, except for the
following kinds of idling:
   A.   Idling while stopped:
      1.   For an official traffic control device;
      2.   For an official traffic control signal;
      3.   At the direction of a police officer.
   B.   Idling as needed to operate heaters or air conditioners where the
temperature is below thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32° F) or above ninety
degrees Fahrenheit (90° F), as measured at the Salt Lake City Airport and
determined by the national weather service, for the health or safety of a
driver or passenger, including service animals.
   C.   Idling for the minimum amount of time required for the operation of
defrosters or other equipment to clear the windshield and windows to provide
unobstructed views and ensure visibility while driving.
   D.   Idling as needed for emergency vehicles to operate equipment.
   E.   Idling as needed to ascertain that a vehicle is in safe operating
condition and equipped as required by all provisions of law, and that all
equipment is in good working order, either as part of the daily vehicle
inspection, or as otherwise needed.
   F.   Idling as needed for testing, servicing, repairing, installation,
maintenance or diagnostic purposes.
   G.   Idling for the period recommended by the manufacturer to warm up or
cool down a turbocharged heavy duty vehicle.
   H.   Idling as needed to operate auxiliary equipment for which the vehicle
was primarily designed or equipped, other than transporting goods, such as:
operating a transportation refrigeration unit (TRU), lift, crane, pump, drill,
hoist, ready mixed equipment, except a heater or air conditioner.
   I.   Idling as needed to operate a lift or other piece of equipment designed
to ensure safe loading and unloading of goods or people.
   J.   Idling to recharge a battery or other energy storage unit of a hybrid
electric vehicle.
   K.   Idling as needed for vehicles that house K-9 or other service animals.
   L.   Idling by on duty police officers as necessary for the performance of
their official duties. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.13.050: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation: Violation of section
11.13.040  of this chapter is a civil offense and shall be penalized as
follows:
      1.   First three (3) offenses: A warning, but no fine.
      2.   Fourth offense within twelve (12) months of the first three (3)
offenses: A civil fine of one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00).
      3.   Subsequent offenses within twenty four (24) months of the first
offense: A civil fine of two hundred ten dollars ($210.00).
   B.   Reduction Of Penalties: The civil penalties specified in subsection A
of this section shall be subject to the following:
      1.   Paid Within Ten Days: Any penalty that is paid within ten (10) days
from the date of receipt of notice shall be reduced by the sum of one hundred
ten dollars ($110.00);
      2.   Paid Within Twenty Days: Any penalty that is paid within twenty (20)
days from the date of receipt of notice shall be reduced by the sum of seventy
dollars ($70.00);
      3.   Paid Within Thirty Days: Any penalty that is paid within thirty (30)
days from the date of receipt of notice shall be reduced by the sum of forty
dollars ($40.00);
      4.   Receipt Of Notice: As used in this section, “receipt of notice”
means the affixing of a notice to the vehicle alleged to have been employed in
a violation of this chapter, or by delivery of such notice to the owner or
driver thereof.
      5.   Other Fees And Assessments: A forty five dollar ($45.00)
administrative fee shall be assessed for the city’s cost of collecting past due
debts.
   C.   Strict Liability Of Owner: Whenever any vehicle shall have been
employed in a violation of this chapter, the person in whose name such vehicle
is registered shall be strictly liable for such violation and the penalty
therefor. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
11.13.060: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Procedures: A violation of this chapter may be appealed as
follows:
      1.   The city manager shall appoint such hearing officers as he or she
deems appropriate to consider matters relating to the unauthorized use of
streets.
      2.   Any person having received notice of such unauthorized use, or the
owner of any vehicle employed in such use, may file a notice of appeal within
fifteen (15) days of the violation with the city recorder.
      3.   The city recorder shall deliver the notice of appeal to the hearing
officer within two (2) days.
      4.   The person charged with an offense under this chapter shall present
and contest such alleged unauthorized use to the hearing officer.
      5.   The burden to prove any defense shall be upon the person raising
such defense.
      6.   The hearing officer may find that no unauthorized use occurred and
dismiss the ticket.
      7.   If the hearing officer finds that an unauthorized use occurred but
one or more of the defenses set forth in this section is applicable, the
hearing officer may dismiss the notice of unauthorized use and release the
owner or driver from liability thereunder. Such defenses are:
         a.   At the time of the receipt of the notice, possession of the
subject vehicle had been acquired in violation of the criminal laws of the
state;
         b.   If the notice of unauthorized use alleges a violation of any
ordinance pertaining to a parking meter, such meter was mechanically
malfunctioning to the extent that its reliability is questionable;
         c.   Compliance with the subject ordinances would have presented an
imminent and irreparable injury to persons or property;
         d.   If the hearing officer finds that the owner of the vehicle is
deceased but was living when the ticket was issued;
         e.   If the hearing officer finds that the vehicle was sold with the
original license plates on, and the ticket was received prior to the sale,
provided the sale is reported to the DMV and the bill of sale is provided
within twenty (20) days of receipt of the parking notice.
      8.   If the hearing officer finds that an unauthorized use occurred but
one or more of the defenses set forth in this section is applicable, the
hearing officer may reduce the penalty associated therewith, but in no event
shall such penalty be reduced below the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). Such
defenses are:
         a.   At the time of receipt of the notice, possession of the subject
vehicle had been acquired pursuant to the written lease agreement or similar
written agreement;
         b.   The subject vehicle was mechanically incapable of being moved
from such location; provided, however, such defense shall not apply to any
vehicle which remains at such location in excess of six (6) hours;
         c.   Any markings, signs or other indicia of parking use regulation
were not clearly visible or comprehensible;
         d.   At the time of receipt of notice for expired registration, the
vehicle was registered but the sticker not displayed, or if the vehicle is
registered within five (5) days of the expiration date;
         e.   At the time of the notice of violation a residential parking
permit was valid but not properly displayed;
         f.   Such other mitigating circumstances as the hearing officer may
find, with the written approval of the court’s traffic manager, which must
include the basis for the decision. A report on such decisions is to be
provided to the City Manager and city council on a quarterly basis.
      9.   If the hearing officer finds that an unauthorized use occurred and
no applicable defense exists, the hearing officer may, in the interest of
justice and on behalf of the city, enter into an agreement for the timely or
periodic payment of the applicable penalty.
      10.   If the penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter remains unsatisfied
after forty (40) days from the receipt of notice, or ten (10) days from such
date as may have been agreed to by the hearing officer, the city may use such
lawful means as are available to collect such penalty, including costs and
attorney fees. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.14
DEFERENCE TO STATE CODE
SECTION:
11.14.010: Statutes Incorporated By Reference
11.14.010: STATUTES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
For purposes of this title and to the extent applicable, the following statutes
are hereby adopted by reference. All violations adopted herein shall be
infractions unless otherwise noted:
Utah Code Annotated Section Description
Utah Code Annotated Section    Description
10-8-1                         General Powers
41-1a-201                      Vehicle registration requirement
41-6a-210                      Failure to Stop for an officer
41-6a-216                      Removal of plants or other obstructions
                               impairing view; notice to owner
41-6a-304                      Obeying Traffic control devices; improper
                               signage
41-6a-309                      Unauthorized traffic control devices
41-6a-311                      Traffic Signs; Removing or otherwise damaging
41-6a-524                      Reckless Driving
                               Speed regulations - safe and appropriate speeds
41-6a-601                      at certain locations - prima facie speed limits
                               - emergency power of the governor
41-6a-704                      Overtaking and passing vehicles proceeding in
                               same direction
41-6a-705                      Passing upon right - when permissible
41-6a-707                      Limitations on driving on left side of road;
                               Limitation on passing - prohibitions
41-6a-708                      Signs and markings on roadway - no passing zones
                               - exceptions
41-6a-710                      Roadway divided into marked lanes - Provisions -
                               Traffic Control
41-6a-711                      Following another vehicle; Safe Distance -
                               Exceptions - Penalty
41-6a-801                      Turning - manner - traffic control devices
41-6a-802                      Turning around - where prohibited - visibility
                               Turning or changing lanes - safety - signals -
41-6a-804                      stopping or sudden decrease in speed - signal
                               flashing - where prohibited
41-6a-901                      Right of way between vehicles - unregulated
                               intersection
                               Right of way - stop or yield signals - yield -
41-6a-902                      collisions at intersections or junctions of
                               roadways - evidence
41-6a-903                      Vehicle turning left - yield right of way
41-6a-903.1                    Merging lanes - yielding
41-6a-904                      Emergency Vehicles; Vehicle Yield; Stationary
                               Emergency Vehicles
41-6a-907                      Failure to stop a vehicle prior to emerging
41-6a-1003                     Pedestrians yielding right of way - limits on
                               pedestrians
41-6a-1004                     Emergency Vehicles; Pedestrian Yield
41-6a-1201                     Driving on tracks
41-6a-1202                     Driving through safety zone
41-6a-1401                     Standing or parking vehicles - Restrictions and
                               exceptions
41-6a-1501                     Proper riding of motorcycles
41-6a-1502                     Motorcycles, motor driven cycles, or all terrain
                               type I vehicles - operation on public highways
41-6a-1503                     Motorcycle or motor driven cycle - attaching to
                               another vehicle prohibited
41-6a-1504                     Motorcycle or motor driven cycle - footrests for
                               passenger - height of handlebars limited
41-6a-1511                     Mini motorocycles
41-6a Part 16, in its entirety Vehicle Equipment
41-6a-1701                     Backing - when permissible
41-6a-1702                     Sidewalk - driving prohibited - exception
41-6a-1703                     Prohibition as to passenger riding on improper
                               portion of motor vehicle - exceptions
41-6a-1704                     Vehicle door - prohibited opening
41-6a-1705                     Obstruction to driver s view or driving
                               mechanism
41-6a-1706                     Occupancy of a trailer or semitrailer while
                               being moved on highway prohibited
41-6a-1707                     Entering intersection, crosswalk or railroad
                               grade - sufficient space required
41-6a-1710                     Following or parking near fire apparatus
                               prohibited
41-6a-1712                     Destructive or injurious materials on roadways
41-6a-1715                     Careless Driving
                               Operation of vehicle by persons under 16
41-8-1                         prohibited - exceptions for off highway vehicles
                               and off highway implements of husbandry
                               Registration of vehicles - application -
41-22-3                        issuance of stickers and card - proof of
                               property tax payment - records
41-22-10.6                     Requiring compliance with traffic laws
41-22-10.7                     Vehicle equipment requirements
                               Restrictions on use of privately owned lands
41-22-12.5                     without permission - unlawful for person to
                               tamper with signs or fencing on privately owned
                               land
41-22-13                       Prohibited uses
53-3-202                       Driver s License Requirement
76-9-108                       Funeral Processions: Disruption; requirements of
                               participating vehicles
72-7-105                       Driving on/across sidewalks
72-7-301                       Traffic Signs; Liability for damages
72-7-302                       Traffic Signs; Removing or otherwise damaging
72-7-409                       Loads on vehicles; limitations; fastening
76-8-420                       Traffic Signs; Removing or otherwise damaging
 
(Ord. 2025-05, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11.15
FINES NOT SET BY UNIFORM BAIL SCHEDULE
SECTION:
11.15.010: Fines Not Set By Uniform Bail Schedule
11.15.010: FINES NOT SET BY UNIFORM BAIL SCHEDULE:
For any parking violation not currently set by the uniform bail schedule, the
suggested fine is $25. For any moving violation not currently set by the
uniform bail schedule, the suggested fine is $160. This section does not
prohibit the court from in its discretion imposing no fine, or a fine in any
amount up to and including the maximum fine, for the offense. (Ord. 2025-05, 3-
20-2025)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISIONS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13,
  chapter 13.10 of this code.
TITLE 13
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 13.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
13.01.010: Citation
13.01.020: Authority
13.01.030: Purpose
13.01.040: Organization Of Title
13.01.050: Licenses And Permits To Conform
13.01.060: Certificate Of Occupancy
13.01.070: Omission Not A Waiver
13.01.080: Resolution Of Conflicts
13.01.090: Time Computation
13.01.100: Improvement Completion Assurance, (Guarantee)
13.01.110: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
13.01.120: Transition Rules
13.01.010: CITATION:
This title shall be known as the LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS OF THE
CITY OF HOLLADAY, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded. This title shall also
be known as title 13, city of Holladay code of ordinances. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.01.020: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to the Utah municipal land use, development, and
management act, as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-102(2) et
seq., as amended; the general welfare power delegated municipalities as set
forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-84, as amended, and the police power
authority of local government established by Utah common law. This title
constitutes the land use and subdivision ordinance authorized by the Utah
municipal land use, development, and management act. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.030: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this title are to provide for the health, safety, and welfare,
and promote the prosperity, peace and good order, comfort, convenience, and
aesthetics of the city and its present and future inhabitants and businesses,
to protect the tax base, to secure economy in governmental expenditures, to
foster the city's agricultural and other industries, to protect both urban and
nonurban development, to provide fundamental fairness in land use regulation,
and to protect property values. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.040: ORGANIZATION OF TITLE:
   A.   Composition: This title is composed of regulations and standards for
general provisions, administration and enforcement, zones, regulations of
general applicability, and regulations for specific uses for land use and
development within the city of Holladay.
      1.   General Provisions: General provisions establish how this title is
applied; how planning documents such as the general plan relate to this title;
and provide rules and definitions applicable to the entire title.
      2.   Administration And Enforcement: Administration and enforcement
provisions describe the powers and duties of decision making bodies and
officials, procedures for considering land use applications, and standards for
dealing with nonconforming circumstances. Enforcement provisions set forth
procedures used to correct violations of this title.
      3.   Zones: This title establishes two (2) types of zones: base zones,
and overlay zones.
         a.   Base zones include residential, commercial, and public zones.
Base zone provisions establish regulations and development standards that
govern land uses allowed in each base zone.
         b.   Overlay zone provisions establish regulations that address land
use matters in geographic areas which overlay one or more base zones. Overlay
zone regulations apply in addition to base zone regulations.
      4.   Regulations Of General Applicability: Regulations of general
applicability govern land use matters, such as parking, signs and tree
protection that apply in all zones.
      5.   Regulations For Specific Uses: Specific uses subject to additional
regulations are set forth in this title.
   B.   Appendices: The following tables are appended to and are considered
part of this title.
      1.   Appendix A, Allowed Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed by
zone are set forth in appendix A of this title.
      2.   Appendix B, Land Use And Appeal Authorities: The land use and appeal
authorities as set forth within this title are listed for reference in appendix
B of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.050: LICENSES AND PERMITS TO CONFORM:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this title, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements necessary to promote public health, safety, convenience, order,
prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. Each
department, official, and employee of the city vested with the duty or
authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this
title and shall issue no permit or license for a use, building, or purpose
where the same would conflict with the provisions of this title. Any permit or
license issued in violation of this title shall be null and void.
   B.   Building And Use Permits Required: Construction, alteration, repair or
removal of any building or structure, or any part thereof, as provided or as
restricted in this title, shall not be commenced or proceeded with except after
the issuance of a written permit for the same by the building inspector. The
use of the land shall not be commenced or proceeded with except upon the
issuance of a written permit for the same by the community development
director. No use permit shall be required for land used for agricultural
purposes, as defined in this title.
   C.   Compliance Prerequisite To Permit Issuance: After the effective date
hereof, no building permit may be issued without first having been approved by
the community development director. The community development director shall
not approve a building permit if any building, structure or use of land would
be in violation of any of the provisions of this title, nor shall any other
city officer grant any permit or license nor the use of any building or land if
use would be in violation of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.060: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required:
      1.   No lot, parcel, or building shall be used or occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to applicable provisions of
building codes and regulations adopted by the city.
      2.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the building and
the lot or parcel on which the building is located conform to applicable
provisions of this title and other building codes and regulations adopted by
the city.
   B.   Unlawful To Use Or Occupy: It is unlawful to use or occupy, or to
permit the use or occupancy of any building or structure, unless a certificate
of occupancy has been issued for such building or structure. Failure to obtain
a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this title.
   C.   Nuisance: The use or occupancy of any building, structure, or premises
for which a certificate of occupancy has not been issued is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and may be abated as such; it shall also be a public
nuisance for any building, structure, or premises to be used or occupied in a
manner different than authorized by a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.01.070: OMISSION NOT A WAIVER:
The omission to specify or enumerate in this title those provisions of general
law applicable to all cities shall not be construed as a waiver of the benefits
of any such provisions. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.080: RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS:
This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, other ordinances, or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such
provisions which are less restrictive. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.090: TIME COMPUTATION:
   A.   Time Periods Computed: In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by this title, the day of the act, event or decision after which the
designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of
the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day,
which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday. When the period of time
prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
   B.   Date Of Decision: The date of a decision or recommendation of a land
use authority shall be the date of the public meeting or hearing where such
decision or recommendation is made. If the decision is made by the community
development director, the date of the decision shall be the date specified on
the property owner's notification letter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.100: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE, (GUARANTEE):
   A.    Purpose of this section:
      1.   To ensure that all required improvements of development are
completed pursuant to the land use and development regulations adopted by City
of Holladay and are subject to warranty;
      2.   To set forth the requirements for improvement competition agreements
and financial warranty assurance including, for construction improvements
after, or prior to, recording a plat or obtaining a building permit; and
      3.   To comply with the provisions of the Utah Municipal Land Use,
Development, and Management Act by, among other things, setting forth forms of
acceptable improvement completion assurance and a method of partial release.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and phrases, when used in this
Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
                                  A document prepared by the City Engineer
                                  that shows a list of Improvements for which
                                  financial assurance is required, the
                                  quantity, unit type, unit cost, and extended
                                  cost of each item, as well as a total dollar
                                  amount for all the items listed on the
                                  Calculation. The unit prices are intended to
CITY ENGINEER’S CALCULATION     be the cost of construction and to include
(“CALCULATION”):              the cost of materials, overhead,
                                  mobilization, traffic control, special
                                  inspections, testing, audits by third
                                  parties, reasonable contingencies and all
                                  other expenditures needed for the completion
                                  of the Improvements listed on the
                                  Calculation. The Calculation determines the
                                  dollar amount of the improvement completion
                                  assurance.
                                  The estimated cost of completing the
COST OF CONSTRUCTION:             Improvements plus reasonable contingency, as
                                  determined by the City Engineer.
                                  Permanent public infrastructure, items,
                                  structures, facilities, systems, or
                                  landscaping required as a condition to
IMPROVEMENT:                      recording a subdivision plat, obtaining a
                                  building permit, or developing a commercial,
                                  office, industrial, mixed use, or
                                  multifamily-residential Development.
                                  A cash bond, escrow bond, or letter of
                                  credit required by City to guarantee the
                                  proper completion of public Improvements
IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE  required as a condition precedent to: (a)
(“GUARANTEE”):                recording a subdivision plat; or (b)
                                  development of a commercial, office,
                                  industrial, mixed use, or multifamily
                                  project.
 
   C.   Applicability: The provisions of this Section shall apply to all
development requiring improvements. As a condition precedent to recording a
plat, obtaining a building permit, or commencing development, the following are
required:
      1.   An improvement agreement is to be executed for all required
improvements.
      2.   A guarantee for all improvements that have not been inspected and
accepted by the City, and that are:
         a.   Publicly owned and maintained;
         b.   Public landscaping improvements;
         c.   Essential or required to meet the building code or fire code;
         d.   Required to meet natural hazard mitigation and stormwater
management requirements;
         e.   Required to meet street standards and access requirements; or
         f.   Essential to public safety requirements adopted in a land use
regulation, as determined by the City Engineer or Director.
   D.   Improvement Agreement and Guarantee: Prior to recording a plat or
commencing any development, the developer shall provide to the City an
improvement agreement and a guarantee in accordance with the following
requirements.
      1.   Developer Responsibility. The developer is responsible for compliant
completion and warranty of all improvements. Developer shall timely complete
the improvements and guarantee the improvements be free of defects in materials
and workmanship in accordance with this Title, the improvement agreement, and
all other applicable approvals, regulations, standards, and specifications.
      2.   Forms, Duration, Terms. The developer shall execute an improvement
agreement and guarantee using forms that are acceptable to the City. The
guarantee shall run to the benefit of the City and shall remain in effect until
the City approves a partial release. The improvement agreement and guarantee
shall contain language that promises and ensures compliant completion and
warranty of the improvements by the developer. The guarantee shall contain a
provision for unconditional payment of the face amount of the guarantee within
ten business days from the date the City makes a written declaration of
developer’s failure to perform pursuant to this Section.
      3.   Improvement Assurance Warranty Period; Improvement Warranty
Guarantee.
         a.   Developer shall provide an unconditional warranty that
improvements comply with the City’s standards for design, materials, and
workmanship and will be free of defects in materials and workmanship for 12
months following the date when the improvements are inspected and approved by
the City Engineer, unless the City Engineer determines, for good cause, that a
12- month period would be inadequate to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare; or has substantial evidence, on record of prior poor performance by
the developer; or has substantial evidence that the area upon which the
improvements will be constructed contains suspect soil and the City has not
otherwise required the applicant to mitigate the suspect soil. Improvements
listed on the same calculation shall have the same improvement warranty period.
         b.   Financial assurance shall be required for the duration of the
improvement warranty period, in the amount set forth in this Section, to secure
performance of replacement and repairs of improvements in accordance with
developer’s unconditional warranty.
      4.   Amount of the Guarantee and Improvement Warranty Guarantee.
         a.   The amount of the guarantee shall be determined by the City
Engineer. The amount of the guarantee shall be 100 percent of the cost of
construction plus ten percent (10%) of that amount to cover administrative
costs incurred by the City to complete the improvements, if necessary.
         b.    During the improvement warranty period the amount of the
improvement assurance warrantee guarantee shall be either (a) ten percent (10%)
of the amount shown on the calculation or (b) ten percent (10%) of the
developer’s reasonable proven cost of completed improvements, whichever is
less, except the guarantee for the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
requirements shall not be reduced and shall remain at 100 percent.
      5.   Developer Shall Complete Improvements in a Timely Manner. All
improvements shall be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer within
one year from the date the guarantee is posted with the City, unless the
developer requests an extension in writing, and the extension is approved by
the Director and City Engineer for good cause. The developer shall execute an
improvement agreement promising completion within the required time, and the
improvement agreement shall be amended accordingly.
      6.   Sequence for Completion of Improvements. To protect the health,
safety and welfare of the City and its residents from traffic, flood, drainage
or other hazards, the City Engineer may require that the improvements be
completed or repaired in a specified sequence and/or within a specified period
of time, which may be less than one year. The City Engineer will notify the
developer in writing of that requirement if the City Engineer deems such action
necessary.
      7.   Failure to Complete Improvements in a Timely Manner. If the
developer fails to satisfactorily complete the improvements within one year
from the date when the guarantee is posted, or within the shorter time period
specified by the City Engineer in order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the City and its residents from traffic, flood, drainage or other
hazards, or as extended by the City Engineer pursuant to this Section, the City
may, in its sole discretion, pursue all lawful remedies, including without
limitation, declaring the developer in default of the improvement agreement,
declaring the guarantee forfeited by the developer, and demanding payment
pursuant to the terms of the guarantee. The City may spend the funds to pay for
construction, replacement, or repair of incomplete or defective improvements,
as well as the City’s administrative overhead and any other associated costs
incurred by the City. The City may take any other action it deems appropriate
to enforce the improvement agreement, collect on the guarantee, recover amounts
not covered by the guarantee and any other civil or criminal remedies allowable
by law, which may include liens.
      8.   Initiating Inspections. The developer on record shall request
inspections when installed improvements are complete, at the end of an
improvement warranty period, and/or after correcting deficiencies noted in a
prior inspection. The request shall contain a statement affirming that all
improvements are complete and/or all deficiencies have been corrected.
Inspections will be scheduled by the City Engineer upon receiving the
developer’s written request. The City Engineer may schedule an inspection,
without a written request from the developer, upon determination that the time
for completion of an improvement warranty period has expired.
      9.   Developer Shall Correct Deficiencies in a Timely Manner. The
developer shall correct any deficiencies noted by City inspectors within 30
days from the time the inspector notifies the developer. Extensions may be
authorized by the City Engineer for good cause beyond the developer’s control
after receipt of a written request and explanation from the developer.
      10.   Partial Release of Guarantee. Upon completion of the improvements
listed on an individual calculation, and inspection and approval of those
improvements by the City Engineer, the City may release up to 90 percent (90%)
of the portion of the calculated guarantee amount.
      11.   Final Release of Guarantee. Upon completion of the improvements
warranty period for the improvements listed on an individual calculation, and
the subsequent inspection and approval of those improvements by the City
Engineer, the City will release all remaining portions of the guarantee amount
shown on that calculation.
      12.   Acceptable Types of Guarantees. Guarantees shall be approved by the
City and may be either:
         a.   An irrevocable letter of credit, containing information required
by the City, from a bank or credit union chartered under the laws of the State
of Utah or the United States of America, licensed and regulated by the
Department of Financial Institutions of the State of Utah or its successor,
insured by the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation or National Credit
Union Share Insurance Fund, and having an office in the State of Utah. The
letter of credit shall be signed by the guarantor, with the signature notarized
and attested and shall be automatically extended upon expiration, unless
released by a letter issued by the City Engineer;
         b.   An escrow bond, submitted on forms provided by the City, having
as a guarantor an organization licensed and regulated by the Department of
Financial Institutions of the State of Utah, or its successor, having an office
in the State of Utah, and which is insured by the Federal Depository Insurance
Corporation or National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. Escrow bonds shall
consist of a letter of commitment, signed by both the guarantor and the
developer, with the signatures notarized and attested; or,
         c.   A cash bond, submitted on forms provided by the City and signed
by the developer, with the signature notarized and attested.
      13.   Developer’s Certification of Notification to Subcontractors. The
developer may be required to sign a statement that certifies that the developer
has or will notify all contractors and subcontractors that the City will not
release any portion of the guarantee until all improvements on a calculation
are completed and the work has been inspected and accepted by the City
Engineer, at which time the City will release no more than the portions allowed
under this Section.
   E.   Construction of Improvements Prior to Plat Recordation or Issuance of
Building Permit. If the developer desires to complete the improvements prior to
recording a subdivision plat or prior to receiving a building permit, the
developer may post an alternative guarantee in accordance with the following
requirements.
      1.   The alternative guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the
City Engineer to remove incomplete improvements and restore disturbed property,
including, without limitation, a base rate of $10,000 per disturbed acre
(rounded up to the full acre), and $10,000 per stormwater main line connection.
      2.   After posting the alternative guarantee, the developer may complete
all improvements, except that no plat will be recorded, and no building permit
will be issued by the City.
      3.   When the improvements have been completed, inspected and approved by
the City Engineer, the developer shall provide the improvement warranty
guarantee as set forth in D.4.b. Upon the developer posting the improvement
warranty guarantee, the City will release the subdivision plat to be recorded,
or the City will issue the building permit, provided all other City
requirements have been satisfied.
   F.   Fee In Lieu Of Required Improvements:
      1.   Where present conditions exist which make it unfeasible or
impractical to install any required public improvements, the city may require
the subdivider to pay to the city a fee equal to the estimated cost of such
improvements as determined by the director of community development. Upon
payment of the fee by the developer, the city shall assume the responsibility
for future installation of such improvements.
      2.   The City Manager or designee shall establish a special account for
such fees and shall credit to such account a proportioned share of interest
earned from investment of city monies. Records relating to identification of
properties for which fees have been collected, fee amounts collected for such
properties and money transfer requests shall be the responsibility of the
community development department.
   G.   Waiver For Political Subdivisions: When the developer is a school
district, municipality, service area, special purpose district or other
political subdivision of the state, the city may waive the bond and accept a
letter from the governing body guaranteeing installation of the improvements.
Before approving any such waiver, the city shall receive a recommendation from
the Community and Economic Development Director. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd.
Ord. 2021-08, 4-8-2021; Ord. 2023-10, 9-7-2023)
13.01.110: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
All prior ordinances of the city covering the zoning of districts in the city,
in their entirety and including the maps theretofore adopted and made a part of
such ordinances, are hereby superseded. This title shall be deemed a
continuation of previous ordinances, and maps and not a new enactment insofar
as the substance of revisions of previous ordinances is included in this title.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.01.120: TRANSITION RULES:
Nothing in this title shall require a change in any plans, construction, or
designated use of any building or structure if a complete application for the
same was submitted prior to the effective date hereof, unless such application,
or a permit issued thereunder, expires. If an application or permit expires,
any new permit shall conform to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.02
PLANNING DOCUMENTS
SECTION:
13.02.010: Purpose
13.02.020: General Plan
13.02.030: Roadway Classification Map
13.02.040: Standard Details For Public Works Construction
13.02.050: Capital Facilities And Impact Fee Ordinance
13.02.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify planning documents which provide the
policy foundation for this title and to set forth the basis for preparing and
adopting such planning documents. Such documents shall be filed with the city
recorder and in the community development department. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.02.020: GENERAL PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: In order to accomplish the purposes set forth in this title
and to comply with provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-401 et seq.,
regarding general plans, the city has prepared and adopted a long range general
plan for present and future needs of the city and for growth and development of
land within the city. Such plan shall be known and referred to as the Holladay
general plan. The city may amend the general plan as may be necessary and
appropriate. The general plan may provide for:
      1.   Health, general welfare, safety, energy conservation,
transportation, prosperity, civic activities, aesthetics, and recreational,
educational, and cultural opportunities;
      2.   Reduction of the waste of physical, financial, or human resources
that result from either excessive congestion or excessive scattering of
population;
      3.   Efficient and economical use, conservation, and production of the
supply of food and water, and drainage, sanitary, and other facilities and
resources;
      4.   Use of energy conservation and solar and renewable energy resources;
      5.   Protection of the urban development;
      6.   Protection and promotion of moderate income housing;
      7.   Protection and promotion of air quality;
      8.   Historic preservation;
      9.   Identifying future uses of land that are likely to require an
expansion or significant modification of services or facilities provided by
each affected entity; and
      10.   An official map, as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 72-5-
401 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Scope: The general plan shall show the city's recommendations for
development of the territory covered by the plan, and may consist of text,
maps, charts, and descriptive and explanatory matter. The city council shall
determine the extent, and format of the general plan and may include areas
located outside city boundaries.
      1.   The general plan shall include:
         a.   A plan for moderate income housing as required by Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-403, as amended;
         b.   A land use element that:
            (1)   Designates the proposed general distribution and location and
extent of uses of land for housing, business, industry, agriculture,
recreation, education, public buildings and grounds, open space, and other
categories of public and private uses of land as appropriate; and
            (2)   Includes a statement of the projections for and standards of
population density and building intensity recommended for the various land use
categories covered by the plan;
         c.   A transportation and circulation element consisting of the
general location and extent of existing and proposed freeways, arterial and
collector streets, mass transit, and any other modes of transportation that are
appropriate, all correlated with the land use element of the plan;
      2.   The general plan may include, among other things:
         a.   An environmental element that addresses:
            (1)   The protection, conservation, development, and use of natural
resources, including the quality of air, forests, soils, rivers and other
waters, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources; and
            (2)   The reclamation of land, flood control, prevention and
control of the pollution of streams and other waters, regulation of the use of
land on hillsides, stream channels and other environmentally sensitive areas,
the prevention, control, and correction to the erosion of soils, protection of
watersheds and wetlands, and the mapping of known geologic hazards;
         b.   A public services and facilities element showing general plans
for sewage, waste disposal, drainage, local utilities, rights of way,
easements, and facilities for them, police and fire protection, and other
public services;
         c.   A rehabilitation, redevelopment, and conservation element
consisting of plans and programs for:
            (1)   Historic preservation;
            (2)   Elimination of blight; and
            (3)   Redevelopment, including housing sites, business and
industrial sites, and public building sites;
         d.   An economic element composed of appropriate studies and an
economic development plan that may include review of municipal revenue and
expenditures, revenue sources, identification of base industry, primary and
secondary market areas, employment, and retail sales activity;
         e.   A parks, trails, and open space element that establishes a
comprehensive plan for the development of parks and trails, and preservation of
open space;
         f.   Recommendations for implementing the general plan, including the
use of land use regulations, capital improvement plans, and other appropriate
actions; and
         g.   Any other elements the city considers appropriate.
   C.   Legal Status: The general plan shall be considered an advisory guide
for growth and development of the land except as specifically provided
otherwise in this title or as required by law.
   D.   Amendment: The general plan may be amended as provided in section
13.07.020 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.02.030: ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION MAP:
   A.   Adoption: The city of Holladay roadway classification map, appendix A
of the general plan, shows existing and proposed rights of way,
classifications, and is adopted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 72-5-
401, "official map" et seq., as amended.
   B.   Amendment: The roadway classification map may be amended in accordance
with the general plan amendment procedures set forth in section
13.07.020 of this title.
   C.   Effect Of Map:
      1.   The adopted roadway classification map does not:
         a.   Require a landowner to dedicate and construct a street as a
condition of development approval, except under circumstances set forth in
subsection C2 of this section; or
         b.   Require the city to immediately acquire property it has
designated for eventual use as a public street.
      2.   This subsection shall not prohibit the city from:
         a.   Requiring a landowner to take into account proposed streets in
planning a development proposal;
         b.   Acquiring property through purchase, gift, voluntary dedication,
or eminent domain; or
         c.   Requiring the dedication and improvement of a street if the
street is found necessary by the city because of a proposed development.
      3.   The roadway classification map of the city shall not be used to
unconstitutionally prohibit the development of property designated for eventual
use as a public street.
      4.   The adopted roadway classification map shall be available for public
inspection upon request. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.02.040: STANDARD DETAILS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Purpose: In order to ensure the construction of infrastructure
throughout the city which complies with best practices, the city has compiled a
set of details for all public works installations. This document shall be known
as the "City Of Holladay Standard Details For Public Works Construction" and
shall apply to all work in the public right of way and on any publicly held
easement and includes utilities, trench backfills, roadway and street
excavations, filling and surface improvements.
   B.   Scope: This document contains diagrams and descriptive and explanatory
matter which shall be applied to all public works construction within the city.
   C.   Amendment: From time to time this document may be modified based on new
information and may be amended by resolution of the city council with a
recommendation from the technical review committee and the Holladay City
engineer. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.02.050: CAPITAL FACILITIES AND IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE:
   A.   Adoption: In order to defray the costs for capital facilities
improvements required by new development, the city has adopted a capital
facilities and impact fee ordinance.
   B.   Scope: The capital facilities and impact fee ordinance establishes the
city's impact fee policies and procedures and establishes fees for public
safety, stormwater facilities, and parks and recreation within the city. The
ordinance describes certain capital improvement to be funded by impact fees,
provides a schedule of impact fees for differing types of land use development.
   C.   Amendment: The capital facilities and impact fee ordinance may be
amended as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 11-36a-101 et seq., as
amended. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.03
SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13.03.010: Purpose
13.03.020: General Submission Requirements
13.03.030: Specific Submission Requirements For Administrative Review
13.03.040: Submissions Requirements For All Other Land Use Applications
13.03.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for submission of all
land use and development applications to assure that applications will be
processed on a uniform basis. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.03.020: GENERAL SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application: A submission for consideration by a Land Use Authority
shall include:
      1.   A completed development review application form;
      2.   A filing fee as established by the City's fee schedule;
      3.   Proof of ownership or legal control of the land by the applicant;
      4.   Any other information the Community Development Director determines
necessary for full and proper consideration and disposition of a particular
application.
   B.   Proof Of A Neighborhood Meeting:
      1.   All of the following land use applications require proof of a
neighborhood meeting:
         a.   Developments in a Residential Zone:
            (1)   Rezones,
            (2)   Subdivisions, and
            (3)   Planned unit developments.
         b.   Nonresidential developments abutting a residential development or
Residential Zone boundary:
            (1)   Rezones,
            (2)   Nonresidential subdivisions,
            (3)   Permitted or conditional use site plans, and
            (4)   Planned unit developments.
      2.   The applicant shall send a written notice stating the place, date
and time of the neighborhood meeting to all residential property owners, as
identified in the Salt Lake County Recorder's records, whose property is within
five hundred feet (500') of the subject property line.
      3.   The applicant shall notify these owners at least one week prior to
the neighborhood meeting.
      4.   The neighborhood meeting shall be conducted at a location within the
City of Holladay.
      5.   Phone calls or informal door to door contacts shall not be
considered to constitute a neighborhood meeting.
      6.   The record of a neighborhood meeting shall include:
         a.   A list of all individuals who were notified;
         b.   A roster of attendees; and
         c.   A copy of the minutes. (Ord. 2016-13, 5-26-2016)
13.03.030: SPECIFIC SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
In addition to the requirements of section 13.03.020 of this chapter, the
submission requirements of a proposed land use, development or other matter
which is subject to review as per chapter 13.08 of this title shall be as
follows:
   A.   Subdivisions: Submission requirements for subdivisions shall be as
required by section
13.10A.050 of this title.
   B.   Site Development/Redevelopment Plans:
      1.   Preliminary (Technical) Review: The following items shall be
submitted to the Community and Economic Development Department for review by
the TRC prior to approval by the designated Land Use Authority as per
chapter 13.101 Appendix B of this title. Items may be waived by the Community
Development Director as not applicable:
         a.   Electronic submittal of a complete application made available
with the community and economic development department, a proposed site plan
composed of a scaled drawing of and information pertaining to the proposed
development site. A site plan shall include the following:
         (1)   North arrow and scale band at no less than 1 to 40 feet.
         (2)   In a Title Block located in the right margin;
            (A)   Address and Name of development.
            (B)   Name, phone number and business address of applicant/
developer and project designer.
            (C)   Name, phone number and business address of property owner.
            (D)   Date of preparation.
         (3)   Utility service connection letters from each utility company
serving the project stating the company has reviewed the plan, its comments
concerning the extent of service availability, and acceptance of the proposed
location of all utility easements. A copy of the approved plan, initialed and
stamped by the utility company shall be submitted with the letter.
         (4)   A vicinity map containing sufficient information to accurately
locate the property shown on the plan.
         (5)   Lot coverage tabulation table in the following format:
 
                                   Square Feet % Of Total
Total parcel area                   -           -
Total building area                 -           -
Total impervious area               -           -
Total landscaped area               -           -
Total existing tree canopy coverage -           -
 
         (6)   For residential uses, show the number of dwelling units and the
overall units per acre.
         (7)   For nonresidential uses, show the proposed distribution of uses
in square feet within each separate structure.
         (8)   Proposed building elevations and the projected overall height
from existing grade.
         (9)   Names and locations of fronting streets, public or private.
         (10)   Footprints of proposed and existing buildings.
         (11)   Building setback lines as required by the current zone
standards.
         (12)   Existing and proposed drive accesses.
         (13)   Parking locations and number of spaces.
         (14)   Existing grade contours.
         (15)   Current zoning.
         (16)   FEMA Flood Area Designation as per
chapter 13.74.
         (17)   Natural Hazard Area, Geologic Fault line/Study Areas as per
chapter 13.75.
         (18)   Wildland Urban Interface areas as per chapter 13.70.
   C.   Final (Civil) Review: For review of a final site development
application, the applicant shall submit to the Community and Economic
Development Director the following:
      1.   A completed application on a form made available with the Community
and Economic Development Department and copy of the approved preliminary site
plan.
      2.   Where required, a narrative describing how all modifications or
additions as required by the Planning Commission have been address.
      3.   Electronic submittal of a site plan drawn to scale (no less than 1
inch equals 40 feet) by a certified engineer, architect, landscape architect or
land surveyor containing the following information:
         a.   In a title block located in the lower right hand corner the
following shall appear:
            (1)   The proposed name of the project, which name shall be
approved by the Community Development Department;
            (2)   The location of the project, including: address, and parcel
number.
            (3)   The names and contact info of the owner, and of the designer
of the site plan;
            (4)   The date of preparation, scale (no less than 1 inch to equal
40 feet) and the north arrow.
            (5)   Current Land Use Zone:
         b.   The Final site plan shall show the following existing conditions:
            (1)   The boundary lines of the proposed project indicated by a
solid heavy line and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby;
            (2)   All abutting property under the control of the applicant,
even though only a portion is included in the development;
            (3)   The location, width and names of all existing public or
private streets, and driveway entrances within two hundred feet (200') of the
project boundaries and of all prior platted streets or other public ways,
railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces,
permanent buildings and structures, permanent easements and section and
corporation lines, within and abutting the project;
            (4)   The location of all wells, proposed, active and abandoned,
and of all reservoirs within the project and to a distance of at least two
hundred feet (200') beyond the project boundaries;
            (5)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities within the project and to a distance of at least two hundred feet
(200') beyond the project boundaries, indicating pipe sizes, grades, manholes
and exact location;
            (6)   Existing ditches, canals, natural drainage channels, and open
waterways and proposed realignments;
            (7)   Existing grade Contours at vertical intervals of not more
than two feet (2'). The 100-year flood level of all watercourses, if any, shall
be indicated in the same datum for contour elevations;
            (8)   All installed fire hydrants on or within five hundred feet
(500') of the proposed subdivision;
            (9)   Current zoning designation, on and off site; and
            (10)   Location of all trees.
         c.   The final site plan shall show all proposed:
            (1)   Areas intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for
public use or set aside for use of property owners in the project;
            (2)   Building setback lines, including dimensions;
            (3)   Easements for water, sewers, drainage, utility lines and any
other easements required by the Planning Commission’s conceptual approval;
            (4)   Lot Coverage tabulations showing:
 
                                                 Square Feet % Of Total
Off street parking                                            
Buildings and/or buildable area                               
Total floor space by use                                      
Landscaped areas                                              
Impervious surfaces                                           
Total area of existing tree canopy coverage to be             
mitigated
 
            (5)   Dimensioned parking layout showing location and number of
individual parking stalls, driveways and other areas of ingress and egress;
            (6)   Location of consolidated open space;
            (7)   Location and type of solid waste disposal facilities.
      4.   A detailed landscaping plan. Such landscaping plans shall be
prepared by a qualified professional, and shall include:
         a.   Distribution of new plant material and trees described by name or
type, and plans for slope control and/or other physical environmental changes;
         b.   Special effects and decorative materials;
         c.   Irrigation systems (sprinkler, bubbler, etc.);
         d.   Recreation equipment;
         e.   An analysis of the impact of the development upon existing
vegetation, especially as it relates to the removal of any significant trees;
         f.   Location and description (height, materials) of existing and
proposed fences with any revised letters of agreement with abutting property
owners; and
         g.   Location and description (dimensions, distance to property lines
and type of lighting [direct or indirect]) of existing and proposed
freestanding signs.
      5.   A tree removal permit application as required by
chapter 13.77 of this title.
      6.   Drawings of proposed structure elevations, including covered
parking, showing the height, dimensions, appearance, materials proposed, and
percentage of each material used on each building elevation, along with the
location and description of any proposed wall signs.
      7.   A detailed lighting plan prepared by a professional and emphasizing
energy conservation and compatibility with abutting and adjacent uses and using
the minimum light necessary to achieve visibility and security.
      8.   A copy of proposed CC&Rs, if applicable.
      9.   Statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for each
phase of development, including proposed grading work and any landscape work.
      10.   Electronic submittal of the proposed civil construction drawings,
sheet not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), with
sufficient detail for construction of all improvements, stamped by the project
engineer including:
         a.   Horizontal control.
         b.   Demolition.
         c.   Grading and drainage.
         d.   Erosion control.
         e.   Utilities, on site and off site.
         f.   Roadway design, public improvements; curb, gutter, sidewalks,
driveway approaches(s), Street Trees as determined by the Technical Review
Committee.
         g.   Civil details, general notes, etc.
         h.   Appropriate supporting documents showing compliance with State
and Federal standards such as: air emissions, site pollution prevention
measures and water discharge standards.
      11.   To mitigate possible adverse impacts from the proposed development,
the Technical Review Committee shall determine from a review of the preliminary
site plan whether the following additional information shall be submitted:
         a.   Soil erosion, geological hazard and sedimentation studies and/or
control plans and specifications. Such studies, control plans, and
specifications shall be prepared by a qualified professional with the costs of
preparation of such plans and specifications being borne by the applicant.
         b.   A traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer or other
qualified person as determined by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024;
amd. Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.03.040: SUBMISSIONS REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL OTHER LAND USE APPLICATIONS:
In addition to the requirements of section
13.03.020 of this chapter, the submission requirements of a proposed land use,
development or other matter which is subject to a procedure set forth in this
title shall be as follows:
   A.   General Plan Amendment: For a general plan amendment the following
shall be submitted:
      1.   If the land use map is proposed to be amended, a vicinity map no
larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") showing affected
properties clearly marked; and
      2.   A brief narrative of the proposed amendment outlining the requested
district and the reason for the request.
   B.   Text Or Zone Map Amendment:
      1.   For a text amendment, the following shall be submitted:
         a.   Chapter and section references with a draft of the proposed text
amendment; and
         b.   A brief narrative of reasons supporting the amendment.
      2.   For a zone map amendment, the following shall be submitted:
         a.   An accurate property map showing:
            (1)   Present and proposed zoning classifications,
            (2)   Abutting properties,
            (3)   Accurate legal descriptions and an approximate common address
of the areas proposed to be rezoned, and
            (4)   A map of the area in the general plan and how the proposed
rezoning complies with the future plans of the city as laid out in the adopted
general plan.
         b.   A brief narrative of reasons supporting the amendment.
   C.   Administrative Interpretation: The following shall accompany request
for an administrative interpretation:
      1.   A complete description of the proposed request for administrative
determination; and
      2.   Any other information the community development director determines
to be necessary for full and proper consideration and disposition of a
particular request.
   D.   Nonconformity Determination: The following shall accompany an
application for a nonconformity determination:
      1.   A description of the action or finding requested by the applicant.
      2.   Grounds for finding the use, structure, lot, or other circumstance
is nonconforming or for allowing expansion or modification of the
nonconformity.
   E.   Variance: For a variance, the following shall be submitted:
      1.   A brief narrative describing:
         a.   The specific feature or features of the proposed use,
construction or development that require a variance, and the amount of the
requested variance;
         b.   The specific chapter and section references of this title from
which a variance is sought;
         c.   A statement of the characteristics of the subject property that
prevent compliance with the provisions of this title; and
         d.   An explanation of how the application satisfies the variance
standards set forth in section
13.09.020 of this title.
      2.   A plot plan showing all of the following information:
         a.   The applicant's name and address;
         b.   Site address;
         c.   Property boundaries and dimensions;
         d.   Layout of existing and proposed buildings, parking, landscaping,
and utilities; and (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
         e.   Abutting property lines and uses within one hundred feet (100')
of the subject property. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
      3.   An elevation plan drawn to scale showing elevations of existing and
proposed structures;
      4.   When the variance involves building height, a streetscape plan
showing the height of all buildings within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the
subject property;
      5.   When a variance involves grade changes, a topographical drawing
prepared by a licensed surveyor or civil engineer, showing existing topography
in dashed lines at two foot (2') intervals and showing the proposed grade in
solid lines at two foot (2') intervals;
      6.   When a variance involves retaining walls, a plan showing all
retaining walls, including the height relative to proposed grades; and
      7.   Any other information reasonably determined by the community
development director to be pertinent to a requested variance.
   F.   Special Exceptions: In addition to the requirements of section
13.03.020 of this chapter, the following shall accompany an application for a
special exception:
      1.   A plot plan showing all of the following information:
         a.   The applicant's name and address;
         b.   Site address;
         c.   Property boundaries and dimensions;
         d.   Layout of existing and proposed buildings, parking, landscaping,
and utilities; and (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
         e.   Abutting property lines and uses within one hundred feet (100')
of the subject property; (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
      2.   An elevation plan drawn to scale showing elevations of existing and
proposed structures;
      3.   Any other information reasonably determined by the community
development director to be pertinent to a requested variance.
   G.   Other Land Use Applications: For any land use application other than
those listed above, the following shall be submitted:
      1.   Information necessary to demonstrate compliance with requirements of
this title that apply to the land use application; and
      2.   Any other information the community development director determines
necessary for full and proper consideration and disposition of a particular
application. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   H.   Review By The Design Review Board: For any land use application that
requires review by the design review board under the provisions of this title
the following shall be submitted:
      1.   A conceptual site plan as required by subsection
13.03.030A of this chapter,
      2.   Building sections,
      3.   Exterior elevations,
      4.   Photographs of the subject or abutting properties,
      5.   Perspective drawings,
      6.   Description of building materials,
      7.   Color samples,
      8.   Exterior lighting designs,
      9.   Fence plans,
      10.   Signs,
      11.   Landscaping plans. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
CHAPTER 13.04
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13.04.010: Purpose
13.04.020: Scope
13.04.030: Rules Of Interpretation
13.04.040: Definitions Of Terms
13.04.050: Illustrations
13.04.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules of interpretation, definitions
and illustrations so that the provisions of this title may be readily
understood and consistently administered. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.04.020: SCOPE:
The rules of interpretation, definitions and illustrations contained in this
chapter shall apply to this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.04.030: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   General: All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this chapter shall be construed to accomplish the purposes of this title.
   B.   Conjunctions: Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
      1.   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply.
      2.   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
      3.   "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
   C.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common use and understanding of the text, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired an appropriate meaning in law
shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   D.   Tense, Number, And Gender: Words used in the past or present tense
include the future as well as the past or present unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary. The singular shall include the plural and the plural
shall include the singular as the context and application of this title may
reasonably suggest. Words of one gender shall apply to a person, regardless of
gender, as the context and application of this title may reasonably suggest.
   E.   Headings: Headings used in this title are used for organizational and
reference purposes only and shall not control or affect the scope, meaning, or
interpretation of provisions of this title.
   F.   Undefined Common Terms: Common terms used in this title but not defined
in this chapter shall be as defined in "Webster's Collegiate Dictionary". (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.04.040: DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:
For the purpose of this title the following terms have the following meanings:
ABANDONMENT: See section
13.88.130 of this title.
ABUTTING: Properties which have a common property line or corner.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached, subordinate building clearly incidental to and
located upon the same lot occupied by the main building and occupied by or
devoted to an accessory use. When an accessory building or structure is
attached to the main building in a structurally substantial manner, by an
enclosed conditioned space, such accessory building shall be considered part of
the main building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A permanent or semi-permanent detached structure intended
to provide ancillary support to a primary or accessory building and or land
use. Examples may include but shall not be limited to; sporting ramps, swimming
pool slides, faux rock landscaping features, playground equipment etc.. When an
accessory structure is attached to the main or accessory building in a
structurally substantial manner, such accessory structure shall be considered
part of the building and required to meet the underlying zoning requirements,
i.e. setbacks, height etc.
ACCESSORY USE: A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use or structure
with which it is associated; and is a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with such primary use; and is either in the
same ownership as such primary use or is maintained and operated on the same
lot substantially for the benefit or convenience of the owners, occupants,
employees, customers or visitors of the primary use.
ADJACENT: Properties in close proximity which may, or may not have a common
property line.
ADULT DAYCARE FACILITY: See definition of commercial daycare, adult.
AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, local district, special service
district under Utah Code Annotated title 17D, chapter 1, Special Service
District Act, school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under
Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 13, Interlocal Cooperation Act, specified
public utility, a property owner, a property owners' association, or the Utah
Department of Transportation, or other political subdivision of the State of
Utah if:
   A.   The entity's services or facilities are likely to require expansion or
significant modification because of an intended use of land;
   B.   The entity has filed with the City a copy of the entity's general or
long range plan; or
   C.   The entity has filed with the City a request for notice during the same
calendar year and before the City provides notice to an affected entity in
compliance with a requirement imposed under this title.
AGRICULTURE: The cultivation of land for the production of food, feed, fiber,
and other goods by the systematic raising of plants including all associated
equipment and buildings, but excluding the keeping or raising of livestock.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, BAR ESTABLISHMENT: A business licensed by the UDABC to
sell alcohol, wine, heavy beer and beer to public patrons for consumption on
the premises. Such uses include:
   A.   An equity establishment (such as a country club),
   B.   A fraternal establishment, or
   C.   A bar establishment.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, BREWERY: A business licensed by the Utah Department of
Alcohol Beverage Control (UDABC) to manufacture, brew, store, transport or
export beer and heavy beer.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, OFF PREMISES BEER RETAILER: A place of business wherein
beer is sold in original containers for consumption off the premises in
accordance with the State's Liquor Control Act and the licensing ordinance of
the City.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, ON-PREMISES BANQUET AND CATERING: A business licensed
by the UDABC to sell liquor, wine, heavy beer and beer to public patrons for
consumption on the premises for contracted banquet activities in conjunction
with a hotel, resort, sports facility, or convention center.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, ON PREMISES BEER RETAILER: A business licensed by the
UDABC for the sale of beer (not liquor) to public patrons for consumption on
the premises, including restaurants, sports facilities and other food/beverage
facilities. This definition does not include an on premises beer retailer -
"tavern", as defined by the UDABC.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, RESTAURANT - BEER ONLY: A business licensed by the
UDABC for the sale of 3.2 percent beer for consumption on the premises of a
restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public, and
maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from
the sale of food.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, RESTAURANT - FULL SERVICE: A business licensed by the
UDABC for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a
restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public, and
maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from
the sale of food.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, RESTAURANT - LIMITED SERVICE: A business licensed by
the UDABC for the sale of wine, beer and heavy beer for consumption on the
premises of a restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving food to the
general public, and maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its total
restaurant business from the sale of food.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, SINGLE EVENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for a
specific event for a specific period of time and location and only available to
groups, partnerships, limited liability corporations, churches, lodges or
chapters of fraternal and social organizations or other bona fide organization
and licensed by the UDABC for the sale of a specific range of alcoholic
beverages to the general public or to the organization's invited guests for the
duration of the event.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, STATE STORE: A facility for the sale of packaged
alcoholic beverages located on premises owned or leased by the State and
operated by State employees.
ALCOHOL RETAIL LICENSE, TAVERN: A business licensed by the UDABC for the sale
of beer (not liquor) to patrons for consumption on the premises.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty five feet (25') wide which
affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, flooding
occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which
originates at the apex and is characterized by high velocity flows; active
processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable
flow paths.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL ALTERATION OR RENOVATION: A change or rearrangement in
the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders, or interior partitions, or a change in the dimensions or
configurations of the roof or exterior walls, as well as a change in doors,
windows, means of ingress or egress, or an expansion or diminution of a
building or structure.
AMATEUR RADIO FACILITY: Any antenna and antenna support structure capable of
transmitting as well as receiving signals and licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to transmit amateur radio signals regardless of
the transmission mode or frequency. For the purposes of this title, an amateur
radio tower/antenna shall be considered an accessory structure and regulated as
such (see
chapter 13.83 of this title).
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: A video game, pinball, or other machine, whether mechanically
or electronically operated that, upon insertion of a coin, trade token, slug,
or similar object, or upon payment of money or other consideration through use
of a metered or similar device, operates or may be operated as a game or
contest of skill or amusement, and that contains no automatic payoff for the
return of money or trade tokens, or that makes no provision whatever for the
return of money to the player. An amusement device is further defined as a
machine, apparatus, or contrivance that is used or that may be used as a game
of skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player initiates, employs, or
directs a force generated by the machine. An amusement device excludes a
billiard, pool, or bagatelle table.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
APPEAL AUTHORITY: The person, board, commission, agency, or other body
designated by ordinance to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use
application or a variance.
APPLICANT: A person who submits an application for development, license or
permit to the City of Holladay
ARCADE: A use which contains four (4) or more amusement devices.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a
designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the land
in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater
chance of flooding in a given year. The area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: See definitions of group homes.
AUDITORIUM, EXHIBIT HALL, CONVENTION CENTER: A use, indoors or outdoors, where:
an audience is seated for a performance; a group or individuals may view an
art, science, or other fixed exhibition; or a room or set of rooms used for the
purpose of meetings, education, group food service, and/or other events for a
large number of patrons.
AVALANCHE: A mass of snow, ice, soil and/or rock in swift motion down a slope.
BANKING AND CREDIT SERVICES: A use licensed to receive money on current or
deposit account, the exchange and/or issue of money, the extension of credit
and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, excluding such businesses as
payday loans and check cashing services.
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in a given year.
BASEMENT: An area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BED AND BREAKFAST: (See
chapter 13.76 of this title.) A dwelling containing a maximum of five (5)
guestrooms, and occupied by the owner or individual responsible for operating
the facility, and used for accommodations or lodging of guests for
compensation.
BENCH MARK: A mark affixed to a permanent or semipermanent object along a line
of survey to furnish a datum level.
BILLBOARD: See definition of sign, off premises (billboard).
BLOOD PLASMA FACILITY: An indoor medical establishment designed for the
collection and processing of human blood. Such facilities are often subordinate
to and made an ancillary part of a city or county authorized medical clinic
where one or more doctors are present on-premises or are part of a medical
laboratory facility.
BOARDER: A person living in a rented room in a boarding house, excluding the
boarding house operator or members of the operator's immediate family who
reside on the premises with the operator.
BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot within which a building/structure may be
built, which is bounded by the required setbacks.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels.
BUILDING, ELEVATED: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a
nonbasement building:
   A.   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B,
C, X, and D, as adopted as part of the national flood insurance program
regulations, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water and
   B.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though
the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls
meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance
program regulations.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The three-dimensional space in which a building or structure
may be constructed on a lot as delineated by setbacks and building height
restrictions.
BUILDING FACE: Any single side of a building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF:
   A.   The vertical distance above the lowest original ground surface at a
point on the perimeter of the building to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the ridge or highest
point of a pitched or hipped roof.
   B.   Buildings may be stepped to accommodate the slope of the terrain;
provided, that each step shall be at least twelve feet (12') in horizontal
dimension. The height of each stepped building segment shall be measured as
provided in subsection A of this definition. (See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.1 of this chapter.)
   C.   For the purpose of this definition "original ground surface" means the
elevation of the ground surface in its natural state before manmade
alterations, including, but not limited to, grading, excavation, or filling,
excluding improvements required by land use ordinances. When the elevation of
the original ground surface is not readily apparent because of previous manmade
alterations, the elevation of the original grade shall be determined by the
community development department using the best information available.
BUILDING LINE: The line of that face, or corner, or part of a building nearest
a property line.
BUILDING, MAIN: The primary building or one of the primary buildings upon a
lot, housing a primary use upon the lot.
BUILDING MATERIALS SALES AND SERVICES: A business engaged in the retail or
wholesale sale of materials and services used in the construction of buildings
or other structures, as well as the outdoor storage of construction equipment
or materials on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses include
lumberyards, home improvement centers, lawn and garden supply stores,
construction equipment sales and rental, electrical, plumbing, air conditioning
and heating supply stores, swimming pool sales, construction and trade
contractors' offices and storage yards.
BUILDING SITE: A space of ground occupied or to be occupied by a building or
group of buildings.
CANAL: An artificial waterway for the collection and conveyance of irrigation
water and/or stormwater.
CANOPY: A roofed structure supported by a building and/or supports extending to
the ground directly underneath the canopy, and providing a protective shield
for areas such as service station pump islands and walkways.
CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For the
purpose of this title, a carport shall be subject to all of the regulations
prescribed for a private garage.
CARTWAY, TRAVELED WAY: The paved area of a street between the curbs, including
travel lanes and parking areas, but not including shoulders, curbs, sidewalks,
or swales. If curbs are lacking and parking is restricted to shoulders, the
cartway is defined as the traveled way (exclusive of shoulders).
CEMETERY: A property used for the interring of the dead, including a mausoleum,
or columbarium when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of
such cemetery.
CHARTER SCHOOL:
   A.   An operating charter school;
   B.   A charter school applicant that has its application approved by a
chartering entity in accordance with Utah Code, title 53A, chapter 1a, part 5,
the Utah Charter Schools Act; and
   C.   An entity working on behalf of a charter school or approved charter
applicant to develop or construct a charter school building.
CHURCH/RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: See definition of quasi-public use.
CITY: The City of Holladay.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Holladay.
CLEAR CUTTING: The removal of sixty percent (60%) or more of the tree canopy
from a lot or parcel on which no person resides at the time of the removal.
CLUSTERING: A development or subdivision design technique that concentrates
buildings or lots on a part of a site to allow remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally sensitive
areas.
COMMERCIAL DAYCARE, ADULT: A use for the care and supervision of three (3) or
more adults at least eighteen (18) years of age for less than twenty four (24)
hours a day, and licensed by the State of Utah.
COMMERCIAL DAYCARE, CHILD: A use for the care or training of children for less
than twenty four (24) hours a day where tuition, fees, or other forms of
compensation for the care of the client is charged, and which is licensed or
approved to operate as a daycare or preschool facility.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: A use having three (3) or more dogs for the purpose of
boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, training for fee, or sale.
COMMERCIAL PRESCHOOL FACILITY: A use for the education of three (3) or more
children before the commencement of statutory education, usually between the
ages of two (2) and five (5), and licensed by the State of Utah.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The City of Holladay Community Development
Director.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: An application shall not be considered complete unless
and until (1) all of the required information and submittal materials in the
amounts and dimensions required by this code have been submitted to and
received by the City department or official specified in this code; and (2) the
Community and Economic Development Director or a duly-appointed representative,
has certified the application as “complete.” The decision with respect to
completeness and applicability of submittal requirements shall be final. This
requirement pertains to all applications for preliminary and/or final plats of
a subdivision, a planned unit development, zoning, rezoning, general
development plans, and special use permits where such applications are in
anticipation of new surface development, or any other similar land use
designation that is used by a local government.
COMPLETION BOND: A cashier's check, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow
agreement, in amount, form and content specified by the City and filed with the
City for the purpose of ensuring completion of improvements required under this
title.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact on the City, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land uses, may
not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain conditions
are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts.
CORRAL: A space, other than a building, less than one acre in area or less than
one hundred feet (100') in width, used for the confinement of animals.
COUNTY: Salt Lake County, Utah.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Essential and hazardous facilities and special occupancy
structures as defined in
chapter 13.75 of this title.
CRITICAL FEATURE: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, an
integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without
which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The minimum volume necessary for maintenance of tree health
and stability that is calculated by measuring the diameter of the subject tree
at breast height. Every inch of tree trunk diameter equates to one linear foot
of distance outward from the trunk in all directions.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being terminated at the
other by a vehicular turnaround.
CULINARY WATER AUTHORITY: The department, agency, or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of the culinary water
system and sources for the subject property.
dbh (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT): The trunk diameter measurement of a non-
transplantable tree, taken four and one-half feet (4.5') above the ground line.
DENSITY, MAXIMUM: The total number of lots or dwelling units allowed by the
application of a standard subdivision design, using the minimum lot size,
width, and setback dimensions required by each unique zone.
DEVELOPMENT, DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Construction or expansion of a building,
structure, or the establishment of a use that creates additional demand and
need for public facilities; a change in use of a building or structure that
creates additional demand and need for public facilities; or a change in the
use of land or occupancy that creates additional demand and need for public
facilities.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such impairment or being regarded as having such impairment. The following
definitions are incorporated into the definition of disability:
   A.   Disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a
Federally controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act, 21 USC 802, or as defined under title 58, chapter 37, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended;
   B.   A physical or mental impairment includes the following:
      1.   A physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
      2.   A mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities; or
      3.   Such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy,
multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current, illegal
use of controlled substances) and alcoholism.
DISINFECTING AND EXTERMINATING SERVICES: A use providing services for the
control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests.
DITCH OR LATERAL: A narrow channel used to collect or convey irrigation water
or stormwater to and from a canal and individual properties, typically owned by
a private company or individual property owners.
DOMESTIC STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling or
other residential facility to perform domestic services or to assist residents
in performing major life activities.
DRIP ZONE: For purposes of
chapter 13.77, "Landscaping", of this title the drip zone is calculated by
measuring the diameter of the tree at a height of five feet (5') from ground
level. Every inch of tree trunk diameter equates to one foot (1') of drip zone.
DRIVE-THROUGH: A facility which accommodates patrons' automobiles and from
which the occupants of the automobile may make purchases or transact business.
DRUGSTORE (PHARMACY): A facility where prescription drugs are filled and
dispensed by a pharmacist licensed under the laws of the State of Utah and
where other medically related items and services may be sold.
DRY CLEANING: A facility where textiles and clothing are cleaned by the use of
an organic solvent rather than water.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY UNIT (ADU): One habitable living unit added to, created
within, or detached from a primary owner-occupied single-family dwelling and
contained on one lot. ADUs are subject to the approval of a Building Permit (
13.08.100) and the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (
13.04.050 and
13.01.060); and if the ADU is being rented, the annual review and approval of a
License (
5.68.020).
   A.   Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit (IADU): One accessory dwelling unit
created within the owner-occupied primary dwelling unit or within the footprint
of the primary dwelling unit that is connected in a structurally substantial
manner by an enclosed conditioned space.
   B.   External Accessory Dwelling Unit (EADU): One accessory dwelling unit
designed as a detached structure located on the same lot as, and subordinate
to, a primary dwelling unit. Up to two (2) occupiable units on any lot.
DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT:
   A.   A building, or portion thereof, which is one or more rooms physically
arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for
occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and
sleeping.
   B.   Buildings with more than one kitchen or set of cooking facilities are
considered to contain more than one dwelling unit unless the additional cooking
facilities are clearly accessory to a dwelling unit as determined by the
Community and Economic Development Director. Factors for determining whether
cooking facilities are accessory to a dwelling unit may include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   A building design which allows all occupants ready access to all
portions of the building including cooking facilities;
      2.   No portion of the building containing cooking facilities can be
separated from the remaining rooms to form a separate dwelling unit;
      3.   There is only one electric and/or gas meter for the building.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof, designed or intended
to be used for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of
each other and containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, PRIMARY: A single-family dwelling unit that is detached and occupied
as the primary residence of the owner of record.
DWELLING, RENTAL: A building or portion of a building used as a home or
residence by one or more persons available to be rented, loaned, leased, or
hired out for a period of 30 consecutive days or longer.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one
or two (2) families living independently of each other, the structure having
one dwelling unit and one approved Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A single building under a continuous roof
containing two (2) dwelling units completely separated by either: a) a common
interior wall, where the units are side by side; or b) a common interior floor,
where the units are one above the other. A common wall may be located within an
attached garage used for the storage of private automobiles.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED: Two (2) or more dwelling units together in a single
building under a continuous roof that are completely separated by either: a) a
common interior wall, where the units are side by side; or b) a common interior
floor where the units are one above the other. A common wall may be located
within an attached garage used for the storage of private automobiles.
EASEMENT: The quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage in land without profit, existing distinct from the ownership of the
land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public.
EDUCATION AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH FACILITY, MEDICAL AND DENTAL LABORATORY: A
use engaging in research, testing or evaluation of materials or products,
prototype design and development and/or precision fabrication of articles for
on or off site orders.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, PRIVATE: A building or group of buildings and associated
grounds designed, constructed, or used for instruction in a branch of knowledge
and having a curriculum similar to that of a public school. This use may
include laboratory and shop instruction using demonstration vehicles, products,
or models incidental to such instruction. This use does not include repair,
maintenance, or manufacture of vehicles, goods, or merchandise and does not
include providing direct services to the general public other than instruction.
For the purpose of this title, this use includes "trade" and "vocational"
schools.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, PUBLIC: A school district building in which pupils
assemble to receive instruction in a program for some combination of grades
from preschool through grade 12, including kindergarten; a program for children
with disabilities; a structure or facility located on the same property as a
building described above and used in support of the use of that building; and a
building to provide office and related space to a school district's
administrative personnel.
   A.   For the purpose of this title, this definition does not include land or
a structure, including land or a structure for inventory storage, equipment
storage, food processing or preparing, vehicle storage or maintenance, or other
use in support of providing instruction to pupils, that is not located on the
same property as a building described above and used in support of the purposes
of a building described above.
   B.   This definition does not include home occupations represented as
schools, trade schools, charm schools, dancing schools, music schools or
similar limited schools, or private universities or colleges.
ELDERLY PERSON: For the purposes of
chapter 13.98 of this title, a person who is sixty (60) years or older, who
desires or needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who
is capable of living independently.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND LEASING: A business primarily engaged in the rental of
equipment, appliances, and other machines.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, for the
purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred
to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by ordinance 09-18, September 17, 2009.
EXPANSION: An increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including
physical size of the property, building, parking, and other improvements.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: For the
purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FAMILY: Family is defined as one of the following, but not more than one at the
same time, who occupy a dwelling unit:
   1.   One person living alone;
   2.   Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or other
legal relationship living together as a single housekeeping unit; and up to two
(2) additional persons living with the family, such as domestic staff, living
together as a single housekeeping unit;
   3.   Up to four (4) persons living together as a single housekeeping unit
and the minor children of any of them.
FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION: The keeping of animals on a lot for exclusive use by
persons residing thereon. See section
13.76.240, "Animal And Fowl Restrictions", of this title.
FAULT: A fracture in the earth's crust forming a boundary between rock or soil
masses that have moved relative to each other.
FAULT, ACTIVE: A fault displaying evidence of greater than four inches (4") of
displacement along one or more of its traces during Holocene time (about 11,000
years ago to the present).
FAULT, SCARP: A steep slope or cliff formed directly by movement along a fault.
FAULT, SETBACK: An area on either side of a fault within which construction of
structures for human occupancy or critical facilities is not permitted.
FAULT, TRACE: The intersection of a fault plane with the ground surface, often
present as a fault scarp, or detected as a lineament on aerial photographs.
FAULT, ZONE: A corridor of variable width along one or more fault traces,
within which deformation has occurred.
FENCE: A structure, typically made of wood, vinyl, wire, masonry or other
similar materials which divides two (2) areas of land for privacy or security.
For the purpose of this title fencing also includes hedges and freestanding
walls.
FIRE AUTHORITY: The unified fire authority.
FLEA MARKET/FARMERS' MARKET: An occasional or periodic market held in an open
area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to
the public.
FLOOD, FLOODING: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a general
and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, an
official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the
official report provided by the federal emergency management agency. The report
contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of a base flood, as well as
the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, those
physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in
order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a
"special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs,
levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed
in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the
operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness
plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, land use
ordinances and regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes
such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a land
area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
Flood, Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a
combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments
to structures which reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the
channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FRONTAGE: All property fronting on one side of a public street or private right
of way.
FUNERAL HOME, CREMATORY: A use, also known as a mortuary, used to embalm,
arrange, or conduct a funeral, and which may include facilities used to cremate
human remains.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed and/or used for the storage of
one or more motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to
which it is accessory, provided that a garage shall be considered part of a
dwelling if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common.
GAS STATION: A use primarily for supplying gasoline, propane, oil, air and
water for direct retail to the consumer.
GENERAL PLAN: The city of Holladay general plan adopted as general guidelines
for proposed future development of the land within the city as allowed by Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-103(14).
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: A surface fault rupture, shallow groundwater, liquefaction,
landslide, debris flow, unstable soil, rockfall, or other geologic condition
that presents a risk to life, substantial loss of real property, or substantial
damage to real property.
GRADE, FINISHED: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between a building and the adjacent
property line or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the
building, between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building.
GRADE, NATURAL OR ORIGINAL: Natural or original grade shall be the elevation of
the ground surface in its natural state before manmade alterations, including,
but not limited to, grading, excavation, or filling.
GRADING: A change of existing surface conditions by excavating, placing of
soils or rocks, or stripping of vegetation.
GRAFFITI: An inscription, drawing, painting or other visual defacing of a
building, structure, or natural feature, made without the consent of the owner.
GROCERY/FOOD SALES: A single use larger than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet in gross floor area specializing in the sale of groceries, and household
supplies, with at least seventy five percent (75%) of total sales in food items
and may include specialty food stores such as bakery, butcher, delicatessen or
other similar food types.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA: The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy
including basements, mezzanines and upper floors.
GROUP HOME: For the purposes of
chapter 13.98, "Group Homes; Other Facilities", of this title:
Group Home, Assisted Living Facility:
   A.   A residential facility, licensed by the state of Utah, that provides
coordinated support personnel and healthcare services, available twenty four
(24) hours per day, to residents who have been assessed by the Utah department
of health or the Utah department of human services rules to need any of these
services. Each resident shall have a service plan based on the assessment,
which may include:
      1.   Specified services of intermediate nursing care;
      2.   Administration of medication; and
      3.   Support services promoting resident's independence and self-
sufficiency. Such a facility does not include adult daycare provided in
conjunction with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
   B.   Assisted living facility type I is a residential facility that provides
assistance with activities of daily living and social care to two (2) or more
ambulatory residents who require protected living arrangements.
   C.   Assisted living facility type II is a residential facility that
provides coordinated supportive personal and healthcare services to two (2) or
more semi-independent residents.
   D.   Assisted living facilities type I and type II may be classified as
large, small or limited capacity.
      1.   A large assisted living facility houses seventeen (17) or more
residents.
      2.   A small assisted living facility houses six (6) to sixteen (16)
residents.
      3.   A limited capacity assisted living facility houses no more than five
(5) residents.
   E.   "Semi-independent" means a person who is:
      1.   Physically disabled but able to direct his or her own care; or
      2.   Cognitively impaired or physically disabled but able to evacuate
from the facility, or to a zone or area of safety, with the physical assistance
of one person.
Group Home, Nursing Home: An intermediate care/nursing facility or a skilled
nursing facility licensed by the state of Utah, for the care of individuals
who, due to illness, advanced age, disability, or impairment require assistance
and/or supervision on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis. Such a facility
does not include an adult daycare facility or adult daycare provider in
conjunction with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
Group Home, Residential Facility: A building or portion thereof where an
individual is living at a given point in time and intends to remain and not a
place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
Group Home, Residential Facility For Elderly Persons: A dwelling unit that is
occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by no more than eight (8)
elderly persons in a family type arrangement. A residential facility for
elderly persons shall not include any of the following:
   A.   A facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility
may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
   B.   A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a healthcare
facility as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 26-21-2, as amended; or
   C.   A facility which is a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
Group Home, Residential Facility For Persons With A Disability: A residence in
which more than one person with a disability resides and which is:
   A.   Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under title
62A, chapter 2, of the Utah Code, licensure of programs and facilities; or
   B.   Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Health under Utah Code
Annotated title 26, chapter 21, Health Care Facilities Licensing and Inspection
Act.
GUESTHOUSE, CARETAKER QUARTERS: As of September 30th 2021, this land use is
known as an External Accessory Dwelling Unit.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake Valley Health Department.
HIGH RISK TREE: A damaged, dead, dying or diseased street or waterway tree, or
part of a tree that has a high potential for failure or for falling on a nearby
structure, into a public right-of-way or into an ephemeral or perennial stream
or canal.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed in section
13.86.020 of this title.
HOLLADAY TREE COMMITTEE: A volunteer, City appointed, advisory group of
knowledgeable citizens, charged with advocating for the sustainability of the
City's tree canopy resources and the City's tree management program including
administering the heritage tree designation and the tree canopy sustainability
program as provided in section
13.77.080 of this title.
HOME-BASED MICROSCHOOL: An individual or association of individuals that
registers as a business entity in accordance with state and local laws; and,
for compensation, provides kindergarten through grade 12 education services to
16 or fewer students from an individual’s residential dwelling, accessory
dwelling unit, or residential property. Does not include a daycare. See UCA
53G-6- 201.
HOME DAYCARE/PRESCHOOL: See section
13.76.720 of this title. The keeping for care and/or preschool instruction of
not more than twelve (12) children including the caregiver's own children under
the age of six (6) and not in full day school within an occupied dwelling and
yard.
HOME DAYCARE/PRESCHOOL, SMALL: See section
13.76.725 of this title. The keeping for care and/or preschool instruction of
not more than six (6) children including the caregiver's own children under the
age of six (6) and not in full day school within an occupied dwelling and yard.
HOME OCCUPATION: See section
13.76.730 of this title. A commercial activity carried out for gain by one or
more persons residing in the dwelling unit which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling.
HOOKUP FEE: A fee for the installation and inspection of a pipe, line, meter,
or appurtenance that connects to a Municipal water, sewer, stormwater, power,
or other utility system.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an
integral part of the facilities.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: See title 8 of this Code. Animals and/or birds ordinarily
permitted in the house and kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats and
canaries.
IMAGING CENTER: A facility with the equipment to produce various types of
radiologic and electromagnetic images and a professional staff to interpret the
images obtained.
IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed under Utah Code Annotated section 11-
36a-101 et seq., as amended.
IMPAIRMENT, RECORD OF: For the purposes of
chapter 13.98, "Group Homes; Other Facilities", of this title, a history of, or
having been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
IMPAIRMENT, REGARDED AS HAVING AN: For the purposes of
chapter 13.98, "Group Homes; Other Facilities", of this title, a person is
regarded as having an impairment when:
   A.   The person has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one or more major life activities but is treated by another
person as having such a limitation;
   B.   The person has a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of
others toward such an impairment; or
   C.   The person has none of the impairments defined in this definition but
is treated by another person as having such an impairment.
IMPERMEABLE COVERAGE/IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Those portions of a lot that are
covered by primary and accessory buildings or structures, and by surfaces that
prevent the passage or absorption of surface water, such as pavement.
IMPROVEMENT ASSURANCE: A surety bond, letter of credit, cash, or other security
to guaranty the proper completion of an improvement that is required as a
condition precedent to recording a subdivision plat; or beginning development
activity; and offered to a Land Use Authority to induce the Land Use Authority,
before actual construction of required improvements, to consent to the
recording of a subdivision plat; or issue a permit for development activity.
IMPROVEMENT ASSURANCE WARRANTY: A promise that the materials and workmanship of
improvements comport with standards that the Municipality has officially
adopted; and will not fail in a material respect within a warranty period.
INTENSITY: The concentration of activity.
INTERNAL LOT RESTRICTION: A platted note, platted demarcation, or platted
designation that runs with the land and creates a restriction that is enclosed
within the perimeter of a lot described on the plat; or designates a
development condition that is enclosed within the perimeter of a lot described
on the plat.
JUNK: See section
13.76.740 of this title.
LAND USE APPLICATION: An application required by this title.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: A person, board, commission, agency, or other body
designated by the city council to act upon a land use application.
LAND USE ORDINANCE: This title.
LAND USE PERMIT: A permit issued by a land use authority.
LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE: Offices and storage yards associated
with a use providing installation and maintenance of landscaping for
compensation.
LANDSCAPING, LANDSCAPED: Shall be highly water efficient consisting of a
combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, vegetative ground cover, perennial
plants and annual plants or lawn, together with a water-efficient drip type
irrigation system to maintain the plants alive and flourishing for the length
of time the plantings are to be maintained if not in perpetuity. A maximum of
sixty-five percent (65%) of the total required landscaped area may include
permeable materials such as organic mulch, inorganic materials such as rocks,
boulders, gravel, or other materials, and/or ornamental objects such as
fountains, pools, statues, retaining walls, or benches.
LANDSLIDE: The downslope movement of a mass of soil, superficial deposits, or
rock.
LAUNDRY, ALTERATION AND APPAREL REPAIR SERVICES: A facility where items of
clothing are laundered, altered and/or repaired, including self-service
laundromats.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The Holladay city council.
LEVEE: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a manmade
structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the
flow of water so as to provide protection from flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a flood
protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and
operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE: The area in which construction and development activity
must be contained, including development and construction of the primary
building and permitted accessory structures, play areas, and on site septic
tanks, utilities, drainage, and other services.
LIQUEFACTION: A condition wherein certain water saturated soils lose bearing
strength because of ground shaking and an increase of groundwater pore
pressure.
LIVE/WORK: A building or spaces within a building used jointly for a primary
commercial or manufacturing use as allowed by the zone and a residential use
where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary
use as a place of work.
LIVESTOCK: See section
13.76.240 of this title. Animals kept for husbandry or for family food
production, including:
   A.   "Large livestock" shall include horses, mules, burros, donkeys, cattle,
sheep, goats, llamas, swine and other similarly sized farm, hoofed domesticated
animals.
   B.   "Small livestock" shall include chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese,
pigeons, pheasants, rabbits, and other similarly sized fowl or animals,
excluding dogs, cats, and ferrets.
LOCAL, SUBURBAN AND INTERURBAN TRANSPORTATION: A company or facility, and
associated vehicles, which provides for the movement of people and goods.
Typical uses include taxi service, ambulance service, limousine service, parcel
delivery service, and other similar uses.
LOCALSCAPES® A landscaping approach designed to create locally adapted and
sustainable landscapes through a 5-part approach (central open shape, gathering
areas, activity zones, connecting pathways and planting beds).
   A.   Activity Zones: Portions of the landscape designed for recreation or
function, such as storage areas, fire pits, vegetable gardens, and playgrounds.
Activity zones are located outside of the central open shape and shall be
surfaced with materials other than turfgrass lawn.
   B.   Central Open Shape: An unobstructed area that functions as the focal
point of Localscapes and is designed in a shape that is geometric in nature.
      1.   Turfgrass areas shall not exceed the greater of two hundred fifty
square feet (250 sf), or thirty-five percent (35%) of the property’s front and
side yards.
      2.   A turfgrass central open shape may not be less than ten feet (10')
in width.
      3.   Small residential lots in which the total landscaped area is less
than two hundred fifty square feet (250 sf), are exempt from the ten feet (10')
minimum width requirement for turfgrass.
      4.   Lawn shall not be installed in park strips, paths, or on slopes
greater than 25% or 4:1 grade.
   C.   Gathering Areas: Portions of the landscape that are dedicated to
congregating, such as patios, gazebos, decks, and other seating areas.
   D.   Connecting Pathways. Paths and walkways shall be comprised of materials
that do not include lawn, such as hardscape, mulch, or other durable materials.
   E.   Planting Beds. Planting Beds shall be located outside of the central
open shape and may not utilize turfgrass. They shall be surfaced by mulch,
rock, gravel, or other similar material where not covered by plantings. A
minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the planting bed shall be comprised of
live plant material.
LOT AREA: The area contained within the property lines of an individual parcel
of land or recorded lot shown on a subdivision plat or required by this title,
excluding areas within an existing or designated future public or private right
of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°). (See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.5 of this chapter.)
LOT COVERAGE: The total horizontal area of a lot or parcel covered by a
building, structure or impervious surface.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot with frontage on two (2) or more public streets.
(See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.5 of this chapter.)
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or double frontage lot or a lot on a
private driveway. (See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.5 of this chapter.)
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of the property boundary line between two
(2) abutting lots with the written consent of the owners of record.
LOT ON A PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A lot, the bulk of which does not directly front
onto a street but is usually located behind another lot (or lots) and is only
accessed from a public or approved private street through a private driveway.
(See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.5 of this chapter.)
LOT, PARCEL, PLOT OR TRACT OF LAND: A segment of land established by plat,
subdivision, metes and bounds description, or other legal means and identified
on a plat of record or in a deed of record of Salt Lake County to be owned,
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT WIDTH: The diameter of the largest circle that can be inscribed entirely
within a lot. The lot width circle shall not include streams/floodplains,
wetlands, areas of thirty percent (30%) slope or greater or other natural
hazard areas, or a "significant tree" as defined in this title. (See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.2 of this chapter.)
LOWEST FLOOR: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the lowest
floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a building. An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES: For the purposes of
chapter 13.98, "Group Homes; Other Facilities", of this title, functions such
as caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing,
speaking, breathing, learning and working.
MANUFACTURING: The processing, fabrication, assembly, and packaging of
products.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
MEDICAL, DENTAL, AND RELATED HEALTH SERVICES: A facility or group of offices
for one or more physicians or dentists for the examination and treatment of ill
and afflicted outpatients provided that the patients are not kept overnight
except under emergency circumstances.
MEDICAL LABORATORY: An indoor establishment that includes laboratories and/or
experimental equipment for medical testing, prototype design and development,
and product testing.
MERCHANDISE VENDING MACHINE: A self-service device that dispenses unit servings
of food, beverages, or other products upon payment.
MICRO-EDUCATION ENTITY: A person or association of persons that: registers as a
business entity in accordance with state and local laws; and, for compensation,
provides kindergarten through grade 12 education services to 100 students or
fewer. Does not include a daycare, a home-based microschool, a private school,
or a school within the public education system.
MINOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: Those portions of a structure and/or building such
as finials, cupolas, weather vanes, widow's walks, solar panels or skylights,
but excluding habitable space. (See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.7 of this chapter.)
MOBILE FOOD BUSINESS: A business that serves food or beverages from a self-
contained unit either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, is readily movable,
without disassembling, for transport to another location. The term "mobile food
business" shall not include vending carts or mobile ice cream vendors.
MOBILE FOOD COURT: The lot or parcel where ten (10) or less mobile food truck
(s) or trailer(s) can be located for the business of selling food as approved
by a City of Holladay Land Use Authority.
MOBILE FOOD TRAILER: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.9 of this chapter. A mobile food business that serves food or
beverages from a nonmotorized vehicle larger than three feet (3') in width and
eight feet (8') in length that is normally pulled behind a motorized vehicle.
The term "mobile food trailer" shall not include vending carts, mobile food
trucks or mobile ice cream vendors.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.10 of this chapter. A mobile food business that serves food or
beverages from an enclosed self-contained motorized vehicle. The term "mobile
food truck" shall not include vending carts, mobile food trailers or mobile ice
cream vendors.
MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more
sections, designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities.
MOBILE HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A plot of ground upon which
two (2) or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are
located.
MOBILE HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION, NEW: A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in
chapter 13.74 of this title, on floodplain hazard regulations.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING: Housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or less than eighty percent
(80%) of the median gross income for households of the same size in Salt Lake
County.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING PLAN: A written document adopted by a City legislative
body that includes:
   A.   An estimate of the existing supply of moderate income housing located
within the City;
   B.   An estimate of the need for moderate income housing in the City for the
next five (5) years as revised biennially;
   C.   A survey of total residential land use;
   D.   An evaluation of how existing land uses and zones affect opportunities
for moderate income housing; and
   E.   A description of the city's program to encourage an adequate supply of
moderate income housing.
MOTION PICTURE THEATERS, LIVE THEATER: A facility for viewing film, video, and
digital productions and/or where live theatrical performances are viewed by an
audience.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR: A use that provides motor vehicle repair or maintenance
services. Typical uses include specialty service garages, and sales of new
automotive parts and related accessories. This term excludes towing impound
yards, wrecking or salvage yards and/or sales of used automotive parts and
heavy equipment repair services.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALE AND RENTAL: A facility engaged in the retail or wholesale
sale or rental, from the premises, of motorized vehicles or equipment, along
with incidental service or maintenance. Typical uses include new and used
automobile and truck sales, and automobile rental.
MOTORCYCLE SALES, RENTAL AND REPAIR: A use where motorcycles, motor bikes, off
highway vehicles, motor scooters, mopeds or similar vehicles are sold, rented,
and/or repaired.
NATURAL HAZARD: For the purposes of
chapter 13.75, "Natural Hazard Areas", of this title, a liquefaction and/or
surface fault rupture hazard.
NATURAL HAZARD SPECIAL STUDY AREA: For the purposes of
chapter 13.75, "Natural Hazard Areas", of this title, a potentially hazardous
area, as shown on natural hazards map adopted by the city of Holladay, within
which hazard investigations are generally required prior to development.
NATURAL WATERWAY: An area, varying in width, along a stream, creek, gully,
spring, or wash which is a natural drainage channel.
NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET, LARGE: A use up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or
fewer (but not less than 10,000 square feet) of gross floor area offering a
line of groceries, fresh meat, fresh produce, and other associated items with
at least seventy five percent (75%) of total sales in food items, excluding
noncustomer space, for example, storage, preparation and office areas.
NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET, SMALL: A use of up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
fewer of gross floor area offering a line of groceries, fresh meat, fresh
produce, and other associated items with at least seventy five percent (75%) of
total sales in food items, excluding noncustomer space, for example, storage,
preparation and office areas.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, a
structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in
chapter 13.74 of this title, on floodplain hazard regulations. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the city and includes subsequent improvements
to such structures.
NONCOMPLYING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: See
chapter 13.88 of this title. A structure that legally existed prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of an ordinance but fails to conform to the
current ordinance.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use or activity which lawfully existed prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of an ordinance but fails to conform to the
current ordinance. (See
chapter 13.88 of this title.)
NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility where no person is housed on an
overnight basis, and which provides services including rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to
delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, sexual offenders, sexual abuse,
or mental health. Associated educational services may also be provided to
juveniles.
NURSERY, GARDEN CENTER: A use including a building, part of a building or open
space for the growth, display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other
materials used in indoor or outdoor planting.
OFFICIAL MAP (Roadway Classification Map): The map drawn by the City and
recorded in the Salt Lake County Recorder's Office as per Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-103. For the purpose of this title, the official map is the
adopted roadway classification map, appendix A of the Holladay City general
plan.
OPEN SPACE: An area of land that is substantially free and unobstructed from
manmade improvements.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The line on the bank to which the high water of a
stream ordinarily rises annually as indicated by changes in the characteristics
of soil, vegetation, or other appropriate means taking into consideration the
characteristics of the surrounding areas. Where the ordinary high water mark
cannot be found, the top of the channel bank shall be substituted. In braided
channels, the ordinary high water mark shall be measured so as to include the
entire stream feature.
OUTSIDE DINING: A use, accessory to a restaurant, located outside of the
building where services are provided to patrons in the same manner as those
services provided inside the building such as food and beverage orders taken at
a customer's table.
OUTSIDE DISPLAY: The display of finished goods outside the primary structure
specifically intended for retail sale.
OUTSIDE STORAGE: The continuous storing outside a building, of goods,
materials, merchandise, or equipment for more than twenty four (24) hours.
OVERLAY ZONE: A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones
and that imposes additional or alternative requirements to those required by
the underlying zone.
OWNER: A person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, or public
or quasi-public corporation, or other legal entity, or combination thereof.
PARKING SPACE (AUTOMOBILE): Space within a building, lot, or parking lot for
the parking or storage of one automobile. (See
chapter 13.80 of this title.)
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION: The first placement of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the
main structure.
PERMANENT COSMETICS: A mark or design made on or under the skin by a process of
pricking or ingraining a pigment, dye, or ink in the skin for masking
discolorations or cosmetically enhancing facial features which follow the
natural line of the feature and are limited to eyeliner, eyebrows, or lip
coloring procedures only. For the purposes of this title, permanent cosmetics
does not include body art or tattoos.
PERMITTED USE: A use of land allowed by right in a zone as shown in
chapter 13.100, appendix A of this title, land use table, subject to applicable
requirements of the zone.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, organization, association,
trust, governmental agency, or other legal entity.
PERSONAL SERVICE: A use primarily engaged in providing services generally
involving the care of a person or the person's apparel such as beauty and
barber services, tanning, nails, massage therapy, aesthetician, permanent
cosmetics, or day spa, but excluding a body art/tattoo or sexually oriented
business.
PET GROOMING/PET DAYCARE: A use where animals generally classified as household
pets may be groomed, but excluding an outdoor kennel, dog run, and a facility
where animals are kept overnight.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: See section
13.78.030 of this title. An integrated design for development of residential,
nonresidential, commercial, or a combination of such uses.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Holladay City Planning Commission established pursuant
to
chapter 13.05 of this title.
PLAT: A map or other graphical representation of lands being laid out and
prepared in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a, part 6; title
17, chapter 23, or title 57, chapter 8.
POROUS SURFACE, INCLUDING PERMEABLE PAVING: A composite surface such as pea
gravel, crushed stone or other paving material, approved by the City Engineer
and Community Development Director, designed to allow water to percolate into
the natural aquifer or groundwater system. Permeable pavers include solid or
semiporous pavers set in a designed or engineered pattern and in conjunction
with other materials to allow for the passage of water into the ground.
POTENTIAL GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREA: An area that:
   A.   Is designated by a Utah geological survey map, County geologist map, or
other relevant map or report as needing further study to determine the area's
potential for geologic hazard; or
   B.   Has not been studied by the Utah geological survey or a County
geologist but presents the potential of geologic hazard because the area has
characteristics similar to those of a designated geologic hazard area.
PRIMARY LAND USE: A primary use is a land use which is allowed in a zone as a
permitted or conditional use. A primary use is the primary or predominant
activity conducted on a lot.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A right-of-way serving no more than two (2) dwelling units.
PRIVATE LANE: A right-of-way serving three (3) to five (5) dwelling units.
PRIVATE NONPROFIT RECREATIONAL GROUNDS AND FACILITIES: Recreational grounds and
facilities operated by a nonprofit association incorporated under the
provisions of the Utah Nonprofit Corporation and Cooperation Act, or a
corporation sole.
PRIVATE ROAD: A right-of-way serving six (6) or more dwelling units.
PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS SERVICE: A use which provides various executive,
management, and/or administrative services and support but does not include on
premises sales of goods or commodities. Typical uses are legal services, real
estate, insurance, advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment
service, management and consulting, protective services, equipment rental and
leasing, auction services, commercial research, development and testing, and
photo finishing. Medical and dental offices are not included in this
definition.
PROFESSIONAL, FRATERNAL, AND SOCIAL ASSOCIATION: An organized group or society
having a restricted membership, regular meetings, rituals and formal written
membership requirements such as Elks, Masons, a labor union, or other
professional organization.
PROTECTED TREE: For the purposes of
chapter 13.77 of this title the following trees with a dbh larger than two
inches (2") are considered protected under the provisions of this title:
Community: A tree located or planted within a City-owned property such as City
Hall Park, Knudsen Park, Holladay Pines Park, Butternut Park or Stratton Park.
Heritage: A designation, voluntarily applied for by the property owner, as
being historic, rare, threatened, or of endangered species, reviewed and
approved by members of the Utah Community Forest Council (UCFC) as provided in
the Utah Heritage Tree Act of 1975.
Street: A tree located or planted within a public right-of- way.
Waterway: A tree located or planted within the area between the high water mark
and the apex of the bank of any stream or waterway and:
   A.   Twenty five feet (25') from the apex of the bank of a perennial stream
(Cottonwood Creek, Spring Creek), or
   B.   Twenty five feet (25') from the apex of the bank of an ephemeral stream
(Heughs Canyon, Neff's Canyon), or
   C.   Fifteen feet (15') from the apex of the bank of a manmade canal or
ditch (Salt Lake and Jordan Canal, East Jordan Canal, Upper Canal, Tanner
Ditch).
PROTECTED USE: For the purposes of
chapter 13.91, "Sexually Oriented Businesses", of this title, a church, public
library, public park or parkway, public recreation center, public or private
school, and residence or use in a Residential Zone.
PUBLIC AGENCY: The Federal government; the State; a county, municipality,
school district, local district, special service district, or other political
subdivision of the State; or a charter school.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building owned and operated, or owned and intended to be
operated by the City, a public agency of the United States of America, the
State of Utah, or any of its political subdivisions.
PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for
providing public health services including related facilities such as
laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection
therewith.
PUBLIC HEARING: A formal, duly noticed hearing at which members of the public
are provided the opportunity to comment on the subject of the hearing.
PUBLIC LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENT: Landscaping that an applicant is required to
install to comply with published installation and inspection specifications for
public improvements that: (a) will be dedicated to and maintained by the
municipality; or (b) are associated with and abut trail improvements that
connect to planned or existing public infrastructure.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting that is required to be open to the public under Utah
Code, title 52, chapter 4, Open and Public Meetings Act.
PUBLIC PARK: For the purposes of
chapter 13.91, "Sexually Oriented Businesses", of this title, a park,
playground, swimming pool, golf course, or athletic field which is under the
control, operation or management of a government agency.
PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY: A use within a structure or upon a developed lot,
available for public use, where the parking of more than four (4) vehicles is
permitted. Typical uses include a parking structure, surface parking, and a
shared parking facility.
PUBLIC USE: A use which serves the public health, safety or general welfare.
Typical uses include a public school, park, playground, or other recreational
facility, administrative and service facilities, and a public utility.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person with the requisite training, experience, and
professional certification or license in the field or fields relating to the
subject matter being studied or analyzed.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: A use operated by a private, nonprofit educational,
religious, recreational, charitable, or philanthropic institution which
primarily serves the general public.
RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING: A use for the origination and transmission
of radio and television signals.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. The following words have the following definitions:
Equal Opportunity: Achieving equal results as between a person with a
disability and a nondisabled person.
Necessary: The applicant must show that, but for the accommodation one or more
persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy
the housing of their choice.
Reasonable: A requested accommodation that will not undermine the legitimate
purpose of existing land use regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the
accommodation will provide to a person with a disability.
RECEPTION CENTER: A use providing meeting rooms, reception areas, catering,
entertainment, and other related services to a group of people.
RECORD OF SURVEY MAP: A map of a survey of land prepared in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 17-23-17.
RECREATION CENTER: A use providing a variety of recreation activities including
activities that are enclosed within a structure along with outdoor recreational
activities on the same premises. Activities may include those identified with
"indoor recreation", as well as "outdoor recreation".
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL, INDOOR: Public or private recreation uses, such as
tennis or other racquet courts, swimming pools, bowling alleys, skating rinks,
or similar uses which are enclosed in buildings and are operated on a
commercial or membership basis primarily for the use of persons who do not
reside on the same lot as that on which the recreational use is located.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL, OUTDOOR: An outdoor facility including a stadium,
athletic field, swimming pool, golf driving range, baseball batting range or
similar recreational facilities operated as a business and open to the general
public for a fee. For the purposes of this title, this definition includes
cultural activities, nature exhibitions, and amphitheaters.
RECREATION, FITNESS CENTER: A use providing completely enclosed fitness related
activities. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of food and/
or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed use. This definition may
include such uses as swimming pool, aerobics, weight training, diet counseling,
indoor running track, etc.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A self-propelled or permanently towable, mobile living
unit typically used for temporary human occupancy away from the user's
permanent place of residence. Recreational vehicles also include such vehicles
as a travel trailer, camper, boat/watercraft, and other similar types of
vehicles. For the purpose of this title, this definition does not include
motorcycles, off road or other similar vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: A business that sells, leases, and/or
rents new and/or used recreational vehicles.
RELATED: Related by blood, marriage or adoption within the definition of
"family".
RESOURCE RECYCLING COLLECTION: A portable structure, enclosed bin, trailer, or
other structure where recyclable material (aluminum cans, glass, paper, etc.)
is deposited temporarily.
RESTAURANT: A place of business where food is prepared and served to the public
for consumption on or off the premises.
RETAIL, GENERAL: A use that sells goods for consumer use available for purchase
and removal from the premises; excluding food sales or markets, specialty
retail sales such as tobacco specialty business as defined in Utah Annotated
Code section 10-8-41.6(1) and other retail uses specifically classified in
another definition herein.
RETAINING WALL: A wall designed and constructed to resist the lateral
displacement and erosion of soils or other materials.
RIDGELINE PROTECTION AREA: An area consisting of a prominent ridgeline that is
highly visible from public rights-of-way or trails, and that includes the crest
of such designated prominent hill or slope, plus the land located within one
hundred feet (100') horizontally (map distance) on either side of the crest.
SANITARY SEWER AUTHORITY: The department, agency, or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of sanitary sewer services
or on site wastewater systems.
SEASONAL SALES: A portable structure, including a vehicle, without a permanent
foundation, for use on a temporary or seasonal basis, from which goods or
merchandise are sold or where a service is provided which is utilized on the
premises. (See section
13.76.250 of this title.)
SETBACK: The required minimum horizontal distance that a building, structure,
or use must be set back from a specific property line.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: See title 5,
chapter 5.82 of this Code.
SHELTERED WORKSHOP: For the purposes of
chapter 13.98, "Group Homes; Other Facilities", of this title, an on site
supervised educational or vocational training facility for persons with a
disability which does not have residential facilities.
SHORT TERM RENTAL: See section
13.76.735 of this title. A dwelling or portion thereof available for use or is
used for accommodating or lodging of guests, paying a fee or other compensation
for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
SIGN: For the purposes of
chapter 13.82 of this title, a publicly displayed device or structure intended
to identify or advertise a business, advertise a product, or convey a
noncommercial message.
SIGN, ALTERATION: A change or rearrangement in the structural parts or design
whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height, or by
relocating or change in position.
SIGN, AREA: See section
13.04.050,
figures 13.04.050.6A through
E of this chapter. The area of a sign used for display purposes, excluding the
minimum frame and supports. In computing sign area, only one side of a back to
back or double faced sign shall be computed when signs are parallel or diverge
from a common edge by an angle of not more than thirty degrees (30°). In
relation to signs that do not have a frame or a separate background, sign area
shall be computed on the basis of the least rectilinear line with a maximum of
eight (8) sides, triangle or circle large enough to frame the display. Sign
areas in the shape of a sphere, prism, cylinder, cone, pyramid, square or other
such shapes shall be computed as one-half (1/2) of the total surface area.
SIGN, AWNING OR CANOPY: A sign that is painted or otherwise made part of a
canopy or awning that is a structure, constructed of metal, wood or other
material, placed so as to extend outward from a building or as a freestanding
roof structure over a drive- through facility. A canopy or awning may have
supports extending to the ground as well as attached to a building or other
permanent structure.
SIGN, BANNER: A sign made of fabric or a nonrigid material with no enclosing
framework.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Off Premises (Billboard).
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A permanently attached, manually operated sign that
displays a graphical content or a message that can be easily changed or
altered.
SIGN, COMMUNITY IDENTIFICATION OR GATEWAY: A sign created, erected and owned by
the city, usually in the city's right of way, or by permission on private
property, that identifies an entrance or gateway to the city of Holladay or
designates a particular location or area of the community. Such signs shall be
exempt from the regulations of this title.
SIGN, CROWN: A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside building
face of the topmost habitable story of a building.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that is incidental to a use lawfully occupying the
property upon which the sign is located and which sign is necessary to provide
information to the public, such as direction to parking lots, location of
restrooms, entrances and exits, etc.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign containing a computer generated
message such as a public service, time, temperature and date or a message
center or reader board where different copy changes or video images of a public
service or commercial nature are shown on the same lamp bank or message
facility.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or
outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes or is legible in the
absence of daylight by devices which reflect or project light upon it.
SIGN, INTERIOR: A sign located within a building so as to be primarily visible
only from within the building in which the sign is located.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A freestanding sign which is attached directly to the ground
and supported by a base, the width of which should be at least fifty percent
(50%) of the width of the sign.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: A sign or sign structure or portion
thereof lawfully existing or amended at the effective date of this chapter
which does not conform to all height, area, yard, spacing, animation, lighting,
use or other regulations prescribed in the zone in which it is located.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES (Billboard): A sign directing attention to a use, product,
commodity or service not related to the premises upon which the sign is
located. (See title 5,
chapter 5.72 of this code.)
SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign used to advertise the major activities conducted on
the property where the sign is located.
SIGN, PAINTED WALL: A sign painted on a wall but not having a sign frame or
separation from the wall.
SIGN, POLITICAL/CAMPAIGN: A sign advertising a candidate or candidates for
public elective office, soliciting votes or expressing an opinion that does not
contain commercial content.
SIGN, PROJECT IDENTIFICATION: An expanded and permanent, ground sign
identifying a cohesive commercial development at least two (2) acres in area
abutting major collector streets or arterial streets containing multiple lots
and/or multiple (principal) buildings and sharing common ownership, aesthetic
or maintenance interests.
SIGN, PROJECTING (Blade, Fin): A sign attached to a building or canopy and
extending in whole or part more than twelve inches (12") beyond a wall or roof
of the building.
SIGN, PROPERTY: A sign related to the property upon which it is located and
offering such information as address, name of occupant for residential uses,
warning against trespassing, hazard, or other danger on the property.
SIGN, PUBLIC EVENT: A sign of a temporary nature other than those established
by business for the purpose of advertising a special event pertaining to drives
or events of a civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organization.
SIGN, PUBLIC SAFETY: A public necessity sign such as bus stop, no parking and
street name signs installed by or with permission of the city of Holladay.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of
paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed out of doors for a
short period of time. For the purposes of this title this definition includes
all snipe, pedestal, A-frame, inflatable, wind or other such signs. See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.6E of this chapter.
SIGN, WALL: A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside wall of a
building and extending not more than twelve inches (12") from such wall with
messages or copy on the face side.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign intended to be visible from the public right of way and
painted on or temporarily affixed to a window or door surface.
SITE PLAN: An accurately scaled plan illustrating the existing and proposed
conditions on a lot as required by
chapter 13.08 of this title.
SLOPE: The level of inclination from the horizontal determined by dividing the
horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the same slope and
converting the resulting figure into a percentage value. For purposes of
estimating the average slope of a lot, the area included in the calculation
slopes must cover at least twenty five feet (25') vertically and fifty feet
(50') horizontally.
SMALL ENGINE, APPLIANCE, ELECTRICAL, AND MACHINE REPAIR: A business which
maintains and rehabilitates appliances and other machines customarily used in
the home and other equipment with a one cylinder engine such as lawn mowers and
chain saws.
SPECIFIED PUBLIC AGENCY: The state, a school district; or a charter school.
SPECIFIED PUBLIC UTILITY: An electrical corporation, gas corporation, or
telephone corporation, as those terms are defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 54-2-1, as amended.
SPORTSMAN'S KENNEL, CATTERY AND ANIMAL HOBBY PERMIT: A use, accessory to a
single-family dwelling unit in which three (3) but not more than five (5) dogs,
cats or ferrets, at least four (4) months old, are kept for the purpose of
breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing
which has a valid permit from the city department of animal services.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL: A use for the keeping of horses for remuneration, hire, or
sale.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned
by the occupants of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date of the first inspection on "permanent
construction" from the city building inspector within one hundred eighty (180)
days from the date the building permit was issued.
STATE: The state of Utah and any department, division, or agency of the state.
STORY: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.8 of this chapter.
   A.   The complete horizontal section of a building, having one continuous or
practically continuous floor where the vertical distance between the finished
floor of one level and the finished floor of the level above or below is
greater than six feet (6').
   B.   A complete horizontal section greater than six feet (6') in height
above grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or more
than twelve feet (12') in height above grade at any point shall be considered a
story.
STREAM CORRIDOR: The corridor defined by a perennial stream's ordinary high
water mark.
STREAM, EPHEMERAL: Those channels, swales, gullies, or low areas that do not
have flow year round or are not shown on USGS topographic maps as perennial
streams. These are generally channels that are tributary to perennial streams,
other ephemeral streams, terminal low areas, ponds, or lakes. They are
typically dry except during periods of snowmelt runoff or intense rainfall.
STREAM, PERENNIAL: Those streams, excluding ephemeral streams, ditches, and
canals constructed for irrigation and drainage purposes, that flow year round
during years of normal rainfall, and that are identified on United States
geological services (USGS) topographic maps as perennial streams.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A roadway intended to collect traffic from local and
residential collectors and distribute it to minor arterials and arterial
streets. These streets are designed with a sixty six foot (66') right of way.
STREET, FREEWAY: A divided major highway with full control of access and no at
grade crossings. These roadways serve as regional roads for longer trips and
carry a high number of vehicles at high speeds.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL: A street which serves as the principal network for
community and regional traffic and which carry higher volumes of traffic at
higher speeds. These streets are designed with an eighty foot (80') right-of-
way.
STREET, PRIMARY RESIDENTIAL: A street which collects traffic from residential,
local roads and distributes it to collector, minor arterial, and arterial
streets and is intended for low volume, interneighborhood trips, and lower
speed limits. These streets are designed with a sixty foot (60') right-of-way.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL: A street which has high traffic volumes, operates
at higher speeds, and has limited access. These streets are designed with
right-of-way widths either at eighty feet (80') or one hundred six feet (106')
depending on traffic volumes.
STREET, PUBLIC: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the
public and accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare, not less
than twenty five feet (25') of travel width, which has been made public by
right of use and which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property. For the purpose of this title, this definition also includes the
following: highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, road, or lane, etc.
STREET, SECONDARY RESIDENTIAL: A street which primarily provides direct access
to residential, commercial, and other abutting properties and is intended for
low volume, short trips, and lower speed limits. These streets are designed
with a fifty foot (50') right-of-way.
STREET TREE/COMMUNITY TREE PROGRAM: A document prepared by the City of Holladay
that contains regulations and industry consensus standards and City defined
specifications for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and
other plants upon City owned property, easements, and public rights-of-way. The
guide shall include the tree selection guide for planting trees and shrubs in
public rights-of-way and City owned property.
STRUCTURE: A building, bridge, framework, or other object that has been put
together from different parts, the use of which requires a fixed location on or
in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Any structure measuring eighteen inches or taller above the existing grades
shall meet all underlying zoning requirements.
STRUCTURE DESIGNED FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: For the purpose of
chapter 13.75, "Natural Hazard Areas", of this title, a residential dwelling or
other structure used or intended for human occupancy.
SUBDIVISION: Land that is divided, resubdivided, or proposed to be divided into
two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other division of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or
development either on the installment plan or other plans, terms, and
conditions.
   A.   "Subdivision" includes the division or development of land whether by
deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat, or other
recorded instrument; and except as provided in subsection B of this definition,
divisions of land for residential and nonresidential uses, including land used
or to be used for commercial, agricultural, and industrial purposes.
   B.   "Subdivision" does not include:
      1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land
use ordinance;
      2.   A recorded agreement between owners of abutting unsubdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if no new lot is created; and the
adjustment does not violate applicable Land Use Ordinances;
      3.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record revising the
legal description of more than one contiguous unsubdivided parcel of property
into one legal description encompassing all such parcels of property; or
joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of property that has
not been subdivided, if the joinder does not violate applicable Land Use
Ordinances; or a recorded agreement between owners of abutting subdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if no new dwelling lot or housing
unit will result from the adjustment; and the adjustment will not violate an
applicable Land Use Ordinance.
   C.   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a subdivision under
this definition as to the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the
unsubdivided parcel to the subdivision requirements of this title.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, damage
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
original condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title:
   A.   Repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure,
before the improvement or repair is started.
   B.   For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of a wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   C.   This definition does not include:
      1.   Projects for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
SURGICAL OUT-PATIENT FACILITY: An establishment offering any type of surgical
procedures and related care which, in the opinion of the attending physician,
can be performed safely without requiring inpatient overnight hospital care as
licensed physicians ordinarily may elect to perform in their private offices.
SURVEY MONUMENT: A permanent marker set in the ground referencing survey
coordinates, elevations, property lines, roadway centerlines, right-of-way
lines, or other survey or property location data.
TATTOO/BODY ART: A design made on or under the skin by a process of pricking or
ingraining pigment, dye or ink in the skin excluding permanent cosmetics.
TEMPORARY BUILDING INCIDENTAL TO CONSTRUCTION: A structure which is intended
for temporary or short term use and incidental to construction.
TEMPORARY LODGING, HOTEL, AND MOTEL: A use located on a single lot, designed
for use by guests and furnishing customary hotel services for a period of
thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less.
TEMPORARY SALES: A use established for three (3) days or less with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
TRAIL: A recreational pathway for use by the public for walking, biking, and/or
horseback riding as designated.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, typically having a single stem or trunk growing
to a considerable height and bearing lateral branches at some distance from the
ground. For the purposes of this title, while a tree may be within, or part of,
either a wild/natural area or a man-made landscape(d) area, distinct planting
standards are set forth herein governing the [required] planting and protection
of the same.
TREE BARRIERS: For the purposes of section
13.77.080, "Tree Canopy Sustainability", of this title, a device such as
fencing, berms, or signage installed to limit access to a tree protection zone.
TREE CALIPER: A landscape and nursery trade standard for trunk measurement
determined by measuring the diameter of the trunk six inches (6") above the
ground for up to and including four inch (4") caliper size, and twelve inches
(12") above the ground for larger trees.
TREE CANOPY: The outer limits of a tree's foliage consisting of leaves,
branches and stems that cover the ground when viewed from above. This may also
include understory vegetation.
TREE CANOPY COVERAGE: The area of a lot that is covered by the canopies of
existing trees, including immature trees, and newly planted trees and can be
designated on a tree preservation plan.
TREE CARE STANDARDS, INDUSTRY CONSENSUS: Accepted practices for tree care
include - ANSI A300, nursery stock - ANSI Z60.1, and arboricultural safety
requirements - ANSI Z133.1., a set of parameters developed by a group of
materially affected parties in accordance with accepted essential requirements
for openness, balance, consensus and due process.
TREE, GROVE: A group of trees in close proximity, especially where branches
touch or vertically overlap another tree.
TREE, SIGNIFICANT: Trees of six inch (6") caliper or greater measured at breast
height, groves of five (5) or more smaller trees, or clumps of trees covering
an area of fifty (50) square feet within the drip zone.
TREE TOPPING: The reduction of a tree's size using heading cuts that shorten
limbs or branches back to a predetermined crown limit.
UTILITY, ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT: For the purposes of
chapter 13.79, "Utility And Facility System Placement Regulations", of this
title, the portion of the system, including equipment sites, transformers,
switchgear, pedestals, terminals, meters, buildings (substations), and other
similar equipment, that is normally installed aboveground.
UTILITY COMPANY, PUBLIC: A company that provides a service such as electricity,
gas, telephone, or water.
UTILITY FACILITY COMPANY: A company that provides a service such as cable
television or telecommunications.
UTILITY SYSTEM: All poles, towers, wires, lines, cables, conduits, pipes and
accessory equipment providing service such as electricity, telephone,
telegraph, cable television, gas, water, sewer, steam or petroleum including
service drops, distribution system, transmission system, and accessory
equipment.
VARIANCE:
   A.   For the specific purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, this term
refers to a grant of relief to a person from a requirement of the adopted flood
damage prevention regulations when specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
   B.   For the general purposes of this title, see section
13.09.020 of this title.
VENDING CART: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.11 of this chapter. Includes any nonmotorized mobile device or
pushcart smaller than three feet (3') in width and eight feet (8') in length
from which limited types of products, are sold or offered for sale directly to
any consumer, where the point of sale is conducted at the cart.
VETERINARY SERVICE: A use operated by a licensed veterinarian providing medical
care to animals, fish, reptiles, birds, etc.
VIOLATION: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the
failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)
(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER INTEREST: A right to the beneficial use of water, including each of the
rights listed in Utah Code Annotated section 73-1-11, as amended, and an
ownership interest in the right to the beneficial use of water represented by a
contract; or a share in a water company, as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 73-3-3.5, as amended.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: For the purposes of
chapter 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", of this title, the height
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929 (or other datum, where specified).
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, AMATEUR RADIO FACILITY: For the purposes of
chapter 13.83, "Wireless Telecommunications Facilities", of this title, an
antenna and antenna support structure capable of transmitting as well as
receiving signals and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
to transmit amateur radio signals regardless of the transmission mode or
frequency. For the purposes of this title, an amateur radio tower/antenna shall
be considered an accessory structure and regulated as such (see
chapter 13.83 of this title).
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used
in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio signals.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: An unmanned structure which consists of
equipment used primarily for the transmission, reception or transfer of voice
or data through radio wave or wireless transmissions. Such sites typically
require the construction of transmission support structures to which antenna
equipment is attached.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting multiple sided,
open steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, MONOPOLE: An antenna or series of individual
antennas mounted on a single cylindrical pole. Also includes associated
equipment. For the purposes of this title, if a facility does not fit the
definition of a roof or wall mounted facility it shall be considered a monopole
facility.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, ROOF MOUNTED: An antenna or series of individual
antennas mounted on a flat or pitched roof, mechanical room, or penthouse of a
building or structure. Also includes associated equipment.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, STEALTH: A wall, roof, or monopole facility which
is disguised as another object or otherwise concealed from view. Examples of
stealth facilities include, but are not limited to, trees, synthetic rocks,
flagpoles or architectural elements such as dormers, steeples, and chimneys.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, WALL MOUNTED: An antenna or series of individual
antennas mounted against the vertical wall of a building or structure. Also
includes associated equipment.
YARD: A space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by
buildings or structures, except as follows:
   A.   Fences;
   B.   Canopies allowed under
chapter 13.82 of this title;
   C.   Accessory buildings in a rear yard;
   D.   The ordinary projections of windows where the projection is at least
eighteen inches (18") above floor level, roofs, cornices, chimneys, flues, and
other ornamental features which project into a yard not more than three feet
(3');
   E.   Open or lattice enclosed exterior stairways, located in a Commercial
Zone, projecting into a yard not more than five feet (5'); and
   F.   Structures less than eighteen inches (18") in height from the finished
ground surface.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.4 of this chapter. The side yard adjacent to a public street
or private road extending from the front yard setback line to the rear lot
line.
YARD, FRONT: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.4 of this chapter. A space on the same lot with a building,
between the front line of the building and the front lot line, and extending
across the full width of the lot.
YARD, REAR: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.4 of this chapter. A space on the same lot with a building,
between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line, and extending the
full width of the lot and more or less opposite to the front lot line.
YARD, SIDE: See section
13.04.050,
figure 13.04.050.4 of this chapter. A space on the same lot with a building,
between the side line of the building and the side lot line, and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard.
ZERO LOT LINE: The location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that one
or more of the structure's side facades rest directly on a lot line.
ZONING MAP: The map, adopted as part of this title that depicts land use zones,
overlays, or districts.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2012-24, 11-1-2012; Ord. 2013-20, 9-5-2013;
Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013; Ord. 2013-26, 10-10-2013; Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014; Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015; Ord. 2016-03, 3-17-2016; Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018; Ord. 2018-
17, 11-1-2018; Ord. 2018-18, 11-8-2018; Ord. 2019-07, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2019-09,
5-16-2019; Ord. 2021-13, 5-20-2021; Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021; Ord. 2021-27, 10-
14-2021; Ord. 2022-04, 1-20-2022; Ord. 2022-14, 6-16-2022; Ord. 2023-09, 9-7-
2023; Ord. 2023-10, 9-7-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024; Ord. 2025-03, 3-20-2025)
13.04.050: ILLUSTRATIONS:
FIGURE 13.04.050.1
BUILDING HEIGHT STEPS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4834.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.2
LOT WIDTH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4836.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.3
CALCULATION OF SLOPE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4838.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.4
YARD DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4840.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.5
TYPES OF LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4842.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.6A
CALCULATING THE AREA OF A SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4844.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.6B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4846.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.6C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4848.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.6D
CALCULATING THE HEIGHT OF A MONUMENT SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4850.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.6E
SIGN TYPES
   Awning/Canopy Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4852.gif]
   Projecting Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4854.gif]
   Temporary Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4856.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.7
MINOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4858.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.8
STORY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4860.gif]
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
FIGURE 13.04.050.9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4862.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.10
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4864.gif]
FIGURE 13.04.050.11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4866.gif]
(Ord. 2013-20, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.05
LAND USE AND APPEAL AUTHORITIES
SECTION:
13.05.010: Purpose
13.05.020: Scope
13.05.030: City Council
13.05.040: Planning Commission
13.05.050: Community Development Director
13.05.060: Technical Review Committee
13.05.070: Design Review Board
13.05.080: Historical Preservation Commission
13.05.090: Administrative Appeals Officer
13.05.100: Appendix B
13.05.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the land use authority responsible
for decisions applying to the administration and provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.05.020: SCOPE:
The authority of the decision making bodies and officials as set forth in this
chapter shall apply to the entirety of this title, subject to its various
provisions. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.05.030: CITY COUNCIL:
In addition to the powers and duties of the city council set forth in title 2
of this code, in administering this title the city council shall have the
powers and duties set forth below. Each of such powers and duties shall be
exercised pursuant to the procedural and other applicable provisions of this
title.
   A.   General Plan: Adopt, modify, or reject a proposed general plan or any
amendment thereto for all or part of the city and its surroundings;
   B.   Text Amendments And Rezones: Adopt, modify, or reject proposed
amendments to the text of this title and/or the zoning map;
   C.   Temporary Land Use Regulations: Adopt temporary land use regulations;
   D.   Land Use Authority: Act as a land use authority as provided in this
title; and
   E.   Appeals: Act as an appeal authority as provided in this title; and
   F.   Establish Fees: Establish a fee schedule for applications required by
the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.05.040: PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Purpose: A planning commission is hereby created pursuant to the terms
hereof. It is the intent of the city council that the commission represent the
concerns of diverse citizen groups, as well as the broad interests of the
community as a whole; that membership of the planning commission represents a
fair cross section of the community and provide balanced representation in
terms of geographic, professional, neighborhood and community interest; and
that a wide range of expertise relating to development of a healthy and well
planned community be sought when establishing or altering the composition of
the membership of the planning commission. It is also the intent of this title
that the activities of the planning commission and of its subcommittees, if
any, be conducted to maximize the convenience and accessibility to the citizens
of the city.
   B.   Appointment: The planning commission shall be constituted and appointed
as follows: shall consist of seven (7) members and one alternate member, who
shall be appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city
council.
   C.   Term And Term Limitation: Members of the planning commission, including
the alternate member, shall serve a term of three (3) years and shall not serve
more than two (2) consecutive terms.
      1.   Each term shall begin on July 1 of the year of appointment and shall
end on June 30 of the year when the appointment term expires.
      2.   The terms of planning commission members shall be staggered. A
planning commission member may be appointed for a term of less than three (3)
years to provide for staggered terms or to complete a vacated, unexpired term.
   D.   Geographic Representation: In order to promote geographic
representation on the planning commission, one member of the planning
commission shall be appointed from each of the five (5) city council districts
in the city as established in section
2.08.050 of this code, and two (2) members, plus the alternate member, shall be
appointed at large. No more than two (2) members of the planning commission
shall reside in one city council district.
   E.   Residency Requirement: All members of the planning commission must be
bona fide residents and qualified electors of the city.
   F.   Compensation: Each member of the planning commission shall receive
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per meeting as compensation and as reimbursement
for expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties; provided,
however, that such compensation and reimbursement not exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per month. The alternate member of the planning commission
shall receive twenty five dollars ($25.00) per meeting as compensation as set
forth above for each meeting at which the attendance of the alternate member is
requested by the chair of the planning commission.
   G.   Removal And Vacancies: Members of the planning commission may be
removed for cause by the city manager, upon written charges and after a public
hearing (if a public hearing is requested by the member being removed). Cause
shall include, but not be limited to, violations of the Utah municipal
officers’ and employees’ ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et
seq., or its successor. Any vacancy occurring on the planning commission by
reason of death, resignation or removal shall be promptly filled by the city
manager with advice and consent of the city council for the unexpired term of
such member. Any vacancy occurring on the planning commission by reason of
expiration of term shall be promptly filled by the city manager with the advice
and consent of the city council.
   H.   Officers: The planning commission shall annually elect a chairperson
and such other officers it deems advisable from among its members. The
chairperson and such other officers elected by the planning commission shall
serve for a term of one year and shall not hold the position of chair for more
than two (2) consecutive one year terms.
   I.   Quorum: No action of the planning commission shall be official or of
any effect except when a quorum of the members is present. Four (4) members of
the planning commission shall constitute a quorum.
   J.   Procedure: The planning commission shall adopt policies and procedures
for the conduct of its meetings, the processing of applications, and for any
other purposes considered necessary for the functioning of the planning
commission.
   K.   Powers And Duties: The planning commission shall have the following
duties as per chapter
13.101 Appendix B of this title:
      1.   Prepare and recommend a general plan and amendments to the general
plan to the city council;
      2.   Recommend land use ordinances and zoning maps, official maps, and
amendments to land use ordinances and maps to the city council;
      3.   Act as a land use authority as provided in this title;
      4.   Act as an appeal authority as provided in this title;
      5.   Advise the city council on matters as the city council directs;
      6.   Exercise any other powers necessary to enable it to perform
functions delegated to it by the city council, or conferred upon it by state
statutes.
   L.   Meetings:
      1.   The planning commission shall meet at least once each month. Any
member who cannot attend any meeting of the planning commission shall so notify
the chair of the planning commission, who shall direct the alternate member of
the planning commission to fill the vacancy at such meeting.
      2.   The alternate member may participate in a meeting at which all seven
(7) regular members of the planning commission are present but may not vote.
      3.   All meetings, including any necessary public hearings, shall be held
after the regular working hours of the city.
      4.   All meetings and public hearings of the planning commission shall be
public meetings, and shall comply with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
section 52-4-1 et seq., as amended.
      5.   Such meetings shall be held in a public place designated by the
planning commission and shall be of sufficient size to ensure public access.
      6.   The planning commission shall keep minutes and a recording of the
commission’s proceedings as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-203,
as amended.
      7.   The official record of all commission meetings shall be the written
and approved minutes.
      8.   Copies of the minutes and any recordings may be provided, if
requested, at the expense of the requesting party. If minutes are available but
not yet approved by the commission, they shall be clearly identified as
“unofficial”.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.05.050: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
   A.   Appointment: The community development director is primarily
responsible for administering and enforcing this title.
   B.   Interpretation: When necessary, the community development director
shall interpret the provisions of this title, subject to general and specific
policies established by the planning commission and city council. Upon request,
the community development director shall make a written interpretation of the
text of this title pursuant to the provisions of section
13.08.120 of this title.
   C.   Administrative Duties: The community development director shall
accomplish or cause to be accomplished all administrative actions required by
this title, including the giving of notice, holding of hearings, preparation of
staff reports and receiving and processing of appeals. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.05.060: TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   Purpose: The technical review committee (TRC) is hereby established to
assure that all proposed development within the city complies with the city
general plan and with current city ordinances and resolutions. No proposed
development shall be considered by the planning commission or city council
until the TRC has reviewed the proposed development and makes findings with
regard to compliance with the general plan, provisions of this code, and other
pertinent municipal regulations.
   B.   Membership: The TRC shall consist of members of city staff as
determined by the community and economic development director, including the
city engineer, the building official, staff planners, the city fire prevention
officer and the city attorney, as needed.
   C.   Duties: The TRC shall act under the direction of the community and
economic development director and shall have the following duties and
responsibilities as per chapter
13.101 Appendix B of this title.
      1.   The TRC shall act as the Land Use Authority to review and approve
final subdivision plats.
      2.   The TRC shall review the following items to determine if they comply
with current city ordinances and resolutions:
         a.   Preliminary and final subdivision plats.
         b.   Conditional and permitted use site plans.
         c.   Planned unit developments.
         d.   Any other proposed development of real property requiring
planning commission review.
      3.   The TRC shall make recommendations regarding the following items:
         a.   Rezones.
         b.   General plan amendments.
         c.   Amended subdivision plats and street vacations.
         d.   Text amendments.
         e.   Any development matter governed by a law that gives discretionary
authority to determine compliance.
   D.   Procedures: The TRC may establish procedures for the preparation of
agendas, the scheduling of meetings, and the conduct of meetings and field
trips.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.05.070: DESIGN REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Purpose: A design review board (DRB) is hereby established as provided
in this section and in accordance with the procedure established by this code
for district representation. The purpose of the DRB is to evaluate the design
of proposed developments within the Holladay Village (HV) zone and Holladay
Crossroads (HCR) zone and make recommendations to the planning commission
regarding such development.
   B.   Appointment: Appointment: The DRB shall consist of six (6) members and
one alternate member. The board should include where possible professionals who
have expertise in the fields of architectural design, landscape design,
interior design, urban design, architectural history, art or graphic design,
engineering, or planning; a property owner or business owner within the
Holladay Village commercial area, a property owner or business owner within the
Holladay Crossroads master plan area; and a property owner who resides within a
residential neighborhood adjacent to the Holladay Village area and a property
owner who resides within a residential neighborhood adjacent to the Holladay
Crossroads area. Board members shall be appointed by the city manager with the
advice and consent of the city council.
   C.   Term And Term Limitation: Each board member, including the alternate
member, shall serve a term of three (3) years and may be reappointed for two
(2) consecutive staggered terms.
   D.   Residency Requirement: Each member of the DRB shall be a bona fide
resident and qualified elector of the city.
   E.   Compensation: Each member of the DRB shall receive forty-five dollars
($45.00) per meeting as compensation and as reimbursement for expenses incurred
in the performance of their official duties; provided, however, that such
compensation and reimbursement not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
month. The alternate member of the board shall receive forty-five dollars
($45.00) per meeting as compensation as set forth above for each meeting at
which the attendance of the alternate member is requested by the chair of the
board.
   F.   Removal And Vacancies: Members of the DRB may be removed for cause by
the city manager, upon written charges. Cause shall include, but not be limited
to, violations of the Utah municipal officers’ and employees’ ethics act, Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended. Any vacancy occurring on
the DRB by reason of death, resignation or removal shall be promptly filled by
the city manager with advice and consent of the city council for the unexpired
term of such member. Any vacancy occurring on the board by reason of expiration
of term shall be promptly filled by the city manager with the advice and
consent of the city council.
   G.   Officers: The DRB shall annually elect a chairperson and such other
officers it deems advisable from among its members. The chairperson and such
other officers elected by the DRB shall serve for a term of one year and shall
not hold the position of chair for more than two (2) consecutive one year
terms.
   H.   Quorum: No action of the DRB shall be official or of any effect except
when a quorum of the members is present. Three (3) members of the DRB shall
constitute a quorum.
   I.   Procedure: The DRB shall adopt policies and procedures for the conduct
of its meetings, the processing of applications, and for any other purposes
considered necessary for the functioning of the board. Such policies and
procedures shall be approved by the city council before taking effect.
   J.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   When a land use application is submitted for development in the HV
and RO zones, and determined to be complete by the TRC, the DRB shall review
the application as provided in sections
13.71.020 and
13.50.010 of this title.
      2.   The DRB may recommend to the planning commission amendments to this
title regarding development in the HV and RO zones.
   K.   Meetings:
      1.   DRB meetings shall be held on an “as needed” basis and at the call
of the community development director. Any member who cannot attend a meeting
of the DRB shall so notify the community development director who shall direct
the alternate member of the board to fill the vacancy at such meeting. The
alternate member may participate in a meeting at which all five (5) regular
members of the DRB are present but may not vote.
      2.   DRB meetings shall be held after the regular working hours of the
city and shall comply with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-
102 et seq., or its successor. Such meetings shall be held in a public place
designated by the community development director and shall be of sufficient
size to ensure public access.
      3.   Minutes and recordings of DRB proceedings shall be kept and such
proceedings shall be recorded as provided by law, Utah Code Annotated section
52-4-203, as amended.
      4.   Copies of the minutes and recordings shall be made available to the
public as provided in the Utah government records access and management act,
Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-101 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014; Ord. 2022-16, 6-16-2022)
13.05.080: HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   Purpose: The historical preservation commission shall make
recommendations to the planning commission for those matters outlined in
chapter 13.86 of this title.
   B.   Powers And Duties: Powers and duties of the historical preservation
commission shall include those outlined in subsection A of this section. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2016-09, 5-26-2016)
13.05.090: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS OFFICER:
The city hereby establishes an administrative appeals officer pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-103(2), as amended, to hear requests for variances
from this title and other specified appeals as set forth in this title.
   A.   Appointment: The administrative appeals board shall consist of one
individual, appointed by the city manager, with the advice and consent of the
city council, for a term of three (3) years and thereafter may be appointed for
succeeding three (3) year terms. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the previous officer.
   B.   Qualifications: The officer shall, as a minimum, have such training and
experience as will qualify him to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial
hearings regarding land use, land development, and regulatory codes dealing
with issues related to land use and have knowledge and familiarity with
constitutional due process rights.
   C.   Removal: The city manager may remove an administrative appeals officer
upon the advice and consent of the city council.
   D.   Reappointment: In the case of death, resignation, removal or
disqualification, the position of an administrative appeals officer shall be
promptly filled by a replacement appointed by the city manager with the advice
and consent of the city council for the unexpired term of the previous officer.
   E.   Pro Tempore Appointments: The city manager may, from time to time,
appoint an administrative appeals officer pro tempore on a temporary basis when
necessitated by the absence, unavailability, incapacity or disqualification of
the regularly appointed officer, upon the advice and consent of the city
council. Each officer pro tempore shall, as a minimum, have qualifications
which are similar to those specified in subsection B of this section. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.05.100: APPENDIX B:
The land use and appeal authorities as allowed by this title are also shown in
chapter 13.101 of this title, appendix B. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.06
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
SECTION:
13.06.010: Common Provisions
13.06.020: Procedure
13.06.030: Public Hearings And Public Meetings
13.06.040: Public Notice
13.06.050: General Decision Making Standards
13.06.060: When A Land Use Applicant Is Entitled To Approval
13.06.070: Exactions
13.06.080: Vested Rights
13.06.010: COMMON PROVISIONS:
The following provisions shall apply to any land use application required by
this title.
   A.   Approval Required: No development activity shall be undertaken unless
applicable approvals and permits have been obtained as provided in this title.
Failure to obtain such approval may be enforced as provided in
chapter 13.94 of this title.
   B.   Application Forms: A land use application shall be submitted on a form
provided by the city along with all documents and information as required by
chapter 13.03 of this title or other applicable chapter of this title.
   C.   City Initiated Applications: The planning commission or two (2) city
council members may initiate any action under this title without an application
from a property owner. Notice, hearing, and other procedural requirements of
this chapter shall apply to an application initiated by the city.
   D.   Consideration Of A Land Use Application: No land use application shall
be considered unless:
      1.   The application is complete, and
      2.   The requested approval is allowed by the zone where the subject
property is located, or
      3.   The application is submitted simultaneously with a proposed zoning
map amendment that would, if approved, allow the proposal.
   E.   Accurate Information: All documents, plans, reports, studies, and
information provided to the city by an applicant in accordance with the
requirements of this title shall be accurate and complete.
   F.   Fees: When an application is filed the applicant shall pay to the city
any fee associated with such application as may be set by the city council. Any
application not accompanied by a required fee shall be returned to the
applicant as incomplete.
   G.   Review Of Application: The land use authority shall substantively
review a complete application and shall approve or deny the application with
reasonable diligence.
   H.   Expiration Of Application: If after review of a complete application,
the applicant is required to respond with additional information necessary for
consideration of the application by the land use authority but fails to respond
within six (6) months, the application shall expire.
   I.   Withdrawal Of Application:
      1.   If an applicant fails to correct specified deficiencies within
thirty (30) days after notification thereof the city may deem the application
to be withdrawn. If the application is deemed withdrawn, the application and
any associated fee shall be returned to the applicant upon request; provided,
however, the city may deduct from the application fee the cost of determining
completeness of the application.
      2.   Following submission of a complete application, an applicant may
withdraw the application at any time prior to action on the application by a
land use authority or appeal authority. Application fees shall not be
refundable if prior to withdrawal:
         a.   Staff review of the application has been undertaken; or
         b.   Notice for a public hearing or meeting on the application has
been mailed, posted, or published.
   J.   Decision Date: A decision by a land use authority or appeal authority
shall be issued in writing and takes effect on the date of the written notice.
The written notice constitutes a final decision for purposes of appeal. For any
decision made by the community development director, the final decision date is
the date specified on the property owner's notification letter in the
application file.
   K.   Extension Of Time: Unless otherwise prohibited by this title, upon
written request and for good cause shown, any land use authority or appeal
authority having power to grant approval of an application may, without any
notice or hearing, grant an extension of any time limit imposed by this title.
The total time granted by any such extension or extensions shall not exceed
twice the length of the original time period or one year, whichever is less.
   L.   Procedural Irregularity:
      1.   An action conducted by a land use authority under provisions of this
title which establishes a procedure for the conduct or approval of an
application shall not be deemed invalid or set aside due to error caused by
irregularity, neglect, or omission unless:
         a.   An examination of the record reveals that the procedural error
complained of was prejudicial to a substantial right of the complainant;
         b.   That the decision would have been different had the error not
occurred; and
         c.   Because of the error, the complainant suffered an injury for
which relief must be granted.
      2.   The complainant shall have the burden of proof to show that an error
is prejudicial or that an injury occurred.
   M.   Examination And Copying Of Application And Other Documents: Upon
request, and during normal business hours, any person may examine an
application and materials submitted in support of or in opposition to the
application. Copies of such materials shall be made available at reasonable
cost. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.06.020: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Generally: To facilitate the processing of applications, the city
requires the following:
      1.   Technical Review Committee (TRC) Review: Applications shall be
submitted for TRC review at least one week prior to a regular TRC meeting, to
allow for adequate investigations and staff review. Applications may require
compliance with TRC review procedures as a prerequisite to formal receipt and
action by the appropriate land use authority. Consideration of applications not
received in a timely manner shall be delayed until the next TRC meeting.
      2.   Staff Review: Review by staff or the TRC is required prior to review
by the approving land use authority and is not a substitute for such approval.
   B.   Review For Completeness: Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of all
required fees and information for any specific step of the review procedure,
the community development director and the technical review committee shall
review the application for completeness and compliance with the general plan,
provisions of this code, and other pertinent municipal regulations. When the
community development director with a recommendation from the technical review
committee determines that the application is ready for review by the approving
land use authority, the application shall be scheduled for review at the next
available public meeting of the appropriate land use authority. Incomplete
applications shall not be scheduled for further review.
   C.   Submission Defined: Whenever applications to the planning commission
for formal action are required by this code, "submission to the planning
commission" is hereby defined as submission of such applications at a regularly
scheduled public meeting of the planning commission.
   D.   As Built Construction Drawings: Submission of as built drawings shall
be required prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit by the city of
Holladay, or release of development agreement, including any private common
facilities that may in the future be accepted for public maintenance.
Submissions shall include as built drawings of all required public improvements
once constructed. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.06.030: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC MEETINGS:
Any public hearing or public meeting required under this title shall be
scheduled and held subject to the requirements of this section.
   A.   Scheduling Of Meetings: An application requiring a public hearing or
meeting shall be scheduled within a reasonable time following receipt of a
complete application. The amount of time between receipt of a complete
application and holding a public hearing or meeting shall be considered in the
light of:
      1.   The complexity of the application submitted;
      2.   The number of other applications received which require a public
hearing or meeting;
      3.   Available staff resources; and
      4.   Applicable public notice requirements.
   B.   Minutes And Recording: Written minutes and a recording shall be kept of
all public hearings and meetings as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 52-
4-203, as amended. Written minutes of an open meeting shall include:
      1.   The date, time, and place of the meeting;
      2.   The names of members present;
      3.   The substance of all matters proposed, discussed, or decided, and a
record, by individual member, of the vote taken;
      4.   The names of the persons who provided testimony or comments to the
public body, and the substance, in brief, of the testimony or comments
provided; and
      5.   Any other information that is a record of the proceedings of the
meeting or hearing that any member requests be entered in the minutes or
recording.
   C.   Record Of Meeting: The minutes, tape recordings, all applications,
exhibits, papers and reports submitted in any meeting before the decision
making body or official, and the decision of the decision making body or
official, shall constitute the record thereof. Written and approved minutes
shall be the official record of action taken at a public meeting. The record
shall be made available for public examination as provided in title 2 of this
code. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.06.040: PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   In General:
      1.   The city shall provide notice of any public hearing or meeting
required for consideration of a land use application under this title. For
purposes of this title, noticing requirements set forth herein shall not apply
to applications for building permits.
      2.   The agenda of any public hearing or public meeting required for
consideration of a land use application under this title shall be as per public
noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title
13.
   B.   Applicant Notice:
      1.   For a land use application, the city shall:
         a.   Notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the public
hearing or meeting to consider the application;
         b.   Provide to the applicant a copy of the staff report regarding the
applicant or the pending application at least three (3) business days before
the public hearing or meeting; and
         c.   Notify the applicant in writing of any final action on a pending
application.
      2.   If the city fails to comply with the requirements of subsection Bla
or Bib of this section, or both, an applicant may waive the failure so that the
application may stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda and be
considered as if the requirements had been met.
   C.   Third Party Notice: as per public noticing provisions provided in
Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
   D.   Public Meetings: The city shall provide notice as per public noticing
provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
   E.   Notice Challenge: If notice given under the authority of this section
is not challenged within thirty (30) days after the meeting or action for which
notice is given, the notice is considered adequate and proper. (Ord. 2016-04,
4-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.06.050: GENERAL DECISION MAKING STANDARDS:
The decision making standards set forth in this section are based on the
fundamental distinction between legislative, administrative, and quasi-judicial
proceedings. Legislative proceedings establish public law and policy applicable
generally, while administrative and quasi-judicial proceedings apply such law
and policy to factually distinct, individual circumstances.
   A.   Legislative Procedures:
      1.   Legislative land use decisions include the following:
         a.   General plan amendments;
         b.   Zoning map amendments;
         c.   Zoning text amendments;
         d.   Street vacations and modifications to public easements and rights
of way;
         e.   Temporary land use regulations; and
         f.   Historic site designation.
      2.   Decisions regarding a legislative application shall be based on the
"reasonably debatable" standard, as follows:
         a.   The land use authority shall determine what action, in its sole
judgment, will reasonably promote the public interest, implement the general
plan, conserve property value, avoid incompatible development, encourage
appropriate land use and development, and promote the general public welfare.
         b.   In making such determination, a land use authority member may,
among other things, consider:
            (1)   Staff reports;
            (2)   Testimony presented at a public hearing or meeting;
            (3)   Personal knowledge of conditions and activities bearing on
the issue at hand; and
            (4)   The effect that a particular proposal may have on existing
conditions and activities and upon orderly development of the city.
         c.   The land use authority shall state on the record the rationale
for its decision.
   B.   Administrative Procedures:
      1.   Administrative land use decisions include the following:
         a.   Subdivisions, where the vacation or modification of a public
street is not involved;
         b.   Permitted use site plan;
         c.   Conditional use permit;
         d.   Permitted use;
         e.   Temporary use permit;
         f.   Sign permit;
         g.   Building permit;
         h.   Special exception; and
         i.   Any land use application where a provision of this title is
applied to a factually distinct, individual circumstance but which is not an
appeal.
      2.   Decisions regarding an administrative land use application shall be
based on the "substantial evidence" standard as follows:
         a.   Any administrative land use application for which substantial
evidence in the record shows compliance with requirements applicable to the
application shall be approved.
            (1)   "Substantial evidence" is that quantity and quality of
relevant evidence adequate to convince a reasonable mind to support a
conclusion.
            (2)   Modifications may be imposed to conform an application with
applicable requirements of this title.
         b.   A decision under this subsection shall include at least the
following elements:
            (1)   A statement of approval, approval with requirements, or
disapproval, as the case may be; and
            (2)   A summary of evidence presented which forms the basis for the
decision, including specific references to applicable standards set forth in
this title, other provisions of this code, or other applicable law.
   C.   Quasi-Judicial Procedures:
      1.   Quasi-judicial land use decision include the following:
         a.   Administrative interpretation;
         b.   Nonconformity determination;
         c.   Variance;
         d.   Appeal of an administrative decision;
         e.   Permit revocation;
         f.   Zone boundary or map interpretation.
   D.   Fundamental Fairness: Consideration of any land use application shall
be fundamentally fair, which for the purpose of this title means:
      1.   In any land use proceeding, notice is provided as required by this
title and fair procedure is applied to the proceeding; and
      2.   In a legislative proceeding, a decision by the city council which
advances a legitimate public purpose and could advance the public welfare.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.06.060: WHEN A LAND USE APPLICANT IS ENTITLED TO APPROVAL:
   A.   Pending Text Or Zoning Map Amendments:
      1.   An applicant is entitled to approval of an administrative land use
application if the application conforms to the requirements of this code when a
complete application is submitted and all fees have been paid, unless:
         a.   The land use authority, on the record, finds that a compelling,
countervailing public interest would be jeopardized by approving the
application; or
         b.   Before the application is submitted, the appropriate land use
authority has forwarded a formal recommendation to the legislative body to
amend the provisions of this title in a manner that would prohibit approval of
the application as submitted. Formal initiation of an amendment means
compliance with section
13.07.030 of this title.
      2.   If a text or zoning map amendment which may affect an application is
pending prior to submission of an application, the applicant shall not be
entitled to rely on existing provisions but may be required to comply with
newly enacted provisions as set forth in this subsection.
      3.   The city shall process an application without regard to a pending
amendment to this title if:
         a.   One hundred eighty (180) days have passed since the pending
amendment was forwarded to the legislative body; and
         b.   Action of the legislative body has not resulted in an enactment
that prohibits approval of the application as submitted.
   B.   Imposition Of Permit Requirements: The city may not impose on a holder
of an issued land use permit or approved subdivision plat a requirement that is
not expressed in:
      1.   The land use permit or subdivision plat, documents on which the land
use permit or subdivision plat is based, or the written record evidencing
approval of the land use permit or subdivision plat; or
      2.   This title or any other applicable city ordinance.
   C.   Certificates Of Occupancy: The city may not withhold issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or acceptance of subdivision improvements because an
applicant fails to comply with a requirement that is not expressed in:
      1.   The building permit or subdivision plat documents on which the
building permit or subdivision plat is based, or the written record evidencing
approval of the building permit or subdivision plat; or
      2.   This title or any other applicable city ordinance. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.06.070: EXACTIONS:
The city may impose an exaction or exactions on development proposed in a land
use application, if:
   A.   An essential link exists between a legitimate governmental interest and
the exaction; and
   B.   The exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent, to
the impact of the proposed development. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.06.080: VESTED RIGHTS:
   A.   Extent Of Vested Rights: Upon approval of a land use application under
this title, vested rights accrue only to the extent of such approval.
   B.   Termination Of Vested Rights:
      1.   The continuing validity of an approved land use application is
conditioned upon the applicant proceeding after approval to implement the
approval with reasonable diligence.
      2.   An applicant who has obtained vested rights under this title shall
proceed with reasonable diligence to exercise development rights authorized by
an approved application. Failure to take substantial action on an approved
application. If the applicant fails to take substantial action on an approved
application prior to the expiration date of such approval, as set forth in this
title, such vested rights shall be terminated.
   C.   Waiver Of Vested Rights: An applicant having vested rights shall
continually conform to all conditions of an approved application. An
applicant's failure to do so shall constitute the applicant's knowing and
wilful waiver of the applicant's vested rights under the application. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.07
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL FOR LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES
SECTION:
13.07.010: Purpose
13.07.020: General Plan Amendment
13.07.030: Text And Zoning Map Amendment
13.07.040: Temporary Land Use Regulation
13.07.050: Historic Site Designation
13.07.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for review
and approval of land use and development applications that are legislative
proceedings. These procedures are adopted to assure that all applications are
processed on a uniform basis. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.07.020: GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for amending the
Holladay City general plan.
   B.   Authority: The city council may amend the general plan as provided in
this section. Such amendment may include any matter within the scope of the
general plan as provided in section
13.02.020 of this title.
   C.   Initiation:
      1.   A proposed amendment to the general plan may be initiated by the
city council, the planning commission, the community development director, a
property owner, or the property owner's authorized agent. An agent of a
property owner shall provide an affidavit of authorization from the owner.
      2.   General plan amendment applications not initiated by the city will
be considered by the planning commission no more than three (3) times annually
at intervals of not less than four (4) months. The planning commission shall
promptly consider any application to amend the general plan initiated by the
city council, the planning commission, or community development director.
   D.   Submission Requirements: Submission for a general plan amendment shall
be as provided in section
13.03.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   E.   Noticing Requirements: A general plan amendment is a legislative
proceeding and the city shall give notice of all public hearings and meetings
regarding an application seeking amendment to the general plan.
      1.   Notice Of Intent To Consider A Comprehensive Amendment To The
General Plan: as per public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C:
"Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
      2.   Content Of Notice Of Intent To Consider A Comprehensive Amendment To
The General Plan: The notice to be provided under this subsection shall:
         a.   Include a written description of the proposed amendment;
         b.   Describe or provide a map of the geographic area that will be
affected by the proposed amendment;
         c.   Invite the affected entities to provide information for the city
to consider in the process of evaluating the application or proposed amendment
concerning:
            (1)   Impacts that the use of land proposed in the general plan
amendment may have; and
            (2)   Uses of land within the city that the affected entity is
considering that may conflict with the proposed general plan or amendment; and
         d.   Include the address of the city's website, and the name and
telephone number of a person from whom more information can be obtained
concerning the proposed amendment to the plan.
      3.   Notice Of Public Hearings And Public Meetings On General Plan
Amendments: as per public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing
Requirements" of Title 13. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
   F.   Review Procedure:
      1.   When the application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall forward the application to the technical review
committee for its review and recommendation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall forward the application to
the planning commission for its review and recommendation.
         a.   The planning commission shall send notice and hold a public
hearing on the proposed amendment.
         b.   After the public hearing, the planning commission may modify the
proposed amendment and shall forward the proposed amendment with their
recommendation to the city council.
      3.   Following receipt of the planning commission recommendation, the
city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
      4.   The city council shall act on the application as provided in
subsection G of this section.
   G.   Approval Standards: A decision to amend the general plan is a matter
within the legislative discretion of the city council. The city council may:
      1.   Adopt the amendment as recommended by the planning commission;
      2.   Make any revisions to the proposed amendment that it considers
appropriate;
      3.   Remand the proposed amendment back to the planning commission for
further consideration; or
      4.   Reject the proposed amendment.
   H.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the city
council to amend the general plan may appeal that decision to the district
court as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801 et seq., as amended.
   I.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of an application to amend the general
plan shall not be deemed an approval of any zone, conditional use permit, site
plan, or other land use permit. Approval of a particular zone or permit shall
be obtained in accordance with applicable provisions of this title.
   J.   Effect Of Disapproval: Disapproval of an application, not initiated by
the city, to amend the general plan shall preclude filing, for one year,
another substantially similar application unless the planning commission finds
a substantial change in circumstances has occurred or other significant reasons
exist to merit consideration of a second application within the one year time
period. This subsection shall not limit the city council, planning commission
or authorized city staff from initiating a general plan amendment at any time.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.07.030: TEXT AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENT:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for amending the text of
this title or the zoning map.
   B.   Authority: The city council may amend the number, shape, boundaries, or
area of any zone, or any regulation within the zone, or any other provisions of
this title. The provisions set forth in this section shall not apply to
temporary land use regulation which may be enacted without public hearing in
accordance with section
13.07.040 of this chapter.
   C.   Initiation: Proposed amendments to the text of this title and the
zoning map may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, the
community development director, a property owner, or the property owner's
authorized agent. An agent of a property owner shall provide an affidavit of
authorization from the owner.
   D.   Submission Requirements: Submission for a text or zoning map amendment
shall be as provided in section
13.03.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   E.   Noticing Requirements For Text And Zoning Map Amendments: The city
shall provide notice as per public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C:
"Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
   F.   Procedure:
      1.   After the application for a text or zoning map amendment is
complete, the community development director shall forward the application to
the technical review committee for its review and recommendation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall forward the application to
the planning commission for its review and recommendation.
         a.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment.
         b.   After the public hearing, the planning commission may modify the
proposed amendment and shall thereafter forward the proposed amendment with a
recommendation to the city council.
      3.   Following receipt of the planning commission recommendation, the
city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed zone map or text
amendment. Each notice of a public hearing shall be provided as per public
noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title
13. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.07.040: TEMPORARY LAND USE REGULATION:
   A.   Authority: The city council may, without prior consideration of or
recommendation from the planning commission, and without a public hearing,
enact an ordinance establishing a temporary land use regulation for any part or
all of the area within the city.
      1.   A temporary land use regulation may prohibit or regulate the
erection, construction, reconstruction, or alteration of any building or
structure or any subdivision approval.
      2.   A temporary land use regulation may not impose an impact fee or
other financial requirement on building or development.
      3.   The duration of a temporary land use regulation shall not exceed six
(6) months.
   B.   Environmental Impact Statement Or Major Investment Study Areas:
      1.   The city council may, without prior planning commission
consideration or recommendation, and without a public hearing, enact an
ordinance establishing a temporary land use regulation prohibiting
construction, subdivision approval, and other development activities within an
area that is the subject of an environmental impact statement or a major
investment study examining the area as a proposed highway or transportation
corridor.
      2.   A regulation under this subsection B may:
         a.   Not exceed six (6) months in duration; but
         b.   Be renewed, if requested by the Utah transportation commission
created under Utah Code Annotated section 72-1-301, as amended, for up to two
(2) additional six (6) month periods by ordinance enacted before the expiration
of the previous temporary land use regulation.
      3.   Notwithstanding subsection B1 of this section, a temporary zoning
regulation enacted pursuant to this subsection shall be effective only as long
as the environmental impact statement or major investment study is in progress.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.07.050: HISTORIC SITE DESIGNATION:
   A.   Purpose: As a means of providing recognition and encouraging historic
preservation, this section sets forth the procedure for historic site
designation for a district, building, structure, object or property within the
city.
   B.   Authority: The city council shall act as the Land Use Authority and may
designate historic properties in the city to the “City of Holladay Historic
Site Register” according to the provisions in chapter
13.86 of this title.
   C.   Initiation: Proposal for historic designation shall be made by a
property owner, or the property owner's authorized agent. An agent of a
property owner shall provide an affidavit of authorization from the owner.
   D.   Submission Requirements: Submission for Historic Site Register
designation shall be as provided in section
13.03.020 of this title.
   E.    Noticing Requirements: The city shall provide mailed notice as per
public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing" of this Title.
   F.    Criteria: Any district, building, structure, object or site listed by
the National Register of Historic Places may be designated to the city's
historic site register. Alternatively, any district building, object or site
may be designated if the council finds it meets all the criteria outlined
below:
      1.   It is located within the city.
      2.   It is at least fifty (50) years old.
      3.   Historic integrity:
         a.   It retains its historic integrity, in that there are no major
alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the significant
historic features. Major alterations that would destroy the historic integrity
include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main roof, enlargement
or enclosure of windows on the principal facades, addition of upper stories or
the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with non-
historic materials, moving the resource from its original location to one that
is dissimilar to the original, additions which significantly detract from or
obscure the original form and appearance of the structure when viewed from the
public way.
      4.   If the structure does not meet the integrity requirements outlined
in subsection 3(a) of this section, it may still qualify for designation if it
meets one of the following requirements for exceptional significance:
         a.   It is directly associated with events of historic significance in
the community.
         b.   It is closely associated with the lives of persons who were of
historic importance to the community.
         c.   It exhibits significant methods of construction or materials that
were used within the historic period.
   G   Procedure:
      1.   After the application for a historic designation is submitted, the
community and economic development director shall review for completeness,
accuracy and compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and shall
provide written recommendation to the city council.
      2.   Following receipt of the community and economic development
director’s recommendation, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed designation during a public meeting in accordance with noticing
provision of
13.102.010 Appendix C.
      3.   The city shall notice the property owner in writing of the city
council’s determination within one week of the decision.
   H.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of an application for historic designation
shall not be deemed an approval of any zone, conditional use permit, site plan,
or other land use or modification/construction permit. Approval of a particular
zone or permit shall be obtained in accordance with applicable provisions of
chapter
13.86 this title.
   I.   Removal of properties from the city’s historic site register.
      1.   Properties which, in the council’s opinion, no longer meet the
criteria for eligibility may be removed from the historic site register after
review and consideration by the council. The city council may amend the adopted
historic site register, including deleting existing sites or adding additional
sites. All decisions shall be made during a regularly scheduled public meeting
with mailed noticed in accordance with Holladay section
13.102.010  Appendix C - Noticing.
      2.   The property owner, or the property owner’s authorized agent may
petition the council to remove, a designated property from the historic site
register. An agent of a property owner shall provide an affidavit of
authorization from the owner. All decisions shall be made during a regularly
scheduled public meeting with mailed notice in accordance with Holladay section
13.102.010  Appendix C - Noticing.
   J.   Property Owner(s) of officially designated historic sites may obtain a
historic site certificate from the city containing the historic name of the
property, the date of council designation, and signature of the mayor.
   K.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a final decision of a historic
designation by the city council may appeal that decision to the district court
as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801 et seq., as amended. (Ord.
2024-21, 11-21-2024)
CHAPTER 13.08
THREE STEP ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
SECTION:
13.08.010: Three Step Review
13.08.020: Planned Unit Development
13.08.030: Subdivision
13.08.040: Conditional Use Permit
13.08.050: Projects In Holladay Village Zone
13.08.060: Projects In Office, Research Park And Development Zone
13.08.070: Site Development Plan In Foothills And Canyons Overlay Zone
13.08.080: Site Plan
13.08.090: Temporary Use Permit
13.08.100: Building Permit Zoning Compliance Review
13.08.110: Conversion To Condominium
13.08.120: Administrative Interpretation
13.08.130: Change Of Use
13.08.140: Special Exceptions
13.08.150: Special Exceptions Authorized (Rep. by Ord. 2021-04, 3-4-2021)
13.08.160: Projects In The Residential Office Development Zone
13.08.170: Other Applications Not Listed
13.08.010: THREE STEP REVIEW:
   A.   Relevant Applications: The following land use applications as required
by this chapter shall be submitted and reviewed in three (3) steps:
      1.   Subdivisions;
      2.   Amendments to recorded subdivisions;
      3.   Site plans for all non-residential developments and for all multi-
family developments where there are more than two (2) dwelling units within one
structure; and
      4.   Planned unit developments.
   B.   Approval Process: The requirements associated with each step shall be
reviewed by the Community Development Director and the Technical Review
Committee before an application and recommendations are forwarded to, and
considered by, the appropriate Land Use Authority. The necessity of submitting
revised and additional information, documents, and/or drawings shall be
determined by the Land Use Authority or by the Community Development Director
with advice from the Technical Review Committee. The steps in the approval
process are as follows:
      1.   Step 1: Determination of Complete Application and Pre-application
Meeting. Pre-Application Meeting with the TRC is optional, and available upon
request of applicant;
      2.   Step 2: Preliminary (Planning Commission review and determination;
public hearing required); and
      3.   Step 3: Final (Technical Review Committee review and determination).
   C.   Application Review Process:
      1.   The Community Development Director shall review the application for
completeness and compliance with applicable regulations. The Community and
Economic Development Director or designee shall notify the applicant of the
staff determination of approval or denial (for noncompliance) of the
application review with applicable findings and comments.
      2.   When the Community Development Director determines, after review of
the application, that one or more of the application requirements and
procedural steps are not applicable to the project under consideration, such
requirements may be waived in writing.
      3.   The applicant shall address identified items and resubmit the
information to the Community Development Director.
      4.   When the Community Development Director determines the application
is complete, the application shall be forwarded to the Technical Review
Committee and to such other governmental departments and agencies for review
for review and recommendation.
      5.   The Community and Economic Development Director or designee shall
notify the applicant of the recommendation of the Technical Review Committee;
approval or denial (for noncompliance) of the application and, where
applicable, the need for other information that may assist the Technical Review
Committee to make its recommendation to the Planning Commission.
      6.   Upon recommendation from the technical review committee that an
application meets applicable standards of this title, the community and
economic development director shall forward the application to the planning
commission.
   D.   Preliminary Review Process:
      1.   When the community development director and the technical review
committee determine the application is substantially complete, the application
shall be forwarded to the planning commission with the technical review
committee’s recommendation.
      2.   The planning commission shall review the application at a regularly
scheduled public hearing. Notice of the meeting shall made available as per
public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: “Noticing Requirements” of
Title 13.
      3.   After review of the application at a public meeting the planning
commission shall:
         a.   Approve the application with or without conditions or
requirements;
         b.   Continue the application for further investigation, or postpone
action to allow the applicant an opportunity to provide materials or additional
information needed by the planning commission to take appropriate action; or
         c.   Deny the application and include findings material to the denial.
      4.   The community development director shall notify the applicant in
writing of the planning commission action.
      5.   The planning commission may grant a one-year extension of
preliminary approval of an application for good cause if the request for an
extension is received prior to that date which is one year from date of the
initial approval. In approving an extension, the planning commission may review
and modify or amend the original approval conditions and requirements, subject
to the same notice and process requirements used for the original approval.
   E.   Final Review Process:
      1.   Within one year after receiving approval of the preliminary
application or an extension of an approval of a preliminary application by the
planning commission, the applicant shall submit an application for final
approval by the appropriate land use authority.
      2.   The Community Development Director shall review the application for
completeness and compliance with applicable regulations. The Community and
Economic Development Director or designee shall notify the applicant of the
staff determination of approval or denial (for noncompliance) of the
application review with applicable findings and comments
      3.   The community development director will distribute copies of the
application to the technical review committee for review and recommendation.
      4.   If the application and all supplementary data comply with the
applicable requirements, standards and regulations, the TRC shall approve the
application.
      5.   Within ten (10) working days of the commission decision, the
community development director shall notify the applicant in writing of the
TRC’s action.
      6.   The basis for rejection of a final application shall be any of the
following:
         a.   Its nonconformance to adopted rules, regulations and ordinances
currently in force and affecting the land and its development;
         b.   Its lack of conformance with the approved preliminary plan
application; or
         c.   Technical inaccuracies or insufficiencies, and poor workmanship
in preparation of the plans and documents.
      7.   The City Engineer may execute a development agreement and shall
establish the kind and amount of financial security as required by this title
necessary to guarantee completion of the required public improvements.
      8.   Final approval of an application by the TRC as the land use
authority, shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining other authorizations,
permits, or licenses required under this title or other title of this code.
(Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-20, 8-3-2017; Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021;
Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.08.020: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
For development and review procedures see
chapter 13.78 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.030: SUBDIVISION:
For development and review procedures see
chapter 13.10 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.040: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for review and approval
of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be required for any
use which is a conditional use in this title.
   B.   Authority: The planning commission is authorized to approve conditional
use permits as provided in this section. The planning commission may delegate
to the community development director the authority to approve, modify, or deny
a conditional use permit as provided in this section.
   C.   Initiation: A property owner, or the owner's agent, may apply for a
conditional use permit. An agent of a property owner shall provide a notarized
authorization.
   D.   Submittal: An application for a conditional use permit shall be
submitted as provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   E.   Noticing: The planning commission shall consider the conditional use
application at a public hearing. The City shall provide notice as per public
noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title
13. (Ord. 2016-27, 11-3-2016)
   F.   Approval Standards: A conditional use shall be approved if reasonable
conditions are proposed by the applicant, or can be imposed by the land use
authority, to mitigate the potential detrimental effects of the proposed use in
accordance with applicable standards set forth in this section.
      1.   A conditional use shall:
         a.   Be consistent with policies set forth in the city's general plan
applicable to the site where the conditional use will be located.
         b.   Be allowed by the zone regulations where the conditional use will
be located.
         c.   Be compatible with the character of the site, adjacent properties
and uses, and existing development within the vicinity of the site where the
use will be located.
         d.   Provide vehicular access to the site without materially degrading
the existing level of service of the abutting streets.
         e.   Locate all driveways oriented to direct traffic to streets, major
or local, without impacting the safety, purpose, and character of these
streets.
         f.   Locate on site parking areas and structures, particularly those
locations likely to encourage street side parking for the proposed use, in
areas of the site that will not adversely impact the reasonable use of adjacent
properties.
         g.   Accommodate peak traffic to the site without impairing the use
and enjoyment of adjacent properties.
         h.   Provide an internal circulation system designed to mitigate
adverse impacts on adjacent property from motorized, nonmotorized, and
pedestrian traffic.
         i.   Restrict hours of operation of the proposed conditional use in
relation to the hours of activity or operation of other nearby uses to mitigate
noise, light, odor, or other nuisances that unreasonably impair the use and
enjoyment of adjacent properties.
         j.   Demonstrate existing or proposed utility and public services will
be adequate to support the proposed use at normal service levels and is
designed in a manner to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent land uses, public
services, and utility resources.
         k.   Install appropriate buffering, such as landscaping, setbacks, and
building location, to protect adjacent land uses from light, noise, and visual
impacts resulting from the proposed use. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015; amd. Ord.
2016-04, 4-14-2016)
      2.   A conditional use shall not:
         a.   Contribute to a detrimental concentration of existing
nonconforming or conditional uses substantially similar to the use proposed
within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the exterior boundary of the subject property;
         b.   Result in loss of privacy, objectionable views of large parking
or storage areas; or views or sounds of loading and unloading areas; and
         c.   Encroach on or cause erosion of the bank of a river or stream, or
direct runoff into a river or stream without approval by the appropriate
stormwater authority.
      3.   The proposed conditional use and associated development shall comply
with all other applicable provisions of this title and this code.
   G.   Conditions Of Approval: Such conditions shall:
      1.   Be expressly set forth in the conditional use permit;
      2.   Not be used as a means to authorize a use intended to be temporary
only;
      3.   Substantially further a legitimate public purpose;
      4.   Not require the applicant to carry a disproportionate burden in
furthering the public purpose of the condition; and
      5.   In the case of land dedications and other contributions of property,
be reasonably related and roughly proportionate to the use of the property for
which the conditional use is authorized.
   H.   Denial: If the anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed
conditional use cannot be substantially mitigated by the proposal or by the
imposition of reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with applicable
standards, the conditional use permit shall be denied.
   I.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a final decision of the planning
commission regarding approval or denial of a conditional use permit may appeal
the decision to the city council.
   J.   Effect Of Approval:
      1.   A conditional use permit shall not relieve an applicant from
obtaining any other authorization, permit, or license required under this title
or other title of this code.
      2.   A conditional use permit shall run with the land, unless otherwise
specified in the approved conditional use permit, and is subject to the
provisions relating to amendment, revocation, or expiration of a conditional
use permit.
   K.   Inspection: Following approval of a conditional use permit, the
community development director shall ensure that development is undertaken and
completed in compliance with the permit.
   L.   Amendment: The procedure for amending an approved conditional use
permit shall be the same as the original procedure set forth in this section.
   M.   Revocation: A conditional use permit may be revoked as provided in
chapter 13.09 of this title.
   N.   Expiration: A conditional use permit shall expire and have no further
force or effect if the building, activity, construction, or occupancy
authorized by the permit is not commenced within two (2) years after approval.
A twelve (12) month extension may be approved by the land use authority subject
to payment of an extension fee equal to the original filing fee. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016; Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.08.050: PROJECTS IN HOLLADAY VILLAGE ZONE:
For development and review procedures see
chapter 13.71 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.060: PROJECTS IN OFFICE, RESEARCH PARK AND DEVELOPMENT ZONE:
For development and review procedures see
chapter 13.45 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.070: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN IN FOOTHILLS AND CANYONS OVERLAY ZONE:
For development and review procedures see
chapter 13.72 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.080: SITE PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for review and approval
of a site plan in all zones. Such procedure is intended to provide for orderly,
harmonious, safe, environmentally sensitive and functionally efficient
development consistent with the priorities, values, and guidelines found in
various elements of the Holladay City general plan and this title.
   B.   Authority: The planning commission and community development director
are authorized to approve site plans as provided in this section.
   C.   Initiation: A property owner may request approval of a site plan as
provided in this section. An agent of a property owner shall provide a
notarized authorization.
   D.   Procedure:
      1.   Site plan applications shall be reviewed in three (3) steps as per
section
13.08.010 of this chapter.
      2.   Submission of an application for site plan review shall be as
provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title.
      3.   After the application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall forward the application to the technical review
committee for its review and recommendation.
      4.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall forward the application to
the planning commission for conceptual review and preliminary approval.
      5.   Following a public hearing as required by subsection
13.08.010C7 of this chapter, and pursuant to the standards set forth in
subsection E of this section, the planning commission, shall:
         a.   Approve the site plan with or without additional requirements;
         b.   Continue its review of the site plan; or
         c.   Deny the application.
      6.   Unless otherwise designated by the planning commission, a decision
approving a site plan shall be deemed preliminary approval of the application.
      7.   Except as specified in subsection
13.08.010D5 of this chapter, the community development director is authorized
to grant final approval of a site plan application after all conditions and
requirements of the preliminary approval which are necessary for final approval
have been met. Final approval of a site plan application shall be in the form
of a letter to the applicant which, together with an approved site plan, if
required, shall constitute final approval.
      8.   After a final decision to approve, approve with requirements, or
deny a site plan, the community development director shall give the applicant
written notice of the decision within ten (10) days.
      9.   A record of each approved site plan shall be maintained in the
community development department. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   E.   Approval Standards: The planning commission shall approve a site plan
only upon conformance with the requirements of this title as applicable to the
zone in which the development occurs and the following standards relating to:
(Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
      1.   Safety for persons and property:
         a.   Building elevations and grading plans designed to prevent or
minimize floodwater damage, where property may be subject to flooding; (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
         b.   Relocation, covering, or fencing of irrigation ditches, drainage
channels, and other potential attractive nuisances existing on or abutting the
property; (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
         c.   Increased or decreased setback distances from lot lines where the
planning commission determines it to be necessary to ensure public safety and
to ensure compatibility with the intended characteristics of the properties in
the area;
         d.   Limitations and control of the number, location, color, size,
height, lighting, and landscaping of outdoor advertising signs and structures
in relation to the creation of traffic hazards and appearance and harmony with
adjacent development;
         e.   The location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck loading and
unloading facilities;
         f.   Construction of curbs, gutters, drainage culverts, sidewalks,
streets, fire hydrants, and street lighting, as well as, dedication of property
within a future right of way as shown on the city of Holladay circulation map
adopted as part of the Holladay city general plan;
         g.   Reduction of permitted street grades for winter and storm
conditions, or exposure;
         h.   Proposed fence heights that will not create visual or other
safety hazards, including backing movements, passing vehicles, sidewalk
traffic, and small children; and
         i.   Mitigation measures designed to prevent graffiti;
      2.   Health and sanitation measures:
         a.   A guarantee of sufficient water to serve the intended land use
and a water delivery system meeting standards adopted by the unified fire
authority and city council;
         b.   A wastewater disposal system and a solid waste disposal system
meeting standards adopted by the city and the Salt Lake Valley health
department regulations; and
         c.   Construction of water mains, sewer mains, and drainage facilities
serving the proposed use, in sizes necessary to protect existing utility users
in the district and to provide for an orderly development of land in the city;
      3.   Environmental concerns:
         a.   Limitations and/or restrictions on the use and/or location of
uses in sensitive areas due to soils capabilities, wildlife and plant life;
         b.   Processes for the control, elimination, or prevention of land,
water, air or other natural resource pollution; the prevention of soil erosion;
and the control of objectionable odors;
         c.   The planting of locally adapted ground cover or other surfacing
to prevent dust and erosion;
         d.   Appropriate design, construction, and location of structures,
buildings, and facilities with respect to existing environmental conditions
such as geologic hazards, wetlands, groundwater, floodplains, fault zones,
landslide areas, rockfall, or steep slopes;
      4.   Conformance with the goals, objective and policies of the general
plan;
      5.   Removal of incompatible structures, debris, or plant materials;
      6.   Landscaping shall of highly water efficient design incorporating
Localscapes® design criteria (as defined
13.040.040);
      7.   The location, height, and materials of walls, fences, hedges, and
screen plantings to ensure harmony with abutting development;
      8.   Relocation of proposed or existing structures as necessary to
provide for future streets as shown on the Holladay city circulation map,
adequate sight distances for general safety, groundwater control, or similar
problems;
      9.   Provision for, or construction of, recreational facilities necessary
to satisfy needs of the proposed use;
      10.   Other improvements which serve the property and which may
compensate for possible adverse impacts to the district from the proposed use;
      11.   Consideration of specific short and long range use of development
to assure future timeliness, feasibility, and impact on the community;
      12.   Energy conservation concerns;
      13.   Dark sky protection (elimination of off site light source
visibility and light trespass).
   F.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a final decision of the planning
commission regarding approval or denial of a site plan may appeal the decision
to the city council.
   G.   Effect Of Approval: Every site for which a site plan has been approved
shall conform to such plan.
      1.   A building permit shall not be issued for a building or structure,
external alterations thereto, or sign or advertising structure until the
provisions of this section have been met. No structures or improvements may be
constructed unless shown on an approved site plan.
      2.   Approval of a site plan shall not be deemed as approval of a
conditional use permit or other permit. Approval of such permits shall be
obtained in accordance with applicable provisions of this title and other
applicable provisions of this code.
   H.   Amendment: Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title, no
element of an approved site plan shall be changed or modified without first
obtaining approval of an amended site plan as follows:
      1.   Alteration or expansion of an approved site plan may be permitted by
the community development director upon making the following findings:
         a.   The proposed amendment does not relate to a specific requirement
of approval by the approving authority;
         b.   The amended site plan will conform to applicable requirements of
this code;
         c.   The proposed alteration or expansion meets the approval standards
of subsection E of this section;
         d.   The architecture of the proposed alteration or expansion, and
landscaping, site design and parking layout are compatible with facilities
existing on the site; and
         e.   The site can accommodate a change in the number of employees on
the site or a change in impact on surrounding infrastructure.
      2.   If the community development director cannot make the findings
required in the foregoing subsection, an amended site plan shall be approved by
the planning commission before an alteration or expansion occurs.
      3.   Except as provided in subsection H1 of this section, the procedure
for approval of an amended site plan shall be the same as the procedure for
approval of an original site plan as set forth in this section.
   I.   Expiration: A site plan approval issued pursuant to this section shall
expire and have no further force or effect if the building, activity,
construction, or occupancy authorized by the approval is not commenced within
two (2) years of the date of the approval. A twelve (12) month extension may be
approved by the land use authority subject to payment of an extension fee equal
to the original filing fee. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 6-16-
2022)
13.08.090: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for considering and
approving a temporary use permit including seasonal and temporary sales uses.
   B.   Authority: The community development director may issue a temporary use
permit as provided in this section.
   C.   Initiation: A person may apply for a temporary use permit as provided
in this section. An agent of such person shall provide an affidavit of
authorization.
   D.   Procedure: An application for a temporary use permit shall be
considered and processed as provided in this subsection.
      1.   Submission of an application for a temporary use permit shall be as
provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title. The application shall also show:
         a.   The requested temporary use;
         b.   The place, date, and hours of operation of the proposed use;
         c.   A statement of the approximate number of persons, animals, and/or
vehicles which will participate in the event or be generated by the temporary
use, and an explanation of how the number was derived, such as the number of
presold tickets, available seating and/or parking, and past experience with
similar activities;
         d.   The following maps, plans, and documents evidencing sufficient
measures to be taken to reasonably protect the health, safety, and welfare of
patrons and the public in general:
            (1)   A scale drawing of the area in which the use is to be
conducted, showing the location of existing structures and improvements on the
site of the proposed temporary use, such as, parking areas, curbs and outside
storage areas; and
            (2)   Sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the temporary use
will meet the requirements of this section; and
            (3)   Written approval from the property owner to locate on the
site;
            (4)   Other information as reasonably requested by the community
development director to determine the feasibility of the temporary use.
      2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall forward the application to the technical review
committee for its review and recommendation.
      3.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall act upon the temporary use
permit application based upon the standards set forth in subsection E of this
section. To determine the compatibility of uses, the community development
director may call a public hearing before the planning commission.
      4.   A record of each temporary use permit shall be maintained in the
community development department.
   E.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to the issuance
of a temporary use permit:
      1.   A temporary use shall conform to all recommendations received from
the technical review committee.
      2.   No temporary use permit shall be issued unless the community
development director finds the proposed temporary use:
         a.   Will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working within the vicinity, or injurious to property, improvements, or the
public in general;
         b.   Will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area,
nor block traffic lanes or hinder traffic during peak commuter hours on
weekdays on a primary arterial street or principal commuter route designated by
the city;
         c.   Will not conflict with construction or development in a public
right of way or at public facilities;
         d.   Will not unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire,
ambulance, or other emergency vehicles on the streets, nor require the
diversion of so great a number of police, fire, or other essential public
employees from their normal duties as to prevent reasonable police, fire, or
other public services protection to the remainder of the city;
         e.   Will not conflict with nor be incompatible with the permitted
uses and regulations of the zone where the temporary use will be located; and
         f.   Complies with sections
13.76.250 and
13.76.501 of this title, title 5 of this Code, business licensing requirements
and other applicable provisions of this Code.
      3.   In issuing a temporary use permit, the Community Development
Director may determine:
         a.   The length of time the permit may remain valid;
         b.   The hours of operation of the use; and
         c.   Other regulations necessary for the public welfare.
   F.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a decision of the Community
Development Director regarding approval or denial of a temporary use permit may
appeal the decision to the Planning Commission.
   G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a temporary use permit shall authorize
an applicant to engage in the temporary use subject to conditions of approval
as may be imposed by the Community Development Director.
   H.   Amendment: The procedure for amending a temporary use permit shall be
the same as the original procedure set forth in this section.
   I.   Expiration: A temporary use permit shall expire as provided in the
permit. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.100: BUILDING PERMIT ZONING COMPLIANCE REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for determining zoning
compliance of a building permit application. This section applies, in addition
to all applicable requirements of building codes and regulations adopted by the
City.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   The Community Development Director, with a recommendation from the
TRC, is authorized to review building permits for zoning compliance as provided
in this section.
      2.   The building official is authorized to review and approve a building
permit as provided in the building codes adopted by the City.
   C.   Initiation: A property owner or owner's authorized agent may apply for
a building permit as provided in the building codes adopted by the City.
   D.   Submission: A complete building permit application and applicable zone
worksheet shall be submitted to the Technical Review Committee in a form
established by the Community Development Director along with a fee established
by the City.
   E.   Zoning Compliance Approval Standard: No building permit shall be
approved for zoning compliance unless the proposed building, structure, or use
when built and the land on which it is located will conform to the provisions
of this title and those conditions of approval required under a permit
applicable to the subject property. (Ord. 2017-20, 8-3-2017)
   F.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a decision of the Community
Development Director regarding zoning compliance of a building permit may
appeal such decision to the Administrative Appeals Board.
   G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of zoning compliance shall authorize an
applicant to proceed with the building permit review process. The requirements
of this section shall be in addition to other requirements of the issuance of a
building permit as contained in this title and other applicable provisions of
this Code.
   H.   Amendment: The procedure for amending a building permit zoning
compliance decision shall be the same as the original procedure set forth in
this section.
   I.   Expiration: A building permit shall expire and have no further force or
effect if the building, activity, construction or occupancy authorized by the
approval is not commenced within the time period provided by the adopted
Building Code. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.110: CONVERSION TO CONDOMINIUM:
Procedures for application review and approval of condo conversions shall be
pursuant to
chapters 13.85 and 13.10 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.120: ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose: The provisions of this title, though detailed and extensive,
cannot as a practical matter address every specific situation to which these
provisions may be applied. This section allows the Community development
director to interpret a provision of this title in light of the general and
specific purposes for which it was enacted and as applied to specific
circumstances.
   B.   Authority: The community development director is authorized to render
interpretations of the provisions of this title, and a rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, as provided in this section.
   C.   Initiation: A person may request an administrative interpretation as
provided in this section. An agent of such person shall provide a notarized
authorization.
   D.   Procedure: An application for an administrative interpretation shall be
considered and processed as provided in this subsection.
      1.   Submission of an application for an administrative interpretation
shall be as provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title.
      2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall forward the application to the technical review
committee for its review and recommendation.
      3.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall make the requested
administrative interpretation based upon the standards set forth in subsection
E of this section.
      4.   A record of each administrative interpretation shall be maintained
in the community development department.
   E.   Administrative Interpretation Standards: The following standards shall
apply to an administrative interpretation:
      1.   An administrative interpretation shall not add to or change the
provisions of this title.
      2.   Questions about the location of zone boundaries shall be resolved by
applying the standards set forth in
chapter 13.11 of this title.
      3.   An administrative interpretation shall be consistent with:
         a.   The provisions of this title; and
         b.   A previously rendered interpretation based on similar facts.
   F.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by an administrative interpretation
may appeal the interpretation to the planning commission.
   G.   Effect Of Approval: An applicant shall conform to the administrative
interpretation as determined by the community development director, or on
appeal, by the planning commission. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.130: CHANGE OF USE:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for considering and
approving an application for a change of use.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   The community development director may approve a change of use upon
making the following findings:
         a.   The requested change of use is either permitted by current
zoning, or is substantially consistent with an established permitted use,
conditional use or legally established nonconforming use on the site;
         b.   Existing uses on the site were permitted, or were granted a
conditional use permit when the site plan was approved;
         c.   If required by the international building code, a certificate of
compliance application has been approved by the city building official.
      2.   No change of use application shall be approved unless the proposed
use will conform to the provisions of this title and those conditions of
approval required under a permit applicable to the subject property.
   C.   Initiation: A person may apply for change of use as provided in this
section. An agent of such person shall provide an affidavit of authorization.
   D.   Submission: A complete application and fee shall be submitted to the
community development director.
   E.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a decision of the community
development director regarding a change of use may appeal such decision to the
administrative appeals officer.
   F.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a change of use by the community
development director shall authorize an applicant to proceed with the building
permit review process. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to
other requirements of the issuance of a building permit as contained in this
title and other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.08.140: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: A special exception is an activity or use incidental to or in
addition to the principal use(s) permitted in a zoning district or an
adjustment to a fixed dimension standard permitted as exceptions to the
requirements of this title of less potential impact than a conditional use but
which requires a careful review of such factors as location, design,
configuration and/or impacts to determine the desirability of authorizing its
establishment on any given site. A special exception may or may not be
appropriate in a particular location depending on the local impacts, and
consideration of ways to minimize adverse impacts through special site planning
and development techniques.
   B.   Authority: The planning commission may approve only the special
exceptions authorized by this title in accordance with the procedures and
standards set out in this chapter and other regulations applicable to the
district in which the subject property is located.
   C.   Initiation: A property owner may apply for a special exception as
provided in the provision of this title authorizing such special exception. An
agent of a property owner shall provide an affidavit of authorization. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Procedure:
      1.   An application for a special exception shall be submitted as
provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title.
      2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall forward the application to the technical review
committee for its review and recommendation.
      3.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall forward the application to
the planning commission for review. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
      4.   Notice of the planning commission's first public hearing, shall be
provided as per public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C: "Noticing
Requirements" of Title 13. (Ord. 2016-27, 11-3-2016)
      5.   Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall:
         a.   Approve the application, with or without additional requirements;
         b.   Continue review of the application; or
         c.   Deny the application. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
   E.   Approval Standard: No application for a special exception shall be
approved unless the planning commission shall determine that the proposed
special exception is appropriate in the location proposed based upon its
consideration of the general standards set forth below and, where applicable,
the specific conditions for certain special exceptions as set forth in section
13.08.150 of this chapter.
      1.   The proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general
and specific purposes for which this title was enacted and for which the
regulations of the district were established.
      2.   The proposed use and development will not substantially diminish or
impair the value of the property within the neighborhood in which it is
located.
      3.   The proposed use and development will not have a material adverse
effect upon the character of the area or the public health, safety and general
welfare.
      4.   The proposed special exception will be constructed, arranged and
operated so as to be compatible with the use and development of neighboring
property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
      5.   The proposed use and development will not result in the destruction,
loss or damage of natural, scenic or historic features of significant
importance.
      6.   The proposed use and development will not cause material air, water,
soil or noise pollution or other types of pollution.
      7.   The proposed use and development complies with all additional
standards imposed on it pursuant to section
13.08.150 of this chapter.
   F.   Additional Requirements: The Planning Commission may impose conditions
and limitations as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the
special exception or upon public facilities and services. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to, conditions concerning use, construction,
operation, character, location, landscaping, screening and other matters
relating to the purposes and objectives of this title. Such conditions shall be
expressly set forth in the motion granting the special exception.
   G.   Extensions: No special exception shall be valid for a period longer
than one year unless a building permit is issued or complete building plans
have been submitted to the Division of Building Services and Licensing within
that period.
      1.   The Planning Commission may grant an extension of a special
exception for up to one additional year when the applicant is able to
demonstrate no change in circumstance that would result in an unmitigated
impact.
      2.   Extension requests must be submitted to the Planning Commission in
writing prior to the expiration of the exception.
Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this
title and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special exception.
   H.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a decision of the Planning
Commission regarding a land use permit approved under this section may appeal
the decision to the City Council.
   I.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a special exception shall authorize an
applicant to proceed with the thing authorized by the exception.
   J.   Amendment: The procedure for amending a special exception issued
pursuant to this section shall be the same as the original procedure set forth
in this section.
   K.   Expiration: A special exception issued pursuant to this section shall
expire and have no further force or effect if the exception authorized by the
approval is not commenced within one year.
   L.   Revocation: Violation of any such requirement or limitation placed on
the special exception by the Planning Commission approval shall be a violation
of this title and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special
exception. The Planning Commission may revoke a special exception as per
chapter 13.09 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.08.150: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AUTHORIZED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-04, 3-4-2021)
13.08.160: PROJECTS IN THE RESIDENTIAL OFFICE DEVELOPMENT ZONE:
For development and review procedures see
chapter 13.50 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.08.170: OTHER APPLICATIONS NOT LISTED:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for other land use
applications not included in this chapter.
   B.   Authority: The Community Development Director is authorized to approve
those land use permits not included in this chapter as listed in appendix B of
this title.
   C.   Initiation: A property owner may apply for a land use permit as
provided in the provision of this title authorizing such permit. An agent of a
property owner shall provide an affidavit of authorization.
   D.   Procedure:
      1.   A complete application for the land use permit shall be submitted
along with the required fee to the Community Development Director.
      2.   The land use permit application shall be reviewed for compliance
with applicable provisions of this title.
   E.   Approval Standard: No land use permit shall be approved unless the
permit will conform to applicable provisions of this title and applicable
conditions of approval.
   F.   Appeal: A person adversely affected by a decision of the Community
Development Director regarding a land use permit approved under this section
may appeal the decision to the Administrative Appeals Board.
   G.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a land use permit shall authorize an
applicant to proceed with the thing authorized by the permit.
   H.   Amendment: The procedure for amending a land use permit issued pursuant
to this section shall be the same as the original procedure set forth in this
section.
   I.   Expiration: A land use permit issued pursuant to this section shall
expire and have no further force or effect if the thing authorized by the
approval is not commenced within one year. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord.
2014-05, 4-17-2014)
CHAPTER 13.09
QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
13.09.010: Nonconformity Determination
13.09.020: Variance
13.09.030: Appeal Of Administrative Decision
13.09.040: Appeal Authority Standards
13.09.050: Revocation Of Conditional Use Permit Or Special Exception
13.09.010: NONCONFORMITY DETERMINATION:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for determining the
existence, expansion, or modification of a nonconforming use or lot,
noncomplying structure, or other nonconformity.
   B.   Authority: The community development director shall determine all
questions regarding a nonconforming use or lot, noncomplying structure, or
other nonconformity, including, but not limited to, its existence,
establishment, restoration, reconstruction, extension, alteration, expansion,
substitution, or modification.
   C.   Initiation: A property owner may request a determination of any
nonconformity affecting the owner's property as provided in this title. An
agent of a property owner shall provide a notarized authorization.
   D.   Procedure: An application for a nonconformity determination shall be
considered and processed as provided in this subsection.
      1.   Submission of an application for a nonconformity determination shall
be as provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title.
      2.   A record of each nonconformity determination shall be maintained in
the community development department.
   E.   Approval Standard: A determination regarding the existence, expansion,
or modification of a nonconforming use or lot, noncomplying structure, or other
nonconformity shall be based on applicable provisions of
chapter 13.88 of this title.
   F.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the
community development director regarding approval or denial of a nonconformity
determination may appeal the decision to the planning commission as provided in
chapter 13.05 of this title.
   G.   Effect Of Approval: An applicant may continue, expand, or modify a
nonconforming use or lot, noncomplying structure, or other nonconformity as
determined by the community development director, or on appeal, by the planning
commission.
   H.   Expiration: A determination regarding a nonconformity shall not expire.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.09.020: VARIANCE:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for review and approval
of a variance to the provisions of this title. Variance procedures are intended
to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from
particular unforeseen application of the provisions of this title that create
an unreasonable hardship.
   B.   Authority: The administrative appeals officer is authorized to hear and
decide variances to the provisions of this title as provided in this section.
   C.   Initiation: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of
the requirements of this title as applied to a parcel of property that the
person or entity owns, leases, or holds some other beneficial interest may
apply to the administrative appeals officer for a variance from the provisions
of this title as provided in this section. An agent of a property owner shall
provide a notarized authorization. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Procedure: An application for variance shall be considered and
processed as provided in this subsection.
      1.   Submission of an application for a variance shall be as provided in
chapter 13.03 of this title.
      2.   After the application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall forward the application to the technical review
committee for its review and recommendation.
      3.   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the technical review
committee, the community development director shall forward the application to
the administrative appeals officer.
      4.   The administrative appeals officer shall hold a public hearing. The
city shall send notice as per public noticing provisions provided in Appendix
C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
      5.   After due consideration the administrative appeals officer shall
approve, approve with mitigation measures, or deny the application.
   E.   Approval Standards:
      1.   The administrative appeals officer may grant a variance only if all
of the following are met:
         a.   Literal enforcement of this title would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of this title;
         b.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
         c.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same district;
         d.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
         e.   The spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice
done.
      2.   a. In determining whether or not enforcement of this title would
cause unreasonable hardship under subsection E1a of this section, the
administrative appeals officer may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the
alleged hardship:
            (1)   Is located on, or associated with, the property for which the
variance is sought; and
            (2)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
         b.   The administrative appeals officer may not find an unreasonable
hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
      3.   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under subsection E2a of this section, the
administrative appeals officer may find that special circumstances exist only
if the special circumstances:
         a.   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
         b.   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same zone.
      4.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      5.   The administrative appeals officer may not grant a use variance.
      6.   In granting a variance, the administrative appeals officer may
impose additional requirements on the applicant that will:
         a.   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
         b.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived
or modified.
   F.   Effect Of Approval:
      1.   Variances run with the land.
      2.   The granting of a variance shall not relieve an applicant from
obtaining any other authorization, permit, or license required under this title
or any other title of this code.
   G.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a decision of the
administrative appeals officer may appeal that decision to the district court
as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801, as amended. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.09.030: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION:
   A.   Purpose: This section sets forth the procedure for appealing an
administrative decision applying provisions of this title.
   B.   Authority: An appeal authority, as set forth in particular provisions
of this title, shall hear and decide appeals from administrative decisions
applying the provisions of this title.
   C.   Initiation: Any person or entity, adversely affected by an
administrative decision regarding a land use application may appeal such
decision to the appeal authority specified in the procedural provisions of this
chapter associated with such application.
      1.   Only a final decision of a land use authority may be appealed.
      2.   Only those decisions in which a land use authority has applied a
land use ordinance to a particular application, person, or parcel may be
appealed to an appeal authority.
      3.   An appeal may not be used to waive or modify the terms or
requirements of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Procedure: An appeal of an administrative decision shall be considered
and decided as provided in this subsection.
      1.   A complete appeal application shall be submitted to the community
development director within ten (10) days of the decision which is appealed. If
not submitted within ten (10) days, the appeal shall be barred.
      2.   The application shall be submitted in a form established by the
community development director along with any fee established by the city's
schedule of fees. The application shall include at least the following
information:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the appellant and the
appellant's agent, if any;
         b.   The decision being appealed; and
         c.   Grounds for the appeal.
      3.   After an application is determined to be complete, the community
development director shall schedule a public meeting before the appeal
authority as provided in this section. Notice of the public meeting shall be
mailed to the appellant, the applicant/property owner and any other interested
parties requesting notice of the proceedings. Prior to the meeting the
community development director shall transmit to the appeal authority all
papers constituting the record of the action which is appealed.
      4.   An appellant appealing an administrative decision of the city under
this title may request a stay of all further proceedings concerning the matter
which is the subject of the appeal. The request for stay shall be directed to
the city manager, shall specify the proceedings which the appellant wishes to
have stayed, and shall state the reasons for the request. The city manager may
grant a stay if, in his/her judgement, the stay is necessary to preserve and
protect the legal rights of the parties and the requested stay would not be
contrary to the interests of the city. Any stay request granted by the city
shall remain in effect until proceedings before the city have concluded.
      5.   A record of each administrative appeal shall be maintained in the
community development department. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
   E.   Review Standard: An appeal authority shall review the record of
decision and shall consider and decide the appeal in accordance with the
standards of review set forth in section
13.06.050 of this title.
   F.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a final decision of an appeal
authority may appeal that decision to the district court as provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-801, as amended. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.09.040: APPEAL AUTHORITY STANDARDS:
   A.   Scope:
      1.   An applicant, a board, or officer of the city, or any person
adversely affected by a land use authority's decision administering or
interpreting this title may, within the time period provided by particular
provisions of this title, appeal that decision to the appeal authority by
alleging there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the land use authority in the administration or interpretation of this
title.
      2.   An appeal authority shall conduct each appeal request as provided in
this section.
   B.   Appealing A Land Use Authority's Decision:
      1.   An appeal authority shall determine the correctness of a decision by
a land use authority in its interpretation and application of this title and
shall give no deference to the land use authority.
      2.   An appeal authority:
         a.   Shall serve as the final arbiter of issues involving the
interpretation or application of this title;
         b.   May not entertain an appeal of a matter in which the appeal
authority, or any participating member, had first acted as the land use
authority; and
         c.   May reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may remand the
administrative decision to the land use authority from which the appeal was
taken.
   C.   Multiperson Appeal Authority: In the case of a multiperson board, body,
or panel which acts as an appeal authority, at a minimum the board, body, or
panel shall:
      1.   Notify all members of any meeting or hearing of the board, body, or
panel;
      2.   Provide all members with the same information and access to city
resources;
      3.   Convene only if a quorum of its members is present; and
      4.   Act only upon the vote of a majority of its convened members, unless
a greater number of majority votes is required by a particular provision of
this title.
   D.   Consideration Of An Appeal:
      1.   Other than as provided in subsection D2 of this section, each
administrative appeal review shall be de novo. The appeal authority shall
review the matter appealed anew, based upon applicable procedures and standards
for approval, and shall give no deference to the prior decision.
      2.   An appeal from a decision of the planning commission shall be based
on the record.
         a.   No new evidence shall be heard by the city council unless such
evidence was improperly excluded from consideration by the planning commission.
         b.   The city council shall review the decision based upon applicable
standards and shall determine its correctness.
         c.   The city council shall uphold the planning commission's decision
unless it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record or it violates
a law, statute, or ordinance in effect when the decision was made.
      3.   If a provision of this title is determined by the appeal authority
to be ambiguous the provision shall be construed in favor of the adversely
affected person.
   E.   Duties Of Adversely Affected Persons:
      1.   As a condition precedent to judicial review, each adversely affected
person shall timely and specifically challenge a land use authority's decision,
in accordance with applicable provisions of this title.
      2.   An adversely affected person shall present to the appeal authority
every theory of relief that the person can raise in district court.
      3.   An adversely affected person has the burden of proving that the land
use authority erred.
   F.   Panel Of Experts For Appeals Of Geologic Hazard Decisions:
      1.   An applicant of a decision of a land use authority administering or
interpreting the city's geologic hazard ordinance may request the city to
assemble a panel of qualified experts to serve as the appeal authority for
purposes of determining the technical aspects of the appeal.
      2.   If an applicant makes a request under subsection F1 of this section,
the city shall assemble the panel described in subsection F1 of this section
consisting of, unless otherwise agreed by the applicant and the city:
         a.   One expert designated by the city;
         b.   One expert designated by the applicant; and
         c.   One expert chosen jointly by the city's designated expert and the
applicant's designated expert.
      3.   A member of the panel assembled by the city under subsection F2 of
this section may not be associated with the application that is the subject of
the appeal.
      4.   The applicant shall pay:
         a.   One-half (1/2) of the cost of the panel; and
         b.   The city's published appeal fee. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.09.050: REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT OR SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
A conditional use permit or a special exception may be revoked by the planning
commission.
   A.   Grounds For Revocation: In addition to the grounds set forth in section
13.94.030 of this title, any of the following shall be grounds for revocation:
      1.   The use for which a permit or special exception was granted has
ceased for one year or more;
      2.   The holder or user of a permit or special exception has failed to
comply with the conditions of approval or any city, state, or federal law
governing the conduct of the use;
      3.   The holder or user of the permit or special exception has failed to
construct or maintain the site as required by an approved site plan; and
      4.   The operation of the use or the character of the site has been found
to be a nuisance or a public nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction in
any civil or criminal proceeding.
   B.   Community Development Director: The community development director
shall forward a recommendation to the planning commission, as to whether or not
the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions precedent to the
original approval of the conditional use or special exception or has otherwise
violated any provision of this title occurring on the site for which the
conditional use or special exception was approved.
   C.   Planning Commission:
      1.   Prior to taking action concerning revocation of a conditional use
permit or special exception, a public meeting shall be held by the planning
commission.
      2.   Notice of the meeting and the grounds for consideration of
revocation shall be mailed to the permittee within twenty (20) days of the
meeting. The permittee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the
conditional use permit or special exception should not be amended or revoked.
   D.   Other Legal Proceedings: Revocation of a conditional use permit or
special exception shall not limit the city's ability to initiate or complete
other legal proceedings against the holder or user of the permit. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
   E.   Appeal: The holder or user of a conditional use permit or special
exception revoked by action of the planning commission may appeal the decision
to the city council. The city shall send notice of the appeal. The city shall
provide notice as per public noticing provisions provided in Appendix C:
"Noticing Requirements" of Title 13. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-
18, 8-5-2021)
CHAPTER 13.10
SUBDIVISIONS
   (Rep. by Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
CHAPTER 13.10A
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.10A.010: Purpose
13.10A.020: Scope
13.10A.030: Definitions
13.10A.040: Validity
13.10A.050: Administration
13.10A.060: Concept Plan Review Process
13.10A.070: Preliminary And Final Subdivision Application Review Process
13.10A.080: Preliminary And Final Subdivision Application Contents
13.10A.090: Improvements And Infrastructure
13.10A.100: Engineering And Design Requirements
13.10A.110: Development Activity Prior To Plat Recording
13.10A.120: Development Activity After Plat Recording
13.10A.130: Variances And Appeals
13.10A.140: Penalty
13.10A.150: Vacating Or Altering A Subdivision Final Plat, Vacating A Street,
Right Of Way, Or Easement, And Parcel Adjustments
13.10A.160: Exemptions From Plat; Parcel And Lot Line Adjustments
13.10A.170: Exemptions For Agricultural And Utility Service Purposes
13.10A.010: PURPOSE:
   Promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City of Holladay in the matter of Subdivisions or matters
affected by Subdivisions through provisions designed to:
   A.   To promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the
residents of the City;
   B.   To ensure the efficient and orderly subdivision and development of land
within the City:
   C.   To prevent the uncontrolled division and development of real property,
which may be done without considering the rights and best interests of
adjoining property owners and the City as a whole:
   D.   To avoid subdivisions and developments that:
      1.   Do not comply with the City general plan or ordinances,
      2.   Cannot be adequately served by existing utilities or public
services,
      3.   May prove to be dangerous or unsafe due to design, natural or man-
made hazards existing prior to or created by the subdivision and development,
      4.   May cause an unjustifiable burden on existing traffic or
transportation services, or
      5.   May require the future expenditure of public funds to correct
problems caused by the subdivision and development;
   E.   To provide design standards for public improvements, facilities, and
utilities to provide for reasonable access to public rights-of-way, parks,
trails, or open spaces, to provide for the dedication of land and streets
deemed necessary for the proper development of the subdivision, and to provide
for easements or rights-of-way that are necessary to service the properties
created by the subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.020: SCOPE:
   A.   This Title is designed to set for he the process for obtaining
preliminary and final subdivision approvals as well as inform the Subdivider
and public of the requirements and conditions necessary to obtain approval of a
Subdivision. Because each parcel of real property has unique site/situational
characteristics (whether natural or man-made), there may be some aspects of
subdivision development that cannot easily be articulated. For this reason, it
is not possible to cover every possible contingency. Therefore, the
Administrative Land Use Authority has the authority to impose reasonable
conditions for the subdivision and development in addition to those expressly
required, provided that:
      1.   The conditions are not arbitrary or capricious;
      2.   The conditions do not conflict with any local, state, federal law.
   B.   This Title shall apply to lots or parcels where public rights of way
are dedicated, and public improvements and infrastructure are installed
regardless of whether the land is subdivided.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.030: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY: The Technical Review Committee consisting of
the Community and Economic Development Director, City Engineer, Fire Marshal
and others as assigned, responsible for reviewing applications and land use
decisions arising from subdivision applications. The Planning Commission shall
be the Administrative Land Use Authority for the approval of the Preliminary
Plat only. The process is administered and overseen by the Community and
Economic Development Director or designee. The City Council shall be the
Administrative Land Use Authority for the approval of dedicating or vacating a
public street.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY REVIEW: The Administrative Land Use Authority
shall complete a review of each completed Application and provide written
comments to the Applicant requesting additional information and/or
modifications to plans. Each request shall be specific and include citations to
ordinances, standards, or specifications.
APPLICANT OR SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER: A person or persons making an application
to create a subdivision.
APPLICANT RESPONSE TO REVIEW: The Applicant shall submit revised plans along
with a written explanation in response to the Administrative Land Use
Authority’s review comments identifying and explaining their revisions and
reasons for declining to make revisions (if any). Each explanation shall be
specific and include citations to ordinances, standards, or specifications. If
the Applicant fails to address a review comment in the response, the review
cycle is not complete and subsequent review cycle may not begin until all
comments are addressed.
COMPLETE APPLICATION: A Subdivision Application shall be considered complete as
defined in each Application Section.
DEVELOPMENT, DESIGN, AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The Public Works Standards
referred to in this Title.
GEOLOGICAL HAZARD: The restrictions and requirements of the review cycle do not
apply to the review of subdivision applications affecting property within
identified geological hazard areas.
IMPROVEMENTS: All infrastructure improvements, such as water, sewer, storm
drain, land drain, secondary water, curbs, gutters, sidewalk, grading,
streetlights, paving, landscaping, fencing, electric power, natural gas,
communication lines, and all other elements required by this Title and the
Public Works Standards.
REVIEW CYCLE: There shall be no more than four (4) total review cycles. A
review cycle shall be considered complete when:
   1.   Complete Application is submitted to the Administrative Land Use
Authority;
   2.   The Administrative Land Use Authority Review is complete;
   3.   The Applicant Response to Review is complete; and
   4.   The Administrative Land Use Authority provides a written statement to
the Applicant stating completion of the review cycle and next required steps
for approval.
REVIEW CYCLE, EXCEPTIONS:
   1.   Additional Review Cycle(s). May be required when a modification or
correction is necessary to protect public health and safety or to enforce state
or federal law when a change or correction is necessitated by the Applicant’s
adjustment to a plan set or an update to a phase plan that adjusts
infrastructure needed for the specific development.
   2.   Additional Time for Review. If the Applicant does not submit a revised
plan within twenty (20) business days after the Administrative Land Use
Authority requires a modification or correction, the Administrative Land Use
Authority shall have an additional twenty (20) business days to respond.
   3.   Other Land Use Applications. The Review Cycle as defined in this Title
applies only to single family, townhome, and twin-home land use applications.
Review times and cycles may vary for multifamily, commercial, industrial,
institutional, and other non-residential land use applications.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS: Civil engineering and design plans associated
with required infrastructure and City owned/operated utilities required for a
Subdivision.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE REVIEW: A review to verify that an application for a
Subdivision meets the criteria of the applicable City Ordinance(s). The
Administrative Land Use Authority shall notify the Applicant in writing of the
deficiency in the application and the right to appeal the determination to a
designated Appeal Authority as stated in Chapter
13.101 of this code.
SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW: A review of the Applicant’s Subdivision improvement
plans and other aspects of the Subdivision application to verify that the
application complies with all ordinances and applicable standards and
specifications, including the current Public Works Standards for Development,
Design, and Construction. (Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.040: VALIDITY:
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is,
for any reason held to be invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portion of this Title.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.050: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Final Platting and Recording Required
      1.   Terms. Any division of real property within the City is subject to
the terms of this Title. The division of real property includes the sale, gift,
transfer, conveyances, split, or other division that results in changing the
boundaries or legal descriptions of a given parcel of real property and results
in the creation of a new parcel of real property.
      2.   Unlawful Subdivision. No land which is located wholly or in part in
the City of Holladay may be subdivided, the plat be filed and recorded in the
County Recorder’s Office, nor lots be sold unless such Subdivision has been
created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
         a.   Exception. Joining a lot or lots to an existing parcel does not
constitute a Subdivision nor does it require a Subdivision plat amendment.
      3.   Final Plat Approval. Lots shall not be transferred or sold, nor
shall a building permit be issued for a structure thereon, until the final plan
of a Subdivision is approved, and the final plat is recorded in accordance with
this Title and the provisions of state statute, and until the improvements and
infrastructure required in connection with the Subdivision have been
constructed or guaranteed as provided herein.
      4.   Sales of Land Parcels. No person shall sell or exchange or offer to
sell or exchange any parcel of land which is in any part of a Subdivision or a
larger tract of land or offer for a recordation in the County Recorder’s
Office, any deed conveying such a parcel of land or any interest therein,
unless such Subdivision has been created pursuant to, and in accordance with,
the provisions of this Title.
      5.   Building Permits. Building permits shall not be issued prior to
approval and recordation of the final plat.
   B.   Work to be Done by Registered Professional: All plans must be prepared
and stamped by licensed and/or certified professionals in the State of Utah
including, but not limited to, architects, landscape architects, land planners,
engineers, surveyors, geotechnical engineers, transportation engineers or other
professionals as deemed necessary by the City.
   C.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   Approval Process. The approval process for a Subdivision shall be in
sequential order consisting of no more than four (4) review cycles:
         a.   Concept Plan (optional)
         b.   Preliminary Plat / Plan Review (Planning Commission, Public
Hearing)
         c.   Final Plat and Improvement Plan Review (Technical Review
Committee)
      2.   Expiration. Each Subdivision application review cycle shall be valid
for a period of not more than one (1) year. At the request of the Subdivider,
the Administrative Land Use Authority may grant up to two (2) six-month (6)
extensions if substantial progress has been demonstrated by the Applicant.
Expired applications shall be deemed null and void and require the Subdivider
to start the Subdivision approval process over.
   D.   Phasing: Subdivisions may be done in phases. Each phase shall follow
the Approval Procedure as outlined in
13.10A.070.
      1.   The Preliminary Plat shall include all ground anticipated to be
subdivided. The phases shall be shown as part of the Preliminary Plat and
submitted with the Preliminary Plat.
      2.   Development shall be organized such that the phases will be
contiguous, and the required improvements and infrastructure will be continuous
as deemed feasible and desirable by the Administrative Land Use Authority.
      3.   Less desirable or expensive aspects of the Subdivision should not be
delayed to the final phases of development.
      4.   The Administrative Land Use Authority may require a pro-rated
portion of the improvements and infrastructure be developed, or guaranteed in
escrow, in earlier phases.
      5.   Where it is prudent to install improvements and infrastructure that
extend into the next phase, such work may be done when it is shown on the plans
and approved accordingly.
   E.   Rezone of Property: If rezoning the property is required, the Applicant
must first obtain rezone approval as required in City Code, prior to
subdividing.
   F.   Development Agreements: Any Development Agreement (either
administrative or legislative) proposed by the Applicant, or the City shall be
approved prior to subdividing.
   G.   Public Hearings: The Planning Commission shall hold public hearings for
the general plan, zoning map changes, and any other Land Use Ordinances,
applications, and amendments as required by Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-103, 10-
9a-404, 10-9a-502, 10-9a-503, 10-9a-602, and 10-9a-608, and as otherwise
required. The Planning Commission may hold public hearings for preliminary plat
applications, but such public hearings are not required.
   H.   Application Requirements and Review Process: Notwithstanding the
specific requirements outlined in this Section for each Application, all
proposed Subdivisions shall show compliance with all applicable laws and
standards. Poorly drawn, incomplete, or illegible drawings shall be cause for
denial. The Community and Economic Development Director may waive certain
informational and design requirements when they clearly do not apply and are
irrelevant to a proposed Subdivision and shall state such waiver as part of the
review cycle. (Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.060: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW PROCESS: 
   A.   Purpose. An Applicant may request a meeting with the Administrative
Land Use Authority to obtain initial feedback and information prior to making a
formal preliminary application for a Subdivision. This meeting shall be
optional, non-binding, and considered separate from and independent of the
required Subdivision approval review cycles. It is highly recommended that the
Applicant participate in this optional Review Cycle.
   B.   Application Required. To provide a basic framework of the proposed
Subdivision, the Applicant shall submit the required application prepared by
the Community and Economic Development Department to the Administrative Land
Use Authority.
   C.   Fees. There are no fees associated with this type of application.
   D.   Time Frame. Within fifteen (15) business days after the receipt of the
completed application, the Applicant shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Administrative Land Use Authority for
discussion.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.070: PRELIMINARY AND FINAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Initial Staff Review. To help expedite review of a development
proposal, prior to submitting an application for subdivision review, persons
interested in undertaking development may meet informally with members of the
Community Development Department to become acquainted with the substantive and
procedural requirements of this Title, applicable City Codes, and Holladay City
Standard Specifications.
   B.   Development Review Meeting. It is strongly recommended that the
applicant attend a pre-application meeting where the development proposal will
be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee . At the meeting, representatives
from various departments will provide initial feedback on the concept plan
along with copies, links, or instructions for accessing the applicable land use
regulations, a list of standards, and preliminary and final subdivision
application checklists.
   C.   Preliminary and Final Subdivision Application Review.
      1.   Complete Preliminary and Final Subdivision Applications Required.
         a.   A preliminary subdivision application will not be accepted until
staff has determined it is complete.
         b.   A final subdivision application will not be accepted until
preliminary subdivision approval has been granted and staff has determined the
final subdivision application is complete and complies with the requirements of
this Chapter and preliminary subdivision approval.
      2.   Review Cycle. If the application is complete, the review cycle will
commence with City staff.
         a.   Upon submittal of a preliminary or final subdivision application
and supporting information the application shall be forwarded to the reviewing
departments and agencies who shall perform an initial review to verify that the
application, subdivision plans, and supporting information are complete and
comply with applicable Holladay City Code, and the Holladay City Standard
Specifications and Details for Municipal Construction.
         b.   Upon completion of the staff review, the City will inform the
applicant of deficiencies, comments, corrections, and requirements, including
required additional information and studies that need to be addressed.
         c.   The applicant shall complete the review cycle by submitting the
additional information and the modified subdivision plat and plans. In
addition, they shall provide a written explanation in response to the City’s
review comments, identifying and explaining the applicant’s revisions and
reasons for declining to make revisions, if any. The applicant’s written
explanation shall be comprehensive and specific, including a response to each
requested revision or required correction. If an applicant fails to address a
review comment in the response, the review cycle is not complete and the
subsequent review cycle may not begin until all comments are addressed.
         d.   If needed, additional review cycles will commence when the
applicant resubmits revised application materials, plans, and supporting
information to the City. No further review cycles are needed if all departments
and agencies verify that the preliminary or final review standard is met as
described in Subsection (e) and (f) of this Section.
      3.   Failure to submit complete information will result in written
notification to the applicant that the review cannot proceed further until all
required, necessary, and requested information is submitted.
   D.   Preliminary Subdivision Review Approval.
      1.   Land Use Authority Designation. When the preliminary subdivision
plat has been determined to be complete and in compliance with all
requirements, the plat, together with all supporting information, will be
forwarded to the Planning Commission for review at a public meeting.
      2.   Land Use Authority Determination. The Land Use Authority shall
review the preliminary plat and all supporting documents and plans to determine
if they are complete and substantially comply, or can be conditioned to
substantially comply, with Holladay City Code, and the Holladay City Standard
Specifications and Details for Municipal Construction, as applicable to
preliminary plat review.
      3.   Appeal. The decision of the Land Use Authority may be appealed
according to applicable provisions of this Title.
   E.   Final Subdivision Review Approval.
      1.   Technical Review Committee Review. The TRC shall review the final
plat, plans and all supporting documents to determine if they are complete,
comply with all conditions of approval, Holladay City Code, and the Holladay
City Standard Specifications and Details for Municipal Construction.
         a.   The TRC shall also ensure the following items have been
completed, unless recommendation to and approved by the Director as determined
they are not applicable:
         (1)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and Notice of
Intent (NOI) are required according to the requirements identified in Holladay
City Standard Specifications.
         (2)   Post Construction Storm Water Maintenance Agreements are
required according to requirements identified in Holladay City Standard
Specifications. For residential development, the agreement shall be referenced
in and recorded with the restrictive covenants of the Homeowners’ Association.
         (3)   Approval letters from applicable agencies and districts, such as
Holladay City Public Utilities Department, Water Reclamation District, Sewer
District, Utah Department of Transportation, Irrigation Canal, or Ditch
Company.
         (4)   Signed and notarized Improvement Agreement and Agreement to
Conditions.
         (5)   A guarantee for improvements according to the requirements of
Title 10 Improvement Completion Assurance (Guarantee).
         (6)   The final plat has been approved by the Salt Lake County
Recorder’s Office.
         (7)   All construction drawings have been approved by all applicable
City Departments.
         (8)   All applicable development fees have been paid.
      2.   Final Plat. Upon completion of final review, the applicant shall
submit the final plat drawn with waterproof black ink on Mylar sheets to the
Community Development Department. The final plat will be signed by each person
or entity that is required by the Utah Code Annotated or elsewhere in this
Title.
      3.   Land Use Authority Designation and Determination. The Mayor shall
grant final subdivision approval upon recommendation from the Director that the
final plat, plans, and documents are complete, comply with all conditions of
approval, Holladay City Code, Holladay City Standard Specifications and Details
for Municipal Construction, and all applicable fees have been paid. The Mayor
shall deny final subdivision approval if the Mayor finds that the final plat
and documents do not comply with all applicable City ordinances, or fees have
not been paid. In the event of denial for unpaid fees, the applicant may pay
the fees within twenty (20) business days and request reconsideration.
      4.   Appeal. The decision of the Mayor may be appealed according to the
applicable provisions of this Title.
      5.   Plat Recordation. The developer shall be responsible for plat
recordation with the Salt Lake County Recorder’s Office. In addition, an
electronic copy of the recorded subdivision plat shall be returned to Holladay
City prior to the issuance of any building permits.
      6.   Completion of Subdivision Development. The property must be
developed, and the improvements constructed in strict compliance with the
approved final plat, approved construction drawings, and the Holladay City
Standard Specifications and Details for Municipal Construction. Failure to note
any improvement required by this Chapter on the final plat or the construction
drawings shall not eliminate the developer’s responsibility to complete those
improvements in the subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.080: PRELIMINARY and FINAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   A.   General Subdivision Application Contents. All applications for
preliminary and final subdivision review shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department and shall include the following:
      1.   Electronic copies in PDF format of all plans and documents required
in this Chapter unless the Director determines they are not applicable. All
plans shall be submitted together as one set, and all documents shall be
submitted together as another set as required by the subdivision review
checklist that is available from the Community Development Department.
      2.   Payment of all applicable fees.
      3.   All necessary documents, reports, maps, etc., as required for
developments located within an Overlay Zone.
   B.   Preliminary Subdivision Application Contents. An application for
preliminary subdivision review shall comply with all applicable City Code, and
shall include the following information:
      1.   Document Set. The following shall be submitted in the document set:
         a.   General Development Application Form with property owner
signature, and a project description narrative.
         b.   Preliminary title report prepared by a title company. The title
report shall have an “effective date” that is no more than three (3) months old
at the time the preliminary subdivision application is submitted. The title
report legal description shall match exactly the boundary description on the
proposed recording plat.
         c.   Preliminary Storm Water Analysis Report according to the
requirements identified in Holladay City Standard Specifications.
         d.   Infiltration Report according to the requirements identified in
Holladay City Standard Specifications. Infiltration shall be measured in the
field at the same location and depth as the proposed retention (or
infiltration) facility using the double ring infiltrometer test.
         e.   Geotechnical Investigation Report according to the requirements
identified in Holladay City Standard Specifications.
         f.   Traffic Impact Study or Trip Generation Report prepared by a
certified professional transportation engineer.
         g.   Any other documents related to the development that the City may
reasonably require and those shown in other applicable Chapters.
      2.   Electronic Plan Set. The subdivision plan set shall be drawn to a
standard engineer’s scale and formatted to a print size of 24 inches by 36
inches. The scale must be indicated on each sheet and shall not be less than
one-inch equals 60 feet. The following shall be included in the plan set:
         a.   The preliminary plat shall include information from the
subdivision plat template (available from the Community Development Department)
and contain the following:
         (1)   Date, scale, and arrow indicating north drawn on each sheet.
         (2)   The proposed name of the subdivision as approved by the Salt
Lake County Recorder’s Office.
         (3)   The names and contact information of the property owners, the
developer, and the engineer or surveyor of the proposed subdivision.
         (4)   The names of current owners, and the property lines of all
parcels or lots immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision.
         (5)   The subdivision boundary lines showing the proper bearings and
dimensions, which lines shall be of heavier line weight than any other lines on
the drawing and which shall be referenced to two monuments.
         (6)   The boundary lines, dimensions, and legal description of the
parcel to be subdivided, including public and private streets with centerline
descriptions.
         (7)   The bearings, dimensions, and square footage of each lot.
         (8)   The bearings, dimensions, and locations of existing and proposed
easements.
         (9)   The location and dimensions of existing and proposed secondary
water systems (including ditches and canals).
         (10)   A Certificate of Survey with a metes and bounds description,
the signature of a land surveyor licensed in the State of Utah, and the land
surveyor’s seal.
         (11)   A notice of all covenants, conditions, and other restrictions
which may be relevant and applicable to the property contained within the final
plat.
         (12)   An Owners Dedication with signature lines for all property
owners and others who may have a financial interest in the subdivision
acknowledged by a notary public, as required by the Salt Lake County Recorder’s
Office and Holladay City.
         (13)   A signature block for appropriate signatures from the
following: The Land Use Authority, Salt Lake Valley Health Department, City
Engineer, and Chief Engineer of Public Utilities Department, Director of Parks
and Recreation Department, City Attorney, and the Mayor with attestation by the
City Recorder.
         (14)   Other signature approval blocks as may be needed or as required
by Utah Code.
         (15)   All requirements of the Natural Hazards overlays, including,
but not limited to, location of known earthquake faults, floodplains and their
respective zones, hillside slopes greater than 30 percent, etc.
         (16)   A clear delineation of any common, limited common and private
areas when shared ownership applies to the plat, such as property ownership
associations, condominium plats and planned unit developments.
         (17)   Tabulations showing:
            (A)   Total number of acres in the proposed development.
            (B)   Total number of lots or units.
         b.   Record of Survey that was filed with the Salt Lake County
Surveyor’s Office for this property.
         c.   Site Plan overlayed with the proposed plat showing the dimensions
and locations of all existing and proposed improvements and structures, and all
topographical and environmental features as required by the Sensitive Area
Overlay, within and adjacent to the plat boundaries. A notation shall be made
as to whether the existing structures within and adjacent to the plat will
remain or be demolished.
         d.   Storm Water Drainage Plan meeting requirements in Holladay City
Standard Specifications. These plans include, but are not limited to, required
design details and information of existing and proposed post-construction storm
water quality facilities, retention and detention facilities, culverts,
ditches, drainpipes, and invert elevations of storm water drainage pipes at
proposed connections points.
         e.   Grading Plan showing existing and proposed contour lines at two-
foot intervals, excavations, fills, grading, and limits of disturbance.
Existing contours shall extend a minimum of 25 feet beyond the property line.
         f.   Roadway Plan, road profiles and typical road sections that
include the location, widths, centerline descriptions, and names of all
existing and proposed public and private streets, alleys,
         g.   access easements, trails, or other public ways within or directly
adjacent to the property; and other important features, such as railroad
rights-of-ways, and City boundary lines.
         h.   Utility plan that includes the location of existing and proposed
utility easements, fire hydrants, streetlights, water mains and services,
sanitary sewers, and stormwater facilities.
         i.   Master plan showing how undeveloped property adjacent to the
proposed subdivision could be developed, by showing the location of the
subdivision as it forms part of a larger developable area with a conceptual
future street system and lot layout.
         j.   Any other plans related to the development that the City may
reasonably require and those shown in other applicable Chapters.
   C.   Final Subdivision Application Contents. An application for final
subdivision review shall comply with all applicable City Code, and shall
include the following information:
      1.   Document Set. The document set shall contain all the information
from preliminary review with the following additional information:
         a.   A written response to all corrections and redlines from
preliminary review.
         b.   Title report prepared by a title company that coincides with the
owners’ signatures on the final plat. The title report shall have an “effective
date” that is no more than three (3) months old at the time the final
subdivision application is submitted. The title report legal description shall
match exactly the boundary description on the proposed recording plat.
         c.   Documents evidencing conveyances or consents from property owners
within the subdivision when such are required by law.
         d.   Final Storm Water Analysis Report according to the City Engineer
as per requirements identified in Holladay City Standard Specifications.
         e.   The proposed restrictive covenants of the Homeowners’ or
Commercial Owners’ Association.
         f.   Any other documents related to the development that the City may
reasonably require and those shown in other applicable Chapters.
      2.   Electronic Plan Set. The subdivision plan set shall contain all the
information from preliminary review with the following additional information:
         a.   The entire plan set shall have the designing engineer’s State
license seal stamped on all submitted plan sheets.
         b.   The final plat shall include:
         (1)   The name of the subdivision as approved by the Salt Lake County
Recorder’s Office.
         (2)   Lot numbers, approved street names with intersection coordinates
as determined by staff, and street addresses of which numbering shall be in
accordance with the City street numbering system, as designated by staff.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.090: IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE:
   A.   General Requirements: All improvements and infrastructure related to a
Subdivision shall be installed according to the requirements of the City Code
and the Public Works Standards. The Subdivider shall be responsible for
extending all utilities and improvements and infrastructure to the Subdivision
if they are not already adjacent to or on the site including curb, gutter, and
sidewalk on streets operated by the Utah Department of Transportation. When the
City is to take ownership of public infrastructure and improvements, the City
shall require the Subdivider to install such improvements in a manner that does
not cause excessive liability or maintenance costs for the City at the
convenience or advantage of the Subdivider.
   B.   Utilities Required: The following utilities are required to be provided
by the Subdivider to each lot:
      1.   Culinary Water. The water source shall be provided by applicable
water provider unless an alternative permanent source is approved by the City
Engineer and the Salt Lake County Health Department.
      2.   Sewer. The sewer service shall be provided by Mount Olympus
Improvement District through gravity collection lines. Public sewer lift
stations are generally not permitted.
         a.   Public sewer lift stations may be granted by exception by the
Administrative Land Use Authority and the City Engineer when a lift station is
deemed clearly preferable to the interest of the City and gravity sewer is not
feasible.
         b.   Where gravity sewer connections are greater than 500' in
distance, septic tanks may be grant upon review and approval of the Salt Lake
County Health Department
      3.   Land Drain. The land drain system must be installed in areas with
shallow groundwater. If basements are eliminated and the geotechnical report
can provide sufficient documentation that groundwater levels (including
historical) are deep enough to eliminate the need for the land drain system,
the Administrative Land Use Authority and the City Engineer may allow this
requirement to be waived.
      4.   Electrical Power. The electrical power will be provided by Rocky
Mountain Power (RMP), or their successors and all installations must follow RMP
Standards.
      5.   Natural Gas. The natural gas service will be provided by Dominion
Energy, or their successors, and all installations must follow Dominion Energy
Standards.
   C.   Storm Water: Storm water plans shall meet the requirements of the Title
17 of this code. The City Engineer shall determine the appropriate
implementation strategy for meeting the City’s storm water-related standards,
using the current Capital Facilities Plan as a guide; this may include
decisions regarding ownership and access to storm water ponds, and where and
how the water shall flow as part of the City’s overall storm water system.
   D.   Storm Drainage (Canals And Ditches):
      1.   No ditch or canal shall be approved as suitable for the use of storm
drainage water without the written permission of the appropriate ditch or canal
company or of the water users for such use. No ditch or canal shall be used for
stormwater unless adequately improved to handle such water as may be reasonably
expected to be conveyed through the canal or ditch including, irrigation water,
subdivision runoff water, and other water expected to reach such canal or
ditch. Any modification to an existing canal or ditch is also subject to the
review and approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      2.   The subdivider shall work with irrigation, drainage or ditch
companies as to:
         a.   Methods of covering, realigning or eliminating ditches or canals
within or abutting the subdivision;
         b.   The size of pipe and culverts required; and
         c.   The responsibility for the periodic inspection, cleaning and
maintenance of such ditches, pipes and culverts. In cases where canals or
ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads, specifications and grades
for pipe or culvert must be approved by the community development department.
   E.   Canal, Ditch, Irrigation Certification Of Protection: No plats for
subdivision improvements shall be approved by the city unless a “certification
of protection of existing irrigation and storm drain facilities” has been
completed and submitted to the city.
   F.   Inspections: All improvements and infrastructure shall receive
inspections by the City Engineer and as necessary to verify conformance with
the City Code and the Public Works Standards. Failure to obtain the necessary
inspections shall result in a fine as outlined in this Title. Failure to obtain
the necessary inspections may also necessitate removal and re-installation of
the improvements and infrastructure at the Subdivider’s sole cost, as such
removal and re-installation are determined by the City Engineer.
   G.   Fee in lieu of Actual Improvements: Subdivisions adjacent to a rural
road or another road where the surrounding area is lacking public improvements
and infrastructure may request the option to pay a fee in lieu of constructing
the required improvements and infrastructure. The Administrative Land Use
Authority and City Engineer may also require payment of the fee in lieu to make
improvements as a part of a larger future project. An Agreement approving the
payment of the fee in lieu may be approved during the Preliminary Improvement
Plans Application phase by the Administrative Land Use Authority and City
Engineer. Fee in lieu Agreements should only be approved when it is
unreasonable or undesirable for the improvements and infrastructure to be
installed with the development. The Agreement should include:
      1.   A calculation of the cost of the improvements not being installed.
      2.   For areas where the future project date is known, inflation costs at
a maximum of 3% per year may be used up to the project year. For areas where
the future project date is not known, inflation costs may only be included at a
maximum of 3% per year for 5 years.
      3.   For areas where off-site improvements have already been constructed
and excess capacity exists that was paid for by the city, Subdividers may “buy
in” to the existing improvements to meet their requirements. A determination of
available excess capacity and cost will be evaluated by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.100: ENGINEERING AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Access. All lots shall be accessed by a fully improved city street
and shall meet the frontage requirements of the zone the subdivision is
located. It shall be the responsibility of the Subdivider to provide proper
road access to the Subdivision as required in the City Code, the Public Works
Standards. The mere existence of a public road or right-of-way to the proposed
Subdivision does not mean that adequate access exists. It shall be the
Subdivider’s responsibility to construct and dedicate all public roads required
by the City to provide access to the Subdivision.
      2.   Design Standards. All Subdivisions shall comply with the current
Standards for design, construction specifications and inspection of street
improvements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drainage and flood control
facilities shall comply with the “Standard Details For Public Works
Construction” as adopted by the city.
      3.   Public Infrastructure and Improvements. The City Engineer shall have
authority to require adjustments to the utility plan associated with a proposed
Subdivision including adjustments to the type, manner, and location of
utilities. Such adjustments to the utility plan may be required to provide
connectivity among developments, provide for public safety, and minimize public
infrastructure maintenance and liability.
      4.   Additional Reports and Studies.
         a.   Geotechnical reports as required by the Public Works Standards
and the City Engineer.
         b.   A traffic study may be required by the City Engineer depending on
his/her judgment regarding the size of the Subdivision, complex traffic
movements involved with the proposal, interaction of streets with State roads,
new traffic patterns, traffic volume in or near the Subdivision, history of
crashes or expected crashes in the area, general safety, or anticipated traffic
delays due to the Subdivision.
         c.   Storm water pollution protection as required by the Public Works
Standards and City Code.
         d.   Wetland delineation and mitigation may be required as determined
by the City Engineer.
      5.   Preservation of Natural Conditions. The design and development of
Subdivisions shall preserve insofar as possible the natural terrain, natural
drainage, existing topsoil, and trees as determined by the Administrative Land
Use Authority for the Preliminary Subdivision Applications.
      6.   Hazards. Land subject to hazardous conditions such as slides, rock
falls, faults, shallow water table, floods shall not be subdivided until
complete mitigation of the hazards has been properly identified by the
Technical Review Committee as per applicable provisions of this title.
   B.   Street Layout and Access:
      1.   General. All streets shall conform, as much as practicable, to the
adopted General Plan, Transportation Master Plan, and the Public Works
Standards.
      2.   Approval. Overall street layout and access shall be reviewed and
approved as part of the Preliminary Subdivision Applications. The
Administrative Land Use Authority shall have authority to require stub roads,
additional access into the development, and adjustments to the street layout,
street cross-section, and right of way widths. Such adjustments to the
Subdivision plan may be required to provide connectivity among developments,
provide for public safety and emergency access, minimize public infrastructure
maintenance and liability, and align with the General Plan and adopted
transportation plans.
      3.   Required Ingress/Egress Access.
         a.   Developments where the number of residential building units
exceeds thirty (30) along a single street shall have a minimum of two (2)
ingress/egress routes which are two (2) fully improved City rights-of-way.
Thirty (30) residential units shall include all proposed residential units and
all existing single-family buildings and lots, empty building lots, and each
apartment unit located along a single road up to and including the nearest
intersection with two (2) existing means of ingress/egress.
         b.   A development that extends more than one thousand eight hundred
feet (1,800') from a connecting street must provide a second ingress/egress.
      4.   Exceptions. The Administrative Land Use Authority for the
Preliminary Subdivision Applications may waive these access requirements for
more than thirty (30) residential units with one point of improved ingress/
egress when unique topographic circumstances or “landlocked” (physically
restrained from other access points) from adjacent, existing developments
circumstances exist. A waiver of these regulations may require additional
development requirements to ensure public safety standards are met.
      5.   Private Rights-Of-Way. Private rights-of-way may be used for
development purposes in all zoning districts subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Private rights-of-way shall be designed and built as per the City
of Holladay Public Works Standard Drawings.
         b.   Private rights-of-way shall meet the provisions of the zoning
district.
         c.   Private rights-of-way shall not be permitted if the road serves
to connect other rights-of-way or subdivisions.
         d.   Private rights-of-way shall meet all requirements of the
international fire code, appendix D.
         e.   All development on private rights of way of two (2) lots or more
shall establish a homeowners’ association or similar organization that will be
responsible for the care and maintenance of any common property or utilities. A
complete set of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall outline
the care and maintenance of all private utilities, street improvements and
common spaces. The CC&Rs shall also set forth the funding mechanism for that
maintenance. The CC&Rs shall be recorded and run with the land.
         f.   An easement for all public utilities shall be provided and
dedicated to the city.
         g.   Private Rights-Of-Way; Maintenance: The City will not be
responsible in any way for maintenance or upkeep of surface improvements for
private rights-of-way and does not guarantee services like mail or garbage
collection will extend to the residences on such streets.
   C.   Trails:
      1.   Required. Where a proposed Subdivision includes or adjoins an
existing or planned public trail system as specified or referenced in the
City’s General Plan the Subdivision plat shall include and provide for the
development of a public trail infrastructure in accordance with said Plan.
      2.   Improvements. Trails shall be developed in accordance with
applicable AASHTO standards with sufficient width, and to safely accommodate
two-way bicycle and pedestrian traffic along the trail corridor. In absence of
applicable AASHTO standards, the Salt Lake County Trails Standards are hereby
adopted and applied.
         a.   The Administrative Land Use Authority, when feasible, may allow
the trail right-of-way to be a substitute for required sidewalk and park strip
area on one side of the street right-of-way dedicated within the Subdivision.
         b.   All trail improvements shall be dedicated to the City or an
agreed upon non-profit third party, for the operation and maintenance after
final acceptance.
   D.   Fencing:
      1.   Purpose. Provide increased safety from potential dangers due to
agricultural activities, water courses, high-speed traffic, and other potential
dangers or hazards by requiring a barrier between potentially incompatible land
uses.
      2.   Requirement. Fencing shall be required under the following
conditions:
         a.   Bordering Natural and Man-Made Waterways. A six foot (6') high
fence is required where the subdivision borders a canal, canal right-of-way /
easement, or canal property whereon the canal is located.
            (1)   Fencing material shall be chain link unless otherwise
approved according to provision of this section.
         b.   Bordering Interstate. A six foot (6') high fence is required
where building lots for any land use are adjacent to Interstate Highways.
            (1)   The fencing material shall be masonry unless otherwise
approved according to provision of this section.
      3.   Other Fencing Materials. The listed material shall be required
unless a different type of fencing material matches the look and feel of other
adjacent fencing materials as requested by the applicant and approved by the
Administrative Land Use Authority. In no case can the quality or purpose be
less than the listed size and material.
      4.   Authority. The Administrative Land Use Authority shall have
authority to implement reasonable fencing requirements for conditions other
than those stated above where potential dangers are currently present or will
be present after the development of the subdivision. The Administrative Land
Use Authority shall also have the authority to waive the fencing requirement
where its removal will not compromise safety or does not accomplish the intent
of the fence.
   E.   Street Lighting:
      1.   The subdivider shall pay for all outdoor street lighting fixtures.
      2.   The placement and installation of street lighting shall be in
accordance with the adopted Development, Design, and Construction Standards.
      3.   The subdivider shall be required to get power installed into the
subdivision and notify the City when power is available.
      4.   The City is responsible for ordering the streetlights. The
streetlights shall then be installed and maintained by the City’s authorized
contractor.
   F.   Easements:
      1.   General Utility Easements. A minimum ten foot (10') general utility
easement shall traverse the frontage(s) of each lot. The Administrative Land
Use Authority may require additional easements to accommodate utility planning
and future access.
   G. Blocks:
      1. Dedicated walkways through a block may be required where access is
necessary to a point designated by the planning commission. Such walkways shall
be a minimum of six feet (6') in width, but may be required to be wider where
determined necessary by the planning commission. The subdivider shall surface
the full width of the walkway with a concrete surface, install a chainlink
fence or its equal four feet (4') high on each side and the full length of each
walkway and provide, in accordance with the standards, rules and regulations,
barriers at each walkway entrance to prevent the use of the walkway by any
motor vehicle or by any other nonmotorized vehicle wider than four feet (4').
      2.   Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off street
parking and delivery facilities.
   H.   Lots and Parcels
      1.   The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable sites for structures and be properly related
to topography and conform to requirements set forth herein. Side lines of lots
shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line whenever
possible and desirable.
      2.   Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to
provide necessary square footage or frontage, which would be unusable for
normal purposes.
      3.   All lots shown on the final plat must conform to the minimum
requirements of the zoning code for the zone in which the Subdivision is
located, except for remainder parcels as follows:
         a.   May be used for agricultural purposes but shall not be eligible
for habitation, commercial uses, or primary structures.
         b.   May not be eligible for building permits and may not be eligible
for other permitted uses. All limitations and restrictions shall be clearly
noted on the final plat.
         c.   Shall be described on the final plat; however, an exception may
be granted by the City Engineer.
      4.   Each lot shall have frontage on an improved public road as required
in the zoning code and the Public Works Standards unless a permanent private
driveway, access easement or shared driveway has been approved.
      5.   All remnants of land left over after subdividing, shall be attached
to adjacent lots or made part of the common area governed by a Community/
Homeowners Association, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. All
lands within the boundaries of the Subdivision shall be accounted for, either
as lots, right of way, or as remainder parcels.
      6.   Lots having double frontage shall not be approved except where
necessitated by topographic or other unusual conditions or where the lots are
adjacent to a road that does not permit direct access (exception: corner lots).
      7.   Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be joined into one
final plat, provided that all Owners join in the dedication and
acknowledgments.
      8.   A lot shall not be divided by a city limit or county limit line.
Such boundary lines shall be made at lot lines.
      9.   Undevelopable Parcels: Plats may designate lots which are designated
as “undevelopable”. Such lots do not need to meet the minimum lot size
requirements of the zone and may be retained by the subdivider with restrictive
covenants or deeded to the city.
   I.   Utilities to be Underground
      1.   All utilities, including those that are normally overhead shall be
placed underground in all Subdivisions. The Subdivider shall establish final
utility grades prior to utilities being placed underground.
         a.    Exception: wireless communication equipment or where underground
connection is not permitted by the Provider.
   J.   Protection Strips: Where subdivision streets parallel contiguous
property of abutting owners, the subdivider may, upon approval of the planning
commission, retain a protection strip not less than one foot (1') in width
between the street and abutting property, provided that an agreement, approved
by the city attorney, has been made by the subdivider, contracting to deed to
the then owners of the contiguous property, the protection strip for a
consideration named in the agreement. Such consideration may not be more than
the fair cost of land in the protection strip, the street improvements properly
chargeable to the contiguous property, plus the value of one-half (1/2) the
land in the street at the time of agreement, together with interest at a fair
rate from the time of agreement until the time of the subdivision of such
contiguous property. One copy of the agreement shall be submitted by the city
attorney to the planning commission prior to approval of the final plat.
Protection strips shall not be permitted at the end of or within the boundaries
of a public street or proposed public street or within any area intended for
future public use. Each agreement shall be recorded against all abutting
properties in the records of the Salt Lake County recorder.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.110: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY PRIOR TO PLAT RECORDING:
   A.   Pre-Construction Meeting. Upon completion of the Final Plat and
Improvement Plans Review Cycle and prior to commencing any construction
activity, the Applicant shall schedule and attend a pre-construction meeting as
required in the City’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design, and
Construction.
   1.   If the General Contractor changes at any time during construction, an
additional pre-construction meeting shall be held before additional work
commences.
   B.   Inspections. All construction shall be subject to inspections as
required in the City’s Public Works Standards for Development, Design, and
Construction.
   C.   Improvement Completion Assurance. At any time after receiving final
approval, the Applicant may post an improvement completion assurance as
outlined in
13.01.100.
   D.   Subdivision Plat Recording:
      1.   After the plat has been acknowledged, certified, and approved, the
City Recorder shall record the plat in the office of the County Recorder.
   E.   Improvements Completion Assurance and Guarantee of Performance
      1.   Purpose. To assure the completion of required improvements and
infrastructure as required by the approved plans, Public Works Standards, and
all applicable ordinances, the Subdivider shall establish a completion
assurance and guarantee as per provision state in
13.01.100 of this Title.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.120: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY AFTER PLAT RECORDING:
   A.   Improvements and Infrastructure Required for Building Permit. No
building permit shall be issued by the City unless all required improvements
are installed, inspected, and approved, with the exception of sidewalk, asphalt
pavement, streetlights, and street signs.
   B.   Improvements and Infrastructure Required for Occupancy. No occupancy
permit shall be issued by the City unless all required improvements are
installed, including the sidewalk along the frontage of the building lot in
question, but with the exception of streetlights and street signs.
   C.   Conditional Acceptance of Improvements and Infrastructure. The City
Engineer shall issue conditional acceptance upon the following:
      1.   Completion of all required improvements and infrastructure.
      2.   The site has been left in an orderly and clean condition following
construction. Construction waste, debris, excess fill material, or any other
similar material shall not be left or abandoned on the site or on other nearby
properties.
      3.   The final plat has been recorded.
      4.   The Subdivider makes a written request for inspection of
improvements and infrastructure for the purpose of conditional acceptance.
         a.   The city will generate a written punch list of items needing
repair, replacement or yet to be completed.
      5.   Improvements and infrastructure are inspected by the City and found
to be acceptable and in compliance.
         a.   Completion of all items identified on the punch list.
      6.   Reproducible as-built drawings have been submitted to and accepted
by the City Engineer.
   D.   Warranty Period. Upon receipt of Conditional Acceptance, all required
improvements and infrastructure shall be warranted by the Subdivider for a
period of one (1) calendar year.
   E.   Final Acceptance. Following the completion of the Warranty Period, the
Public Works Director shall issue final acceptance of the Subdivision
improvements and infrastructure when:
      1.   The Subdivider makes a written request for inspection of
improvements and infrastructure for the purpose of Final Acceptance.
         a.   The city will generate a written punch list of items needing
repair or replacement.
      2.   Improvements and infrastructure are inspected by the City and found
to be acceptable and in compliance.
         a.   Completion of all items identified on the punch list.
   F.   Release of Remaining Escrow. Upon acceptance by the City Engineer, the
City’s Escrow Agent shall authorize the release of all remaining escrow monies.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.130: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Variances and Appeals Generally: Any Person may petition for a variance
or appeal a decision pertaining to this Title to the Appeal Authority as
established in chapter
13.101 Appendix B, Land Use and Appeal Authorities.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.140: PENALTY:
   A.   Any Person, who shall transfer or sell, or cause to be transferred or
sold, any lot or land in a Subdivision, which Subdivision has not been approved
by the City, and recorded in the office of the County Recorder, shall be guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor for each lot or parcel of land so transferred or sold,
and the description of such lot or parcel of land by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer, or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring, shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the
remedies provided in this Title. The City may enjoin such transfer or sale or
agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction,
or may recover the penalty by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction, together with costs and attorney fees incurred in enforcing this
Title.
   B.   Any Person violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   C.   Any Person violating any of the provisions of this Title or the Public
Works Standards or failing to obtain the necessary inspections and tests
required for public improvements and infrastructure shall be assessed a fine as
stated in the City’s current adopted Consolidated Fee Schedule. Fines may be
applied daily and separately for each violation.
   D.   The City may bring an action against an Owner to require the property
to conform to the provisions of this Title, the zoning ordinance, or any other
applicable Law. The action may include an injunction, abatement, merger of
title, or any other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, or
abate the violation. The City need only establish the violation to obtain the
injunction.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.150: VACATING OR ALTERING A SUBDIVISION FINAL PLAT, VACATING A STREET,
RIGHT OF WAY, OR EASEMENT, AND PARCEL ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Vacating, Altering, or Amending a Final Plat:
      1.   Vacating, altering, or amending a final plat shall be done in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-608, or its successor statute. This
includes changing a Subdivision boundary, dedicated right of way, the number or
layout of lots, easements, the Subdivision name, and any other aspect of a
recorded final plat. If an amendment proposes significant changes to the
existing Subdivision, then the Administrative Land Use Authority may require
the changes to be made through the vacation of the existing final plat and/or
approval of the changes being done through the process required for new
Subdivisions; this should be done to ensure that significant changes receive
proper review and adequate fees are obtained to cover costs to the City.
      2.   The Administrative Land Use Authority for vacating, altering, or
amending a final plat shall be the same as that for the final plat application.
      3.   The city council may, by resolution, grant a petition to vacate an
entire subdivision plat.
      4.   The city shall ensure that the council’s resolution containing a
legal description of the entire vacated subdivision plat is recorded in the
county recorder’s office.
   B.   Vacating a Street, Right of Way, or Easement
      1.   Vacations shall be done in accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-
9a-609.5 or its successor statute.
      2.   The Administrative Land Use Authority shall be the City Council.
      3.   Adjusting or modifying an existing street, right of way, or easement
while not eliminating the street, right of way, or easement, and while still
maintaining access, does not constitute a vacation.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.160: EXEMPTIONS FROM PLAT; PARCEL AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   The purpose of this chapter is to outline the requirements and
procedures for parcel line adjustments and lot line adjustments in accordance
with Utah State Code and local land use regulations. The intent of this chapter
is to allow owners of real property to adjust common property lines while
minimizing delay and expense without the need of a subdivision plat.
   B.   Parcel Boundary Adjustments Not in a Recorded Subdivision
      1.   Approval Required. Prior to the recording of a parcel line
adjustment between adjoining properties not located within a platted
subdivision, the adjustment must first be approved by the Administrative Land
Use Authority if the any of the properties involved includes a dwelling unit.
         a.   Exemption: Approval is not required prior to recording of a
parcel line adjustment if the properties involved do not contain a dwelling
unit.
      2.   Review. Application and the review of a proposed parcel line
adjustment shall follow the procedures listed below:
         a.   Application. An applicant, either an owner of one of the
properties or a representative of the owners, shall submit a complete
application which shall include:
         (1)   Property owner(s) affidavit acknowledging the consent of each
party for the proposed adjustment.
         (2)   Property survey(s) with all existing improvements to the
properties;
         (3)   A legal description of the proposed parcel line and of each
parcel after the boundary line is changed;
         (4)   A site plan or exhibit serving as a visual depiction of the
parcel line adjustment;
         (5)   Any necessary improvement plans, agreements, or additional
materials needed for review as determined by the Administrative Land Use
Authority.
         b.   Review Procedure. Upon receipt and payment of a complete
application, the Administrative Land Use Authority shall commence the review of
the parcel line adjustment request. The review shall be completed, with a
written response returned to the applicant, within fourteen (14) business days
from the date of complete application. The reviewing parties shall review the
adjustment for compliance with city zoning and public works standards.
      3.   Final Approval. If the proposed parcel line adjustment complies with
all city ordinances and development standards, written approval shall be
provided to the applicant by the City Planner or designee.
      4.   Recording. Upon final approval from the Administrative Land Use
Authority, the applicant shall record the approved documents at the office of
the Salt Lake County Recorder to complete the parcel line adjustment. The
parcel line adjustment may be completed by a quitclaim deed or boundary line
agreement and shall be accompanied by the following:
         a.   The written notice of approval of the parcel line adjustment by
The City of Holladay that recites the legal descriptions of both the original
parcels and the parcels resulting from the exchange of title;
         b.   The approved site plan or exhibit depicting the new parcel
boundaries and adjacent properties if deemed necessary; and
         c.   Any other documents deemed necessary as part of the parcel line
adjustment approval.
      5.   Exception. If the parcel line adjustment is creating a new parcel(s)
for the purpose of constructing a dwelling unit, a subdivision plat must be
approved, and the provisions of this title must be followed.
      6.   All parcel line adjustments shall comply with applicable state code
regulations found under sections 10-9a-523 (property boundary adjustment) and
10-9a-524 (boundary line agreement). A parcel line adjustment shall follow the
procedures provided herein unless exempted from local land use authority review
as provided in the forementioned state code sections.
   C.   Lot Line Adjustments within a Recorded Subdivision:
      1.   Approval Required. Prior to the recording of a lot line adjustment
between adjoining properties within a platted subdivision, the adjustment must
first be approved by the Administrative Land Use Authority.
      2.   Review. Application and the review of a proposed lot line adjustment
shall follow the procedures listed below:
         a.   Application. An applicant, either an owner of one of the
properties or a representative of the owners, shall submit a complete
application which shall include:
         (1)   Property owner(s) affidavit acknowledging the consent of each
party for the proposed adjustment between the lots.
         (2).   Property survey(s) with all existing improvements to the lots
and reference to the subdivision within which the properties are located
including easements located on the lots;
         (3)   A legal description of each of the proposed lots after the lot
line is changed including any changes to platted easements associated with the
lots;
         (4)   A site plan or exhibit serving as a visual depiction of the lot
line adjustment. Although not a plat, the site plan or exhibit shall
sufficiently represent the new lots and include adjacent lots within the
subdivision;
         (5)   Any necessary improvement plans, agreements, or additional
materials needed for review as determined by the City Planner, City Engineer,
or designees.
         b.   Review Procedure. Upon receipt and payment of a complete
application, the Administrative Land Use Authority shall commence the review of
the lot line adjustment request. The review shall be completed, with a written
response returned to the applicant, within fourteen (14) business days from the
date of complete application. The reviewing parties shall review the adjustment
for compliance with city zoning and public works standards.
      3.   Final Approval. If the proposed lot line adjustment complies with
all city ordinances and development standards, written approval shall be
provided to the applicant by the City Planner or designee.
      4.   Recording. Upon final approval from the Administrative Land Use
Authority, the applicant shall record the approved documents at the office of
the Salt Lake County Recorder to complete the lot line adjustment. The lot line
adjustment may be completed by quitclaim deed or boundary line agreement and
shall be accompanied by the following:
         a.   The written notice of approval of the lot line adjustment by The
City of Holladay that recites the legal descriptions of both the original lots
and the lots resulting from the exchange of title;
         b.   The approved site plan or exhibit depicting the new lot
boundaries along with adjacent lots within the subdivision; and
         c.   Any other documents deemed necessary as part of the lot line
adjustment approval.
      5.   Exception. If the lot line adjustment is creating a new lot(s) or
parcel(s) for the purpose of constructing a dwelling unit, a subdivision plat
must be approved, and the provisions of this title must be followed.
      6.   All lot line adjustments shall comply with applicable state code
regulations found under section 10-9a-608 (5). A lot line adjustment shall
follow the procedures provided herein unless an amended plat is required per
state statute.
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
13.10A.170: EXEMPTIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND UTILITY SERVICE PURPOSES: 
   A.   Purpose and Intent: Utah Code 10-9a-605(2) exempts agricultural lands
from plat requirements under the certain conditions therein.
   B.   Qualifications of Land for Agricultural Purposes: Agricultural land may
be divided or partitioned under this Chapter only under the following
circumstances:
      1.   The property must have been solely for agricultural use and actively
devoted to agricultural use as defined by Utah Code 59-2-502 and must continue
to be used solely for agricultural use in the future.
      2.   All of the lots or parcels must meet the minimum lot size
requirements of the applicable zoning district.
   C.   Agricultural Partition Parcels as Buildable Lots: An agricultural
partition lot is buildable for only bona-fide agricultural purposes. A parcel
created in accordance with this Chapter is not considered a buildable lot for
residential, commercial, industrial, or any other non-agricultural purposes.
   D.   Public Improvements and Infrastructure: The City shall not require any
public improvements and infrastructure to be installed as a condition of
approval for agricultural partitions.
   E.   Use of Property Created Under This Part for Non-Agricultural Purposes:
If a lot or parcel created by this part is used for a non-agricultural purpose,
the City shall require the lot or parcel to comply with the requirements of the
Subdivision and land use provisions of the City.
   F.   Utilities: A Subdivision of land for utility purposes (unmanned
facilities such as: substations, regulator stations, towers, etc.) creating a
parcel(s) under eight thousand square feet (8,000 ft2) in size may be exempted
by the Administrative Land Use Authority for certain provisions of this Title
and/or provisions of City Code relating to lot size, frontage, setbacks, and
improvements and infrastructure.
   G.   Parent Parcels: The parent parcel from which the agricultural or
utility lot(s) is created shall be labeled as a remainder parcel and shall not
be part of an approved Subdivision until such time as it complies with the
provisions of this Title and other relevant sections of the City Code and has
received the applicable land use approval(s).
(Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
CHAPTER 13.11
ZONES, MAPS, ZONE BOUNDARIES AND ALLOWED USES
SECTION:
13.11.010: Scope
13.11.020: Zones Established
13.11.030: Official Zoning Map
13.11.040: Filing Of This Title And Zoning Maps
13.11.050: Boundary Location Rules
13.11.060: Uses Allowed
13.11.070: Regulations Of General Applicability
13.11.010: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to real property located in a zone
as shown on the official zoning map. No building, structure or property shall
be used and no building or structure shall be erected, structurally or
substantially altered, or enlarged except as set forth in this chapter. Such
requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable
provisions of this title, this Code, or other applicable laws. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.11.020: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this title, the City is divided into the following classes
of zones:
TABLE 13.11.020.1
Forestry and Recreation Zone               FR-0.5
Forestry and Recreation Zone               FR-1
Forestry and Recreation Zone               FR-2.5
Forestry and Recreation Zone               FR-5
Forestry and Recreation Zone               FR-10
Forestry and Recreation Zone               FR-20
Residential Zone                           R-1-4
Residential Zone                           R-1-8
Residential Zone                           R-1-10
Residential Zone                           R-1-15
Residential Zone                           R-1-21
Residential Zone                           R-1-43
Residential Zone                           R-1-87
Residential Zone                           R-2-8
Residential Zone                           R-2-10
Residential Zone                           R-M
Professional Office Zone                   PO
Office, Research Park and Development Zone O-R-D
Public Use Zone                            P
Residential Office Zone                    RO
Neighborhood Commercial Zone               NC
Commercial Zone                            C-1
Commercial Zone                            C-2
Limited Use Zone                           LU
Regional/Mixed-Use Zone                    R/M-U
Holladay Village Zone                      HV
Foothills and Canyons Overlay Zone         FCOZ
 
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014; amd. Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.11.030: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
All zones authorized and described by this title are shown on the maps on file
with the City Recorder and Community Development Department. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.11.040: FILING OF THIS TITLE AND ZONING MAPS:
This title and the maps may be examined by the public subject to any reasonable
regulations established by the City Recorder and the Community Development
Director. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.11.050: BOUNDARY LOCATION RULES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone, the following rules
shall apply:
   A.   Wherever the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the
centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line, then, unless
otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of the street, alley
or block, or such property line, shall be construed to be the boundary of the
zone;
   B.   Whenever such boundary line of such zone is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway or
railroad right-of-way, or public park, or other public land, or any section
line, then in such case the center of the stream, canal or waterway, or of the
railroad right-of-way, or the boundary line of such public land or such section
line shall be deemed to be the boundary of the zone; and
   C.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
boundary location, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
13.11.060: USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Primary Uses: Permitted and conditional uses allowed in all zones shall
be as set forth in the following chapters and in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Permitted and
conditional uses are indicated by "P", "C", respectively. Uses not permitted
are indicated by "-".
   B.   Accessory Uses: Permitted and conditional uses as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title, shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such uses.
      1.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply
to permitted and conditional uses in the same zone except as otherwise
expressly provided in this title.
      2.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot
or parcel unless a permitted or conditional use is currently established on the
same parcel.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: Any use not shown in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title, shall be prohibited
unless the Community Development Director determines the use is substantially
the same as a permitted or conditional use as allowed in the same zone. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.11.070: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
The use and development of real property in all zones shall conform to
regulations of general applicability as set forth in the following chapters of
this title:
   A.   Submission requirements. See
chapter 13.03 of this title.
   B.   Flood damage prevention regulations. See
chapter 13.74 of this title.
   C.   Natural hazard areas. See
chapter 13.75 of this title.
   D.   Supplementary regulations. See
chapter 13.76 of this title.
   E.   Utility and facility system placement regulations. See
chapter 13.79 of this title.
   F.   Off street parking requirements. See
chapter 13.80 of this title.
   G.   Highway noise abatement measures. See
chapter 13.81 of this title.
   H.   Signs. See
chapter 13.82 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.12
FR-0.5, FR-1, FR-2.5, FR-5, FR-10 AND FR-20 FORESTRY AND RECREATION ZONES
SECTION:
13.12.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.12.020: Primary Uses
13.12.030: Accessory Uses
13.12.040: Lot Area, Lot Width, Density And Slope
13.12.050: Limits Of Disturbance/Setbacks
13.12.060: Building Height
13.12.070: Natural Hazards
13.12.080: Water Quality
13.12.090: Grading
13.12.100: Tree And Vegetation Protection
13.12.110: Utilities
13.12.120: Building Location, Construction, And Design
13.12.130: Off Street Parking
13.12.140: Site Development Plan Approval
13.12.150: Applicability To Lots Of Record And Waivers From Slope Requirements
13.12.160: Landscaping
13.12.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the forestry and recreation zones is to permit the development
of the foothill and canyon areas of the city for forestry, recreation, and
other specified uses to the extent such development is compatible with the
protection of the natural and scenic resources of these areas for the continued
benefit of future generations. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.020: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses Allowed: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the
FR zones shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.030: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the FR zones are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.12.040: LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, DENSITY AND SLOPE:
   A.   Lot Area, Lot Width And Density Requirements:
 
District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Maximum Residential Density
FR-0.5   1/2 acre         100 feet          2 du per gross acre
FR-1     1 acre           200 feet          1 du per gross acre
FR-2.5   2.5 acres        250 feet          1 du per 2.5 gross acre
FR-5     5 acres          300 feet          1 du per 5 gross acre
FR-10    10 acres         300 feet          1 du per 10 gross acre
FR-20    20 acres         300 feet          1 du per 20 gross acre
 
   B.   Lots Fronting On Cul-De-Sacs; Lot Width: The minimum lot width of any
lot fronting on a cul-de-sac, partial cul-de- sac, or oblique angle curved
street from which the lot lines radiate shall be measured at a distance of
fifty feet (50') from the front lot line.
   C.   Slope Requirements: All development in the FR zones shall be subject to
the slope protection standards set forth in the foothills and canyons overlay
zone, subsections
13.72.030B, "Slope Protection Standards", and 13.72.030D of this title, streets
and roads. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.050: LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE/SETBACKS:
Because of the unique nature of the topography and climatic conditions of the
foothill and canyon areas, limits of disturbance and setbacks for developments
in the FR zones shall be determined on a case by case basis by the community
development director, subject to the planning commission's final approval on
all developments, except minor developments (see
chapter 13.72 of this title), for all uses, including single-family dwellings
and accessory structures. All determinations of limits of disturbance shall be
subject to the conditions and criteria set forth in the foothills and canyons
overlay zone, section
13.72.040, "Establishment Of Limits Of Disturbance", of this title. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.060: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   Maximum Height: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
title, no building or structure shall exceed the following heights:
      1.   Thirty feet (30') on property where the original slope exceeds
fifteen percent (15%) or the property is located in the foothills and canyons
overlay zone. For purposes of this section, the slope shall be determined using
a line drawn from the highest point of elevation to the lowest point of
elevation on the perimeter of a box which encircles the foundation line of the
building or structure. The box shall extend for a distance of fifteen feet
(15') or to the property line, whichever is less, around the foundation line of
the building or structure. The elevation shall be determined using a certified
topographic survey with a maximum contour interval of two feet (2').
      2.   Thirty five feet (35') on other properties.
   B.   Minimum Story: No single-family dwelling structure shall contain less
than one story. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.070: NATURAL HAZARDS:
Construction of permanent structures in areas subject to natural hazards,
including floods, landslides, and avalanches, shall be subject to the
requirements and limitations set forth in
chapters 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention Regulations", and 13.75, "Natural
Hazard Areas", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.080: WATER QUALITY:
   A.   Health Department Approval Required: Prior to issuance of a conditional
use permit or site plan approval for all uses in the FR zones, regardless of
size or number of units, the applicant shall receive the written approval of
the health department certifying that all water quality and health requirements
have been satisfied and that the proposed construction will not damage the
natural watershed.
   B.   Developments Of More Than Nine Lots/Units: Developments of more than
nine (9) lots or units shall receive the written approval of the Utah
department of environmental quality certifying that the culinary water system
and the sewerage system meet all state water quality and health requirements.
All approvals shall be in accordance with the regulations of the Utah
department of environmental quality relating to culinary water supply and
wastewater disposal.
   C.   Applicable State Regulations And Standards: The applicable state
regulations for individual wastewater disposal systems can be found in the Utah
administrative code sections R317-501 through R317-513, as amended from time to
time. The applicable state regulations for culinary water supply can be found
in Utah administrative code, as amended from time to time.
   D.   Subsequent Changes In Site Plan: If, after health department or Utah
department of environmental quality review and action pursuant to this section,
a site plan is modified such that the original limits of disturbance change,
the applicant must submit the modified site plan to the appropriate health
agency for retesting and a new determination whether all state wastewater and
culinary water standards have been met. Evidence of such retesting must be
submitted prior to final approval of the site plan. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.090: GRADING:
Grading shall be permitted only in conformance with the standards and
limitations set forth in the foothills and canyons overlay zone, subsection
13.72.030C, "Grading Standards", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.100: TREE AND VEGETATION PROTECTION:
Removal of trees or natural vegetation shall not be permitted except in
conformance with the standards and requirements set forth in the foothills and
canyons overlay zone, subsection
13.72.030H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.12.110: UTILITIES:
All utilities in the FR zones shall be placed underground, except as may be
provided for in
chapter 13.79, "Utility And Facility System Placement Regulations", of this
title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.120: BUILDING LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND DESIGN:
All buildings and accessory structures in the FR zones, including single-family
dwellings, shall be located, constructed, and designed in compliance with the
development standards set forth in the foothills and canyons overlay zone,
section
13.72.030, "Development Standards", of this title, and in
chapter 13.73, "Foothills And Canyons Site Development And Design Standards",
of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.130: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The community development director shall determine the
number of off street parking spaces required, provided the minimum requirements
of
chapter 13.80 of this title are met, except that the planning commission may
modify the requirements of sections
13.80.060 through
13.80.130 of this title if such modification will better preserve views,
protect existing trees/vegetation, or reduce the amount of disturbance to steep
slopes, wetlands, streams, or other sensitive environmental areas.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The planning commission shall determine the number of
off street parking spaces required, provided the minimum requirements of
chapter 13.80 of this title are met, except that the planning commission may
modify the requirements of sections
13.80.060 through
13.80.130 of this title if such modification will better preserve views,
protect existing trees/vegetation, or reduce the amount of disturbance to steep
slopes, wetlands, streams, or other sensitive environmental areas.
   C.   Covered Parking: Covered parking is encouraged for all developments in
the FR zone. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.140: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL:
Site development plans for all development in the FR zone, including single-
family dwellings, shall be approved prior to issuance of any building permits
pursuant to the site development plan approval requirements set forth in the
foothills and canyons overlay zone, section
13.72.050, "Approval Procedure For Development In The Foothills And Canyons
Overlay Zone", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.150: APPLICABILITY TO LOTS OF RECORD AND WAIVERS FROM SLOPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicable To Lots Of Record: All standards and requirements for
development in the FR zones as set forth in this chapter shall apply to
development on lots and in subdivisions that were recorded prior to the
enactment date hereof.
   B.   Lots Of Record; Waivers From Slope Requirements: For properties in the
FR zones also located in the foothills and canyons overlay zone (see
chapter 13.72 of this title), the planning commission may waive grade
requirements for streets/roads and slope protection requirements for lots of
record and lots and plans of subdivisions that were approved prior to the
enactment of
chapter 13.72 of this title, provided the conditions and criteria set forth in
subsection
13.72.060A of this title are satisfied. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.12.160: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the FR zones shall comply with the provisions governing landscaping
and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.14
R-1-4, R-1-8, R-1-10, R-1-15, R-1-21, R-1-43, R-1-87 SINGLE- FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
ZONES
SECTION:
13.14.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.14.020: Primary Uses
13.14.030: Accessory Uses
13.14.031: Accessory Dwelling Units
13.14.040: Lot Areas And Widths
13.14.050: Setbacks
13.14.052: Rear Setbacks
13.14.054: Front Setbacks
13.14.056: Side Setbacks
13.14.057: Corner Side Setbacks
13.14.060: Setbacks On Private Driveways
13.14.065: Setbacks On Double Frontage Lots
13.14.070: Building Height
13.14.071: Building Corridor
13.14.080: Lot Coverage
13.14.090: Coverage Of Rear Yard
13.14.100: Mass And Scale
13.14.110: Accessory Buildings
13.14.120: Fences
13.14.130: Storage Of RVs, Boats And Travel Trailers
13.14.140: Landscaping
13.14.150: Informational
13.14.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The majority of land use in the City of Holladay is low density, single-family,
detached dwellings. Most of these dwellings are located in areas zoned R-1. The
purpose of the R-1 zones is to establish and maintain low density residential
neighborhoods that provide persons who reside therein a comfortable, healthy,
safe and pleasant environment. Furthermore, the rules below should support the
goals of the general plan such as the preservation of housing by allowing for
reasonable expansion within limits and for responsible growth. Also, it is the
intent of the rules to ensure that development within these zones is harmonious
and compatible with the character of existing development patterns in the
immediate vicinity including building mass, setback, lot coverage, height, etc.
Specific techniques, among others, that shall be applied in approval of all
development are:
   A.   Graduated height/building envelope rules.
   B.   Maximum building footprint coverage percentages.
   C.   Maximum height allowances.
   D.   Averaging of building setbacks. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord.
2021-24, 9-9-2021)
13.14.020: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses Allowed: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the
Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zones shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021)
13.14.030: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Up to two (2)
occupiable units (one primary, one ADU) on any lot. Properties found in
violation of this section are subject to Enforcement of
chapter 13.94.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure, shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the Single-Family Residential (R-1)
Zones are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   D.   Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to a permitted or
conditional use may be allowed in the Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zones,
provided the total footprint square footage of all accessory buildings does not
exceed the maximum square footage as allowed in section
13.14.110,
chart 13.14.101 of this chapter.
   E.   Any detached accessory building or buildings (i.e. garage, EADU, shed,
etc.), incidental to a permitted use, where the total footprint square footage
is proposed to exceed the square footage allowed in section
13.14.110,
chart 13.14.101 of this chapter or which measures greater than the footprint of
the primary residential structure on lots measuring one half acre or less,
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as a conditional use pursuant to
the provisions of section
13.08.040 of this title.
   F.   A guesthouse may be permitted in the Single-Family Residential (R-1)
Zones if it meets the following:
      1.   A maximum footprint of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet
on lots greater than twenty one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square
feet but smaller than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square
feet.
      2.   A maximum footprint of two thousand (2,000) square feet on lots
greater than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
   G.   The Planning Commission may approve a conditional use permit for a
guesthouse which meets the following:
      1.   A footprint greater than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet on lots larger than twenty one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780)
square feet but smaller than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560)
square feet.
      2.   A footprint greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet on lots
larger than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
      3.   A footprint greater than the footprint of the primary residential
structure. (Ord. 2018-17, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021)
13.14.031: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory Dwelling Units are meant to assist in the creation of new housing
units; support a more efficient use of existing housing stock and
infrastructure; and provide housing that responds to changing family needs,
smaller households, and increasing housing costs within the City and not a
response to supplemental income or vacation rental opportunities.
Existing or new construction of Accessory Dwelling Units of any type may only
be established on a parcel with a single-family detached structure within all
residential zones when the following standards are met. In addition to
applicable remedies for correction of non-compliance set forth in
Chapter 13.94 of this Title, pursuant to Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-530(5), the
City may hold a lien against any property in violation of any provision of this
Title relating to the creation and/or maintenance of an Internal Accessory
Dwelling Unit. The City shall follow the provisions of Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-
530(5) in the creation and filing of any lien.
   A.   Accessory Dwelling Unit as defined in section
13.04.040, shall:
      1.   Comply with applicable building, health, and fire codes.
      2.   Be subject to approval of a Building Permit (section
13.08.100) and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (sections
13.04.050,
13.01.060).
      3.   If rented, be rented for a minimum of thirty (30) consecutive days.
A rented ADU is subject to annual approval of a License (section
5.68.020). The licensing fee can be found in the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
      4.   Owner Occupied: No accessory dwelling unit shall be created,
established, maintained or occupied in a single-family dwelling unless the
owner of the property or an immediate family member, defined as the spouse,
parent, child, sibling, grandparent, or grandchild, occupies either a portion
of the main dwelling or a detached accessory unit on the same single-family
lot. For the purpose of this section, the term “owner occupied” shall be
defined as full time residency within the home by the property owner(s) as
shown on the County tax assessment rolls. Owner occupancy requirement shall not
apply to the accessory dwelling unit when:
         a.   The owner cannot live in the dwelling because of a bona fide
temporary absence of three (3) years or less (i.e: military, job assignment,
sabbatical, or voluntary service);
         b.   The owner was living in the dwelling immediately prior to leaving
for temporary job assignment, sabbatical, or voluntary service; and
         c.   The owner resumes primary occupancy of residence upon returning
from the temporary military, job assignment, sabbatical , or voluntary service
absence;
         d.   Dwelling Unit Occupancy: The occupants of an accessory dwelling
unit shall be limited to a single family, defined as (in accordance with Utah
Code § 10-91-505.5):
            (1)   One person living alone; or
            (2)   Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption,
or other legal relationship living together as a single housekeeping unit; for
purposes of this definition of family, the term “related” shall mean a spouse,
parent, child, stepchild, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, uncle,
aunt, nephew, niece, first cousins, great-grandparent, and great-grandchild.
The term “related” does not include other, more distant relationships.
         (3)   Up to four (4) unrelated persons living as a single-family
housekeeping unit.
      5.   Provide one additional onsite parking stall above the minimum
required according to provisions set forth in section
13.80.040; and replace any parking spaces displaced by the construction of an
ADU from a garage or carport. If an accessory dwelling unit is being added
outside of the existing footprint of the home, onsite parking must meet the
minimums required in section
13.80.040, determined by the number of bedrooms in the accessory dwelling unit.
Parking reduction provisions according to Section
13.80.040.B.
      6.   Maintain the same address as the primary dwelling with the addition
of "Unit B".
      7.   Not operate on separate utility meters from the primary dwelling.
The ADU tenant shall have unobstructed access to utility connections, i.e.
water and gas shutoff, electrical panel and HVAC equipment, etc.
      8.   ADU shall not be permitted on a property with a failing septic tank.
   B.   Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit as defined in section
13.04.040, shall:
      1.   Comply with all provisions set forth in section
13.14.031 A of this chapter.
      2.   Provide egress window(s) for existing and new construction which
meet minimum size standards as per
Chapter 15.08 Building Codes.
   C.   External Accessory Dwelling Unit, as defined in section
13.04.040, shall:
      1.   Comply with all provisions set forth in section
13.14.031 A of this chapter.
      2.   Provide a footprint size of a minimum of two hundred (200) square
feet and maximum footprint as per
Chart 13.14.101.
      3.   Structures shall comply with setbacks for accessory buildings as per
section
13.14.110,
chart 13.14.101. Setbacks may reduced according to the setback reduction chart,
not to exceed the “no closer than (feet)” distance required for accessory
buildings. The property owner of the proposed setback reduction shall file a
signed agreement detailing the context/treatment applied and the resulting
setback distance with the Community and Economic Development department.
Chart 13.14.032:
Context/Treatment Setback Reduction
Context/Treatment                                           Setback Reduction
No lights on sides abutting residential properties          10%
Fencing:                                                     
   1.   8' fence height agreement or 6' masonry wall  1.   30%
   2.   8' masonry wall                               2.   50%
Single floor structure with maximum 10' wall height         50%
Immediately adjacent to an existing accessory building on a 80%
neighboring property
Below grade living space only                               100%
Additional/upgraded certified energy efficient material/    100%
construction designed to reduce sound
Coordination with abutting property owner to build adjacent 100%
ADUs
Immediately adjacent to a non-residential land use          100%
Other proposed buffering treatment (additional vegetation,
screening/acoustic walls, window treatments, architectural  10% per item
feature, color choice, biophilic elements etc.)
 
      4.   Height does not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height above
existing grade.
      5.   The height of accessory buildings containing a dwelling unit shall
comply with graduated height standards as per section
13.14.070.2.
      6.   Comply with Lot Coverage maximums as per section
13.14.080.
      7.   Design standards of any EADU shall include the following. These
standards are intended to increase privacy and minimize impact to neighboring
residents.
         a.   Security and/or building lighting shall be "dark sky" compliant,
to include the following:
            (1)   Only LED, incandescent light sources in the spectrum of white
or off white (light yellow tones in the kelvin scale of 5,000k or lower, i.e.
warmer).
            (2)   Fixtures shall feature a “full cut-off” type hood and mounted
in such a manner that the cone of light does not cross any property line of the
site.
            (3)   Lighting installations shall include timers, dimmers and/or
sensors to reduce overall energy consumption and eliminate unneeded lighting.
         b.   Primary and secondary access points including but not limited to
doors, windows, patios, garage doors, etc. shall not open into a required
setback.
         c.   Required setbacks shall be maintained with landscaping which
provides a buffer to neighboring properties.
      8.   Conversion of existing accessory buildings, including non-
conforming structures, to EADUS is allowed with standards.
         a.   Shall meet all design standards within section
13.14.031.C6.
         b.   Structures that do not conform to the building footprint sizes
shown in
Chart 13.14.101 must apply for a conditional use permit for a footprint that
exceeds the allowed size.
         c.   Structures that do not conform to setbacks in
Chart 13.14.101 shall select setback reduction measures in
chart 13.14.032.
         d.   A second level above twelve (12) feet may not be added or
converted to living space when the accessory structure does not meet the
required accessory structure setbacks per section
13.14.110,
chart 13.14.101.
         e.   Any in-line addition over fifty (50) percent of the linear
measurement of a non-conforming setback shall comply with all applicable
setback and height requirements. (Ord. 2024-18, 11-7-2024)
13.14.040: LOT AREAS AND WIDTHS:
   A.   The minimum lot area and width requirements for lots on public streets,
private lanes and private roads (see
chapter 13.04, "Definitions", of this title) for the purpose of subdivision are
shown on chart 13.14.041 of this section.
CHART 13.14.041
                                                         Minimum Lot Frontage
Zone Minimum Lot Area Maximum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Measured At The Right-
                                                         Of-Way Line
                                                             Minimum Lot
Zone   Minimum Lot Area  Maximum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width Frontage Measured
                                                             At The Right-Of-
                                                             Way Line
R-1-4  4,000 sq. ft.     8,000 sq. ft.     55'               75% of minimum lot
                                                             width
R-1-8  8,000 sq. ft.     16,000 sq. ft.    65'               75% of minimum lot
                                                             width
R-1-10 10,000 sq. ft.    20,000 sq. ft.    80'               75% of minimum lot
                                                             width
R-1-15 15,000 sq. ft.    30,000 sq. ft.    80'               75% of minimum lot
                                                             width
R-1-21 21,780 sq. ft.    43,560 sq. ft. (1 100'              75% of minimum lot
       (1/2 acre)        acre)                               width
R-1-43 43,560 sq. ft. (1 None              100'              75% of minimum lot
       acre)                                                 width
R-1-87 87,120 sq. ft. (2 None              150'              75% of minimum lot
       acres)                                                width
 
   B.   The minimum lot areas and widths required for lots on a "private
driveway" as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title for the purpose of subdivision are shown on chart
13.14.041 of this section, except that portions of a lot less than one-half (1/
2) the minimum lot width may not be counted toward the minimum lot area.
   C.   For lots fronting on a cul-de-sac, the minimum lot frontage shall be
measured at a distance thirty feet (30') from the front lot line and shall be
seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum lot width required by chart 13.14.041
of this section. (Ord. 2018-05, 5-17-2018)
13.14.050: SETBACKS:
   A.   Purpose: The spacing of buildings and structures away from property
lines, rights-of-way, physical hazards and natural features such as streams and
other buildings, are essential elements of land use planning and of urban
design. In particular, setbacks may provide for privacy, light, shadow, air
movement, passive and active space, vegetation and also contribute directly to
physical and psychological well being. Setbacks should vary proportionally
depending upon the size and shape of the properties and also upon the type of
the existing and proposed land use. In some instances setbacks should be
uniform assuming there is a specific desired outcome for the setback, such as
protection of views, public safety, economic development, etc. In other
instances, variability and flexibility of setback may produce equally important
outcomes such as the protection of natural features, aesthetically pleasing
streetscapes, creativity in architectural design, and retention of fragile
housing stock or other important goals. Due to the evolution of housing styles
over the last few decades, the relative high value of land within the
community, the desire for architectural creativity, and especially the dramatic
increase in average house size, setbacks shall be applied within a flexible
envelope.
   B.   Implementation: Averaging of setbacks in all yard areas shall be
allowed as shown below. Variations across the setback line may not exceed
fifteen percent (15%) of the minimums required. Calculation of the average
shall require at least ten (10) equally spaced measurements across any one
"building line", as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, and shown in
figure 13.14.051 of this subsection.
FIGURE 13.14.051
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4868.gif]
The average setback is calculated using the length of 10 equidistant points
along the building line perpendicular to the lot line.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.052: REAR SETBACKS:
The minimum setback requirements for a main building are shown on chart
13.14.053 of this section, except as further limited by the building corridor
as defined in section
13.14.071 of this chapter.
CHART 13.14.053
Lot Size In Square Feet Average Rear Setback In Feet No Point Closer Than: Feet
Lot Size In Square Feet Average Rear Setback In Feet No Point Closer Than: Feet
Less than 10,000        20                           17
10,001 to 13,000        22                           18
13,001 to 16,000        25                           21
16,001 to 19,000        29                           24.5
19,001 to 22,000        34                           29
22,001 to 25,000        35                           29.5
25,001 to 28,000        36                           30.5
28,001 to 31,000        37                           31.5
31,001 to 34,000        38                           32
34,001 to 37,000        39                           33
37,001 to 40,000        40                           34
40,001 to 49,600        41                           34.5
49,601 to 59,200        42                           35
59,201 to 68,800        43                           36
68,801 to 78,400        44                           37
Over 78,400             45                           38
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.054: FRONT SETBACKS:
   A.   Purpose: In the City of Holladay, development patterns have been set in
neighborhoods by past choices. These choices are reflected in the location of
homes with regard to the configuration of individual lots, the age of the
houses and the mature vegetation that has been cultivated and added over the
years. In order to maintain the unique character of individual neighborhoods,
the minimum front setback for main buildings on each street should support and
continue that development pattern.
   B.   Worksheet Required: The property owner and/or their designee shall
calculate the front yard setback as described herein. Results shall be
documented by completing the "R-1 Zone Worksheet", on file with the Community
Development Department. The completed worksheet shall be signed and submitted
with the building permit application and reviewed and verified by the Technical
Review Committee as per subsection
13.08.010A of this title, to become part of the permit file.
   C.   Front Setbacks On Lots 1.5 Acres In Size Or Larger: The minimum front
setback for any main building with frontage on a public street shall be forty
feet (40').
   D.   Front Setbacks On Lots Less Than 1.5 Acres: The minimum front setback
for any main building with frontage on a public street shall be calculated
using an average of the front setbacks of each of the main structures on the
block face within four (4) adjacent lots, two (2) on each side of the property
in question and may include the existing structure on the property in question.
The average of each main structure shall be determined on-site by using the
shortest and farthest measurement from the property line to the main structure.
Measurements will be verified by the Technical Review Committee. The average
calculation shall be further limited by the following:
      1.   If one or more of the lots required in the averaging calculations is
vacant, the front setback for such vacant lots will be determined based upon
the average front setback of the main building, if any, that formerly occupied
that lot. If the lot has never been occupied, or if the average front setback
of the former building cannot be determined, the front setback shall be
calculated using a fifth adjacent lot, which the Community Development Director
determines would most appropriately reflect the development pattern of the
neighborhood in question.
      2.   Lots fronting on a different street than the subject lot may not be
used in computing the average.
      3.   Lots, on file, with the Community Development Department, for which
a front yard variance has been granted by the City of Holladay Appeal Hearings
Officer are deemed to be unique to the streetscape and shall not be used in
computing the average. In which case the calculation of such lots shall be
based upon what the correct setback should have been, omitting the granted
variance distance.
      4.   If one or more of the lots required in the averaging calculations
have been built or rebuilt upon during or after August 2012, the Community
Development staff shall gather the information necessary to complete an "R-
1 Zone Worksheet" as described in subsection B of this section. If the
Community Development staff determines, based upon the information provided in
that worksheet, that the front yard setback for a building was calculated
incorrectly, or that the building was built incorrectly; the front yard setback
for such lots will be calculated based upon what the correct setback should
have been, rather than its as-built configuration.
      5.   When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average setback will be
computed on the basis of the three (3) adjacent lots on the same street as the
subject lot.
   E.   Front Setbacks On Private Rights-Of-Way: The minimum front setback for
a main building fronting on a private right-of-way is shown on chart 13.14.055
of this subsection.
CHART 13.14.055
 
Right-Of-Way Width Front Setback
Less than 20 feet  30 feet from the centerline of the right-of-way
20 feet and above  20 feet from the right-of-way line
 
(Ord. 2017-21, 8-3-2017)
13.14.056: SIDE SETBACKS:
   A.   The combined setbacks for any main structure on a lot in any R-1 zone
shall be a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the "lot width" (see
chapter 13.04, "Definitions", of this title) with no one side setback less than
ten percent (10%) of the lot width.
   B.   The combined setback for any main structure on a lot measuring twice or
more the minimum lot size required by the zone in which it is located shall be
a minimum thirty percent (30%) of the "lot width" (see
chapter 13.04, "Definitions", of this title) with no one side setback less than
fifteen percent (15%) of the lot width. (Ord. 2018-05, 5-17-2018)
13.14.057: CORNER SIDE SETBACKS:
The minimum corner side setback for any main structure on a public street,
private road or private lane shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.14.060: SETBACKS ON PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS:
For the purpose of this title, lots fronting on a private driveway shall be
deemed as unique from lots on any other street, private road or private lane
and shall have setbacks as follows:
   A.   The minimum setback for any main building on a lot fronting on a
"private driveway" (see
chapter 13.04, "Definitions", of this title) shall be as follows:
      1.   A yard abutting the rear yard of an abutting lot shall maintain the
minimum rear setback required by section
13.14.052 of this chapter; and
      2.   A yard abutting the side yard of an abutting lot shall maintain the
minimum side setback required by section
13.14.056 of this chapter. On lots where only one side yard is required, the
minimum side setback shall be ten percent (10%) of the lot width. (Ord. 2015-
02, 2-5-2015)
13.14.065: SETBACKS ON DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
   A.   Lots with frontage on two (2) public streets shall be required to
provide two (2) front setbacks as required by subsection
13.14.054D of this chapter, except as follows:
      1.   For lots with frontage on I-215 or Vanwinkle Expressway, those
frontages shall be considered as rear lot lines and shall comply with section
13.14.052 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.070: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   Purpose: Limiting overall building height and building height in
relation to the property line (i.e., graduated height), is an essential element
of land use planning and urban design. In particular, height limitations
provide some view protection, light, shadow, air movement, and also contribute
directly to physical and psychological well being. The use of overall height
limitations proportional to the lot sizes, and of a graduated height envelope,
is intended to keep the massing of structures away from the property line,
lessening the impact of new homes on abutting lots while allowing for and
encouraging architectural interest. In addition to meeting all of the maximum
height and graduated height envelopes required in this chapter, architects,
developers, and homeowners are required to break up large wall and gable areas
with articulations, building relief, and appropriate fenestration, among other
ornamental features.
   B.   Implementation: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
title, no building or structure shall exceed the following height:
      1.   Main Buildings:
         a.   In all residential zones, the maximum height of any main
building/structure located within the building corridor area as provided in
section
13.14.071 of this chapter shall be as shown on chart 13.14.070 of this
subsection.
CHART 13.14.070
 
Lot Area In Square Feet Maximum Height In Feet
Less than 15,000        32
15,001 to 1 acre        35
Over 1 acre             40
 
         b.   Upon application of a building permit of a main building proposed
upon a new parcel the recording of which resulted from the consolidation of two
(2) or more parcel(s), the maximum height shall be determined by using the area
of largest parcel prior to the recorded consolidation, as provided in chart
13.14.070 of this section. (Ord. 2018-05, 5-17-2018)
      2.   Graduated Height: The height of all buildings/structures, main and
accessory, is further limited by the graduated height envelope created by
starting at a point on the property line eight feet (8') above ground and then
sloping a line at a forty five degree (45°) angle toward the center of the lot.
The entire building must fit under this line except for:
         a.   Dormers that exceed the graduated height envelope:
            (1)   Are limited to fourteen feet (14') wide maximum;
            (2)   Must have at least one-half (1/2) of the dormer width between
each dormer, and from each dormer to the front and side edges of the roof;
            (3)   May not extend above the ridge of the roof it is on.
         b.   Gable, vertical wall, parapet or other structural elements that
exceed the graduated height envelope:
            (1)   Where the graduated height envelope intersects a gable, the
gable may not exceed 0.75 times higher than the point where the graduated
height envelope intersects the gable or "x" (1.75) = maximum gable height. See
figure 1 of this subsection.
FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4870.gif]
            (2)   Where the graduated height envelope intersects a vertical
wall, parapet or structural element other than a gable, the height may not
exceed 0.40 times higher than the point where the graduated height envelope
intersects the vertical wall, parapet or other structural element, or "x"
(1.40) = maximum overall height. See figure 2 of this subsection.
FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4872.gif]
(Where "x" is the height from natural grade at which the graduated height plane
intersects the gable.)
            (3)   May not exceed the overall height allowance.
      3.   Exceptions:
         a.   For structures in the R-1 Zones, chimneys, and other minor
architectural features as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title, may be erected a maximum six feet (6') above the
height limits prescribed in section
13.14.071 of this chapter.
         b.   Individual building elevations that face a public street, or abut
a public or quasi-public, or other nonresidential use are exempt from the
graduated height requirements of this section. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.071: BUILDING CORRIDOR:
   A.   Purpose: The building corridor is a three-dimensional regulation
limiting the depth of a new residential construction at the maximum height
allowed. (Ord. 2012-23, 10-11-2012)
   B.   Determination: The building corridor of a main structure shall be
determined by comparing only similarly sized lots on the same block face as the
subject property.
      1.   Where the subject property is 1.5 acres in size or larger, the
determination of the building corridor shall only involve other lots that are
1.5 acres or larger.
      2.   Where the subject property is smaller than 1.5 acres in size, the
determination of the building corridor shall only involve other lots that are
smaller than 1.5 acres.
      3.   If there are no comparable lots, as applicable, within the
comparative building corridor area, the Community Development Director shall
determine the appropriate building corridor for a new home, with written
findings, based upon what is most compatible with the other existing homes on
adjacent lots within the immediate area. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   C.   Interior Lots: The calculation of the building corridor for any main
structure shall be further determined by averaging the depths of each main
structure, front to back, on the similarly sized lots as categorized in
subsection B of this section.
      1.   For any home(s) built or remodeled pursuant to a building permit
issued prior to November 30, 1999, the applicable building corridor shall be
calculated at 1.15 times the averaged depth of that home(s).
      2.   For any home(s) built or remodeled pursuant to a building permit
issued on or after November 30, 1999, the applicable building corridor shall be
calculated at 1.0 times the averaged depth of only that portion of the
structure that exceeds twenty feet (20') in height.
   D.   Corner Lots: On corner lots, the building corridor for a main structure
shall be calculated as set forth above, except that for any home which was
built pursuant to a building permit issued prior to November 30, 1999, the
applicable building corridor shall be calculated at 1.2 times the averaged
depth of that home(s).
   E.   Implementation: Application of the calculated building corridor depth
shall be implemented by beginning from the determined front setback line as
described in subsection
13.14.054D of this chapter.
   F.   Transition: The building corridor shall be extended by a one to one (1:
1) slope from the maximum height allowed in subsection
13.14.070B1a, chart 13.14.070 of this chapter down to the height limitation as
outlined in subsection G of this section.
   G.   Height Limitation: On public streets, private roads or private lanes as
defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title, any portion of a main building/structure extending
behind the building corridor area shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height.
   H.   Slope: On property where the slope of the original ground surface
exceeds fifteen percent (15%), the maximum height of any main structure shall
not exceed thirty feet (30'). The slope shall be determined using a line drawn
from the highest point of elevation to the lowest point of elevation on the
perimeter of a box encircling the foundation line of the building or structure.
Said box shall extend for a distance of fifteen feet (15') or to the property
line, whichever is less, around the foundation line of the building or
structure. The elevation shall be determined using a certified topographic
survey with a maximum contour interval of two feet (2').
   I.   Required: No dwelling unit shall contain less than one story. (Ord.
2012-23, 10-11-2012)
13.14.080: LOT COVERAGE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate the installation of
impervious surfaces within the city of Holladay. It is the intent of this
regulation to be sensitive to the natural and built environment. The city's
intent is to support reasonable land use regulations. Some of the tools that
can be used in this regard are included elsewhere in this title and also
outlined below. The restriction of impervious surfaces can have a positive
effect on the overall environment. Impervious surfaces replace and alter the
natural landscape. Their construction can initiate a chain of events that
modifies water resources, urban air elements, and the overall environment.
Findings supporting this regulation are:
      1.   Impervious surfaces seal the soil surface, eliminating the benefits
of rainwater filtration and natural groundwater recharge. Stormwaters run
across impervious surfaces, collecting toxins and debris which may be damaging
to the health of riparian habitats and to all waterways and lakes.
      2.   Excessive storm drainage created by uncontrolled runoff often
negatively impacts private property and public infrastructure.
      3.   Impervious surfaces damage tree roots systems depriving them of
water which in turn destroys the canopy and shade that would otherwise moderate
excessively hot urban climates known as "heat islands". Impervious surfaces
displace living vegetation, which is necessary for normal atmospheric carbon
cycling.
      4.   The loss of urban forests, especially in arid Utah and particularly
in Holladay, which is well known for its spectacular tree cover, results in a
loss of community identity and reduces property values.
      5.   In areas of urban build out, redevelopment and reconstruction are
opportunities for environmental rehabilitation. Permeable or porous paving is
an important component in low impact development.
   B.   Maximum Lot Coverage: The total allowable lot coverage for all
structures and the total impervious coverage for any lot is shown on chart
13.14.080B of this section, excluding outdoor swimming pools, ponds with
artificial liners and other water features. Approved permeable or porous
surfaces may be allowed per coverage bonus
table 13.14.080C of this section.
CHART 13.14.080B
Lot Size In Square Feet Percent Coverage Of All Percent Impervious Coverage
                        Structures
Lot Size In Square Feet Percent Coverage Of All Percent Impervious Coverage
                        Structures
Less than 10,000        35                      40
10,001 to 15,000        31                      36
15,001 to 20,000        28                      33
20,001 to 30,000        25                      30
30,001 to 40,000        24                      29
40,001 to 50,000        23                      28
50,001 to 60,000        22                      27
60,001 to 70,000        21                      26
Above 70,000            20                      25
 
   C.   Coverage Bonus: Total percent impervious coverage, as per chart
13.14.080B of this section, may be increased no more than an additional ten
percent (10%) as per coverage bonus
table 13.14.080C of this section. This provision may not be used to increase
the maximum percent coverage of all structures as set forth herein.
COVERAGE BONUS TABLE 13.14.080C
(Maximum 10 Percent Bonus Area Allowed)
 
Method                                                 Maximum Percent Increase
Plant 2 inch caliper tree: 1 percent per tree. Species
as per tree selection guide made available through     6.0 percent
city of Holladay community development department
Permeable pavers or porous surface1: Installed as per  3.5 percent
approved manufacturing standards
Water wise landscaping: Landscaping area must be equal
in area to the percent increase gained, as per         3.5 percent
Holladay water wise guidelines made available through
city of Holladay community development department
Sump2                                                  2.5 percent
Cistern2                                               2.5 percent
 
Notes:
1.    Appropriate porosity approved by city engineer.
2.    Size, design and capacity approved by city engineer.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.090: COVERAGE OF REAR YARD:
No accessory building, including a guesthouse or group of accessory buildings,
shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.100: MASS AND SCALE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is not to restrict architectural
freedom but address the appropriate size of a structure given its context
within an established neighborhood. Two (2) factors influence the perception of
mass and scale of a structure: the physical relationship of the structure to
the size of the adjacent structures and the physical distance between
structures.
   B.   Limitation: To avoid any large, continuous building mass of uniform
height, no portion of any building shall continue more than forty feet (40')
horizontally without a minimum of an eighteen inch (18") break in the roofline
and/or an articulated architectural element such as overhangs, projections,
insets, material and textural changes, or other architectural elements used to
create shadow patterns along the elevation of the building.
   C.   Second Story Locations: Second story portions of a building shall be
designed with adjacent structures in mind. Reduction in the overall scale of
the building can be accomplished by the use of varied upper story setbacks,
providing significantly larger setbacks for the entire structure and/or
placement of the major portion of the second story over the rear portion of the
first story.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4874.gif]
   D.   Exposed Vertical Wall Surfaces Within The Building Corridor:
      1.   Lots where topography slopes from one property line to another may
increase the height of an exposed wall when measured from the natural or
finished grade of the downhill side, whichever is lowest, to a maximum wall
height of twenty five feet (25') where at which point a minimum eight foot (8')
horizontal step shall occur until the wall may continue vertically.
      2.   A foundation wall surface, exposed below the natural grade, shall be
limited to an area no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the maximum potential
area of each exposed wall surface. (Wall surface is calculated by the height of
basement level multiplied by the width of basement level.)
Appropriate exposed wall designs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4876.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4884.gif]
 
Inappropriate exposed wall designs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4880.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4882.gif]
(Ord. 2015-14, 10-8-2015)
13.14.110: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Prohibited Locations: No accessory building/structure may be
constructed in a front setback area, nor shall it be placed within a required
side setback area abutting a street. No accessory building/structure may be
constructed within any public utility or other easement without the express
written consent of all utility providers or parties holding interest in the
easement. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   Rear Yard Requirements: An accessory building/structure may be
constructed in a rear yard provided the accessory building/structure:
      1.   Does not exceed twenty feet (20') in height above existing grade if
located in any required setback;
      2.   Meets the graduated height requirement in subsection
13.14.070 B2 of this chapter;
      3.   Is no closer to a rear or side property line as shown on
chart 13.14.101 of this section; and
      4.   If located entirely within the buildable envelope, the height of the
accessory building/structure shall not exceed the height of the main building/
structure.
CHART 13.14.101
Lot Size In Square Feet Total Footprint (Permitted Use) No Closer Than (Feet)
Lot Size In Square Feet Total Footprint (Permitted Use) No Closer Than (Feet)
Less than 8,000         800                             3
8,001 to 14,600         850                             4
14,601 to 21,200        900                             5
21,201 to 27,800        950                             6
27,801 to 34,400        1,000                           7
34,401 to 41,000        1,050                           8
41,001 to 47,600        1,100                           9
47,601 to 54,200        1,150                           10
54,201 to 60,800        1,200                           11
60,801 to 67,400        1,250                           12
67,401 to 74,000        1,300                           13
74,001 to 80,600        1,350                           14
Over 80,600             1,400                           15
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   C.   Side Yard Requirements: Accessory buildings/structures may be
constructed between the primary structure and the side property line not
abutting a street if the accessory buildings/structures: (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-
2015)
      1.   Do not encroach into the required side setback area;
      2.   Do not exceed twenty feet (20') in height above existing grade; and
      3.   Meet the graduated height requirement in subsection
13.14.070B2 of this chapter.
   D.   Prohibited Structures: Shipping containers, semitrailers, boxcars,
PODS®, or similar structures may not be installed or maintained on a
residential lot. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021; amd
Ord. 2024-18, 11-7-2024)
13.14.120: FENCES:
See section
13.76.710 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.130: STORAGE OF RVs, BOATS AND TRAVEL TRAILERS:
All RVs, boats and travel trailers which exceed eight feet (8') in length shall
only be stored in a side yard or rear yard. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.14.140: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the R-1 zones shall comply with the provisions governing
landscaping and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.14.150: INFORMATIONAL:
For additional information, refer to this title and in particular, the
following sections:
 
13.01.060 "Certificate Of Occupancy"
13.04.040 Definition of "yard"
13.76.100 "Sale Of Space Needed To Meet Requirements"
13.76.210 "Off Site Improvements"
13.76.290 "Single-Family Or Two-Family Dwelling; Standards"
13.80.040 "Number Of Spaces Required"
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.32
R-2-8, R-2-10, R-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
13.32.010: Purpose
13.32.020: Two-Family Residential Zone, R-2-8
13.32.030: Two-Family Residential Zone, R-2-10
13.32.040: Multiple-Family Residential Zone, R-M
13.32.050: Primary Uses
13.32.060: Accessory Uses
13.32.070: Lot Regulations
13.32.080: Setback Regulations
13.32.090: Building Height
13.32.100: Coverage Regulations
13.32.110: Landscaping Regulations
13.32.120: Additional Regulations
13.32.130: Storage Of RVs, Boats And Travel Trailers
13.32.140: Informational
13.32.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide areas for residential developments
with opportunities for alternative housing in either attached or detached
construction arrangements. Furthermore, the standards set forth in this chapter
should support the goals of the general plan in particular, the encouragement
of medium density housing in areas of the city near collector and major
arterial streets as a transition between established single- family
neighborhoods and other nonresidential uses. These regulations promote
clustered developments by the use of graduated height, building envelope rules,
maximum lot coverage, landscaping regulations and setback averaging, thereby
conserving open space and views where it is consistent with surrounding
neighborhoods. Recognizing that as individuals and families move from one stage
of life to the next, providing a range of housing choices allows them the
opportunity to live in housing that suits their needs and desires while
allowing them to maintain their neighborhood and community bonds. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.020: TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, R-2-8:
To provide areas for two-family attached residential and single- family
detached residential with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.030: TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, R-2-10:
To provide areas for two-family attached residential and single- family
detached residential with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.040: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, R-M:
To provide areas for higher attached or detached residential with the
opportunity for varied housing styles and character. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.050: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses Allowed: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the
multiple-family residential (R-2 and R-M) zones shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.060: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the Multiple-Family Residential (R-
2 and R-M) Zones are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.32.070: LOT REGULATIONS:
For the purpose of subdivision in the Multiple-Family Zones the minimum lot
requirements are as shown on
table 13.32.071 of this section.
TABLE 13.32.071
 R-2-8 R-2-10 R-M
                       R-2-8              R-2-10             R-M
Minimum lot area:
Each single-family     5,000 sq. ft.      6,250 sq. ft.      5,000 sq. ft.
detached dwelling
Each unit in an
attached two- family   4,000 sq. ft.      5,000 sq. ft.      4,000 sq. ft.
dwelling
Each unit in a multi-  n/a                n/a                2,722.5 sq. ft.
family dwelling
Minimum lot width:
Each single-family     50 ft.             50 ft.             50 ft.
detached dwelling
Each attached two-     35 ft.             35 ft.             35 ft.
family dwelling unit
Each unit in a multi-  n/a                n/a                n/a
family dwelling
Frontage:
The minimum frontage
on a public street
(cul-de-sac) for any   75% of the minimum 75% of the minimum 75% of the minimum
lot at the street
right-of-way line in
feet
The minimum frontage
on a private street of 75% of the minimum 75% of the minimum 75% of the minimum
any lot at the right-
of-way line in feet
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.080: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The spacing of buildings and structures away from property
lines, rights-of-way, physical hazards and natural features such as streams and
other buildings, are essential elements of land use planning and of urban
design. In particular, setbacks may provide for privacy, light, shadow, air
movement, passive and active space, vegetation and also contribute directly to
physical and psychological well being. Setbacks should vary proportionally
depending upon the size and shape of the properties and also upon the type of
the existing and proposed land use. In some instances setbacks should be
uniform assuming there is a specific desired outcome for the setback, such as
protection of views, public safety, economic development, etc. In other
instances, variability and flexibility of setback may produce equally important
outcomes such as the protection of natural features, aesthetically pleasing
streetscapes, creativity in architectural design, and retention of fragile
housing stock or other important goals. Due to the evolution of housing styles
over the last few decades, the relative high value of land within the
community, the desire for architectural creativity, and especially the dramatic
increase in average house size, setbacks shall be applied within a flexible
envelope. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   B.   Implementation: Averaging of setbacks in all yard areas shall be
allowed as shown below. Variations across the setback line may not exceed
fifteen percent (15%) of the minimums required. Calculation of the average
shall require at least ten (10) equally spaced measurements across any one
"building line", as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, and shown in figure 13.32.081 of this subsection. The
minimum setback requirements for a main building are shown on
table 13.32.081 of this subsection. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4886.gif]
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
TABLE 13.32.081
 R-2-8 R-2-10 R-M
                                R-2-8                            R-2-10     R-M
Front setback:
The minimum setback in feet
from the front lot line for a   25                               25         25
structure containing 1 or more
dwelling units shall be
No accessory structure or
parking area may be constructed
in the required front yard
Rear setback:
The minimum setback in feet
from the rear property line for 20                               20         20
a structure containing 1 or
more dwelling units shall be
Accessory buildings located
entirely within the rear yard
and a minimum of 6 feet from    3                                3          3
any other structure may have a
minimum setback from any
property line of
Side setback:
The minimum side setback in
feet for a structure having 1   See note 1                       See note 1 15
or more dwelling units shall be
Other main buildings shall have Equal to abutting plus graduated
a minimum side setback in feet  height
of
The minimum side setback in
feet for an accessory building
not located entirely within the
rear yard shall be the same as
for any dwelling or main
building
The minimum corner side setback 20                               20         20
in feet for any structure
Building separation:
The minimum separation between
structures containing more than 8
1 dwelling unit in feet shall
be
The minimum separation for
single- family detached         13                               13         13
structures in feet shall be
The minimum separation for any
accessory structure from        Per Fire Code                    2
another structure in feet shall
be
 
Note:
   1.   All structures containing 1 or more dwelling units shall have a total
side setback of 25 percent of the required lot width, with no single side
setback less than 10 percent of the lot width. In no case shall any side
setback be less than 6.5 feet or 13 feet combined.
(Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
   C.   Front Setbacks On Private Rights-Of-Way: The minimum front setback for
a main building fronting on a private right-of-way is shown on
table 13.32.082 of this subsection.
TABLE 13.32.082
 
Right-Of-Way Width Front Setback
Less than 20 feet  30 feet from the centerline of the right-of-way
20 feet and above  20 feet from the right-of-way line
 
(Ord. 2015-05, 5-21-2015)
13.32.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   Purpose: Limiting overall building height and building height in
relation to the property line (i.e., graduated height), is an essential element
of land use planning and of urban design. In particular, height limitations
provide for some territorial view protection, light, shadow, air movement, and
also contribute directly to physical and psychological well being. The use of
overall height limitations proportional to the lot sizes, and of a graduated
height envelope, is intended to keep the massing of structures away from the
property line, lessening the impact of new homes on abutting lots while
allowing for and encouraging architectural interest. In addition to meeting all
of the maximum height and graduated height envelopes required in this chapter,
architects, developers, and homeowners are strongly encouraged to break up
large wall and gable areas with articulations, building relief, and appropriate
fenestration, among other ornamental features. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   Implementation:
      1.   Main Buildings:
         a.   In all R-2 and R-M Zones, the maximum height of any main
building/structure is as shown on
table 13.32.091 of this subsection.
TABLE 13.32.091
 
Lot Area In Square Feet Maximum Height In Feet
Up to 15,000            32
15,001 to 1 acre        35
Greater than 1 acre     40
 
         b.   On property where the slope of the original ground surface
exceeds fifteen percent (15%), the maximum height of any main structure shall
not exceed thirty feet (30'), nor exceed the allowable height as shown in
subsection B1a,
table 13.32.091 of this section. The slope shall be determined using a line
drawn from the highest point of elevation to the lowest point of elevation on
the perimeter of a box encircling the foundation line of the building or
structure. Said box shall extend for a distance of fifteen feet (15') or to the
property line, whichever is less, around the foundation line of the building or
structure. The elevation shall be determined using a certified topographic
survey with a maximum contour interval of two feet (2').
         c.   No dwelling shall contain less than one story.
      2.   Graduated Height: The height of all buildings/structures, main and
accessory, are further limited by the graduated height envelope created by
starting at a point on the property line eight feet (8') aboveground and then
sloping a line at a forty five degree (45°) angle toward the center of the lot.
The entire building must fit under this line except for:
         a.   Dormers that exceed the graduated height envelope:
            (1)   Are limited to fourteen feet (14') wide maximum;
            (2)   Must have at least one-half (1/2) of the dormer width between
each dormer, and from each dormer to the front and side edges of the roof;
            (3)   May not extend above the ridge of the roof it is on.
         b.   Gables that exceed the graduated height envelope:
            (1)   May not be more than 1.75 times higher than the point where
the graduated height envelope intersects the gable;
            (2)   May not exceed the overall height allowance.
      3.   Accessory Buildings/Structures: The maximum height of any accessory
building/structure shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.100: COVERAGE REGULATIONS:
The maximum lot coverage of impervious surface area on a lot in the Multi-
Family Zones is sixty percent (60%). (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.32.110: LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS:
All uses in the R-2-8, R-2-10 and R-M Zones shall comply with the provisions
governing landscaping and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.32.120: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Access shall be provided by a private street or right-of-way from a
public street, such private street or right-of-way shall have a travel width of
at least twenty feet (20') wide. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. A minimum of 0.5 parking spaces shall be
provided for guest parking for each dwelling unit.
   B.   Opaque fences shall be provided along all interior property lines
unless the Planning Commission approves otherwise.
   C.   No fence, wall or hedge shall be erected to a height exceeding four
feet (4') in the front yard and six feet (6') in the side and rear yards unless
approved by the Planning Commission as a conditional use pursuant to the
provisions of section
13.08.040 of this title.
   D.   No parking areas may be located within the required front setback from
a public street.
   E.   All trash receptacles shall be enclosed by sight obscuring fencing
appropriate to the architecture of the main structures. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.32.130: STORAGE OF RVs, BOATS AND TRAVEL TRAILERS:
All RVs, boats and travel trailers which exceed eight feet (8') in length shall
only be stored in a side yard or rear yard. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.32.140: INFORMATIONAL:
For additional information, refer to this title and in particular, the
following sections:
 
13.01.060 "Certificate Of Occupancy"
13.76.100 "Sale Of Space Needed To Meet Requirements"
13.76.190 "Height Limitations; Exceptions"
13.76.200 "Additional Height Allowed When"
13.76.210 "Off Site Improvements"
13.76.290 "Single-Family Or Two-Family Dwelling; Standards"
13.80.040 "Number Of Spaces Required"
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.44
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE
SECTION:
13.44.010: Professional Office Zone (PO) Established
13.44.020: Primary Uses
13.44.030: Accessory Uses
13.44.040: Design And Site Plan Review And Approval
13.44.050: General Development Standards
13.44.060: Setback Requirements
13.44.070: Building Height
13.44.080: Coverage Restrictions
13.44.090: Landscaping
13.44.100: Outside Storage Not Permitted
13.44.110: Lighting
13.44.120: Nuisance Factors And Hazards
13.44.130: Screening
13.44.140: Access And Parking
13.44.150: Pedestrian Walkways
13.44.160: Perimeter Wall
13.44.010: PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE (PO) ESTABLISHED:
The following zone is established:
   A.   Professional Office Zone (PO): The purpose of the PO Zone is to set
standards for areas in appropriate locations for professional and business
offices, personal services and other compatible uses such as a commercial
daycare facility. Developments in the PO Zone are intended to be compatible
with abutting residential uses and to buffer residential development or zones
from more intense land uses.
   B.   Rezone Requests: In evaluating any rezone application for this zone,
preference shall be given to those properties which:
      1.   Occur within a General Plan district supporting appropriate of
either Professional Office-Commercial (PO-C), Mixed Use development, or other
similar areas such as the Highland Drive small area master plan area (HDMP),
      2.   Will result in an upgrade of the building and/or site, and
      3.   Will enhance property values and contribute to the economic
sustainability of the City. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.020: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: The permitted and conditional uses
allowed in PO shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.030: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the PO are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   D.   Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to a permitted or
conditional use may be allowed in the PO, provided the total footprint square
footage of all accessory buildings does not exceed the square footage of the
primary use. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.040: DESIGN AND SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
All site plans for development or redevelopment in a PO Zone shall be reviewed
and approved in three (3) steps as required by
chapter 13.08 of this title. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.050: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Lot Area: In PO Zones, the minimum lot area for any building or
structure shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: In PO Zones, the minimum width of a lot for any building or
structure shall be sixty five feet (65'). (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.060: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum setback requirements for all main and accessory buildings are as
follows:
   A.   Front setback:
      1.   Minimum shall be ten feet (10');
      2.   Maximum shall be no greater than abutting buildings on the same
block face.
   B.   Side setback: No less than the minimum side yard required by the zone
of any abutting property including compliance with the applicable graduated
height requirement.
   C.   Rear setback:
      1.   Thirty feet (30') if abutting a Residential Zone.
      2.   Twenty feet (20') if abutting to other zones.
   D.   Corner side setback shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-
2019)
13.44.070: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   No building or structure in the PO Zone shall exceed forty feet (40')
in height.
   B.   In the PO Zone, firewalls, skylights, clock or bell towers, steeples,
flagpoles, chimneys, and wireless telecommunication masts (
chapter 13.83 of this title) may be erected above the maximum building height
as allowed by section
13.76.190 of this title. However, no space above the height limit shall be
allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-
28-2019)
13.44.080: COVERAGE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Maximum Coverage: The maximum lot coverage of impervious surface area
for a development site shall be seventy percent (70%).
   B.   Coverage Bonus: The total percent impervious coverage as per subsection
A of this section may be increased no more than an additional ten percent (10%)
as allowed by the following table:
COVERAGE BONUS TABLE 13.44.070.001
(Maximum 10 Percent Bonus Area Allowed)
 
Method                                                 Maximum Percent Increase
Plant 2" caliper tree: 1% per tree. Species as per
tree selection guide made available through Holladay   6.0%
City Community Development Director
Permeable pavers or porous surface1: Installed as per  3.5%
approved manufacturing standards
Water wise landscaping: Landscaping area must be equal
in area to the percent increase gained, as per         3.5%
Holladay water wise guidelines made available through
Holladay City Community Development Director
Sump2                                                  2.5%
Cistern2                                               2.5%
 
Notes:
   1.    Appropriate porosity approved by City Engineer.
   2.    Size, design and capacity approved by City Engineer.
(Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.090: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the PO Zone shall comply with the provisions governing landscaping
and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.100: OUTSIDE STORAGE NOT PERMITTED:
Unenclosed storage of any business inventory, equipment, motor vehicles (other
than parking for business vehicles, employee and visitor vehicles), or other
property is not permitted. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.110: LIGHTING:
   A.   Purpose: Site lighting is an important part of any land use development
in the PO Zone. All proposed development shall have a professionally designed
lighting plan approved by the Planning Commission as part of the site plan/
conditional use permit process. Such plans shall emphasize energy conservation
and compatibility with adjacent uses and using the minimum light necessary to
achieve visibility and security while ensuring the enjoyment of a starry night
for all members of the community.
   B.   Height Of Light Poles: The maximum height of light poles shall be
thirty feet (30'). The light shall be low intensity, shielded from uses on
adjacent lots, and directed away from adjacent properties in a Residential Zone
or use.
   C.   Surface Parking Lot Lighting: All parking lot lights, except those
required for security, shall be extinguished one hour after the end of business
hours. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total luminaries used may remain
on overnight for security reasons.
   D.   Pedestrian Walkways: Pedestrian walkways to mass transit facilities
shall be lighted.
   E.   Light Sources: All light sources shall be full cutoff fixtures,
completely concealed with an opaque housing. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.120: NUISANCE FACTORS AND HAZARDS:
Operations shall not be conducted which emit offensive or objectionable noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, dust or gases, air pollution, water pollution or
generates heavy truck traffic. Precautions shall be taken in all operations
against radiation, radioactivity, fire and explosion hazards and other
activities that negatively impact the safe and enjoyable use of property in the
vicinity. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.130: SCREENING:
   A.   Trash Receptacles: All trash or refuse receptacle areas shall be
completely screened from surrounding properties by a masonry wall or other
material architecturally compatible with the building that is either a minimum
of six feet (6') high or high enough to screen the height of the container or
the container shall be enclosed within a building. Any trash or refuse
receptacle area shall be located to the extent possible as far away from
abutting residential uses to minimize potential negative impact.
   B.   Mechanical Equipment: All ground mounted mechanical equipment
including, but not limited to, heating and air conditioning units shall be
completely screened from surrounding properties by a masonry wall or shall be
enclosed within a building and shall be located to the extent possible as far
away as possible from abutting residential uses to minimize potential negative
impact.
   C.   Roof Appurtenances: The use of roof appurtenances is discouraged. If
roof appurtenances, including, but not limited to, air conditioning units,
elevator shafts and mechanical equipment are used, they shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the building or placed within an enclosure no
taller than the absolute minimum needed. Such structures shall comply with the
requirements for penthouses and roof structures of the International Building
Code, as adopted by the State. Such enclosures require Planning Commission
approval, and shall minimize visibility from on-site parking areas, streets,
abutting public streets, and abutting Residentially zoned property.
   D.   Utility Connections: All utility connections shall be compatible with
the architectural elements of the site and not be exposed except where
necessary. Pad mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be
included in the site plan with an appropriate screening treatment. Power lines
and other utility cables shall be installed underground where possible.
   E.   Loading Areas And Docks: Loading areas and docks shall be screened by
landscaping and/or visual barriers from adjacent properties and public streets.
(Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.140: ACCESS AND PARKING:
   A.   Access:
      1.   The number of access points along public streets shall be minimized
by sharing and linking parking areas with adjacent properties where possible.
Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking agreements shall be
required to facilitate the ease of vehicular movement between abutting
properties where possible. The Planning Commission may grant an exception to
this requirement if it is satisfied that obtaining a reciprocal parking
agreement is not possible, practical or would create an undue hardship on the
developing property.
      2.   On corner sites, access points shall be located as far from the
corner as reasonably possible and in no case less than sixty feet (60') from
the point of intersection of the property lines. Vehicular circulation shall be
designed to preclude the intrusion of traffic directly into residential areas.
   B.   Vanpool; Car Pool Spaces: One vanpool/car pool space shall be provided
for every twenty five (25) parking spaces in all parking lots or parking
structures directly associated with an office use. Parking spaces for vanpool/
car pool vehicles shall have a priority location near building entrances to
encourage this form of mass transit.
   C.   Prohibited Parking Areas: Parking shall not be located in the required
front setback or the required corner side setback which faces on a public
street unless appropriately screened from public view. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-
2019)
13.44.150: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
   A.   Required: All-weather surfacing a minimum of six feet (6') wide, shall
be required to accommodate pedestrian movement between activity centers within
the site, to adjacent uses and from building entrances directly to mass transit
facilities.
   B.   Public Easements: Public easements for walkways, trails, and similar
uses are desirable and may be obtained in cooperation with the developer during
the approval process. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.44.160: PERIMETER WALL:
   A.   When Required; Waiver: The project area shall have a decorative tinted
concrete or masonry wall along all rear and side yards not fronting on a public
street, but which abut a residential use. This requirement may be waived or
modified by the Planning Commission upon a determination that the wall is not
necessary to buffer the abutting use or that a different type of screening
instrument is acceptable. Such walls shall not be located in the required
setback from a public street.
   B.   Height: All perimeter walls shall be a maximum of six feet (6') high
unless the Planning Commission requires a higher wall as part of the site plan
or conditional use approval and is acceptable to any abutting property owner.
   C.   Access: The Planning Commission may require appropriate access to
trails, creeks, or other open space amenities with the cooperation of the
property owner. (Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
CHAPTER 13.45
O-R-D OFFICE, RESEARCH PARK AND DEVELOPMENT ZONE
SECTION:
13.45.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.45.020: Design And Site Plan Approval
13.45.030: Primary Uses
13.45.040: Accessory Uses
13.45.050: Outside Storage Not Permitted
13.45.060: Setback Requirements
13.45.070: Building Height
13.45.080: Coverage Restrictions
13.45.090: Perimeter Wall
13.45.100: Landscaping
13.45.110: Lighting
13.45.120: Nuisance Factors And Hazards
13.45.130: Screening
13.45.140: Access And Parking
13.45.150: Pedestrian Walkways
13.45.160: Design Considerations
13.45.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the O-R-D Zone is to provide an aesthetically attractive
environment where flexibility in the land use mix can be fostered. The primary
intent of the zone is to establish a specific area where more intensive office,
research and development facilities can be located. However, the complexity of
the land in the zone and its adjacency to a major freeway access supports the
incorporation of subordinate, and compatible multi-family residential and
general commercial activity such as travel and tourism related uses. Retail,
service, convenience and food establishments are considered appropriate for the
zone when developed with proper site plan and architectural design guidelines.
The zone is intended to ensure compatibility of new development with the
surrounding land uses, including adjacent residential developments, and to
enhance and support the overall economic health and housing needs of the City.
(Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-15, 6-16-2022)
13.45.020: DESIGN AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
Design and site plan approval for all development is subject to the three (3)
step review and approval process as required in
chapter 13.08 of this title. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.030: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the O-R-
D Zone shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title, shall be
prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use had been and is currently
established except as allowed by
chapter 13.88 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the O-R-D Zone are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-
16-2019)
13.45.050: OUTSIDE STORAGE NOT PERMITTED:
Outside storage of any stock, motor vehicles (other than parking for employee
and visitor vehicles), or other property is not permitted. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-
2019)
13.45.060: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum setback requirements for all main and accessory buildings are as
follows:
   A.   Front setback:
      1.   Minimum shall be ten feet (10');
      2.   Maximum shall be fifty feet (50').
   B.   Side setback:
      1.   Thirty feet (30') if abutting a Residential Zone. The side yard
shall be increased at least one foot (1') for each additional foot of building
height above thirty feet (30');
      2.   Ten feet (10') if abutting other zones.
   C.   Rear setback:
      1.   Thirty feet (30') if abutting a Residential Zone. The rear yard
shall be increased at least one foot (1') for each additional foot of building
height above thirty feet (30');
      2.   Ten feet (10') if abutting to other zones.
   D.   Corner side setback:
      1.   Minimum shall be ten feet (10');
      2.   Maximum shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.070: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The maximum height of a building or structure shall be seventy two feet (72').
(Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.080: COVERAGE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Maximum Coverage: The maximum lot coverage of impervious surface area
for a development site shall be seventy percent (70%).
   B.   Coverage Bonus: The total percent impervious coverage as per subsection
A of this section may be increased no more than an additional ten percent (10%)
as allowed by the following table:
COVERAGE BONUS TABLE 13.45.080.001
(Maximum 10 Percent Bonus Area Allowed)
 
Method                                                         Maximum
                                                               Percent Increase
Plant 2" caliper tree: 1% per tree. Species as per tree
selection guide made available through Holladay City Community 6.0%
Development Director
Permeable pavers or porous surface1: Installed as per approved 3.5%
manufacturing standards
Water wise landscaping: Landscaping area must be equal in area
to the percent increase gained, as per Holladay water wise     3.5%
guidelines made available through Holladay City Community
Development Director
Sump2                                                          2.5%
Cistern2                                                       2.5%
 
Notes:
   1.    Appropriate porosity approved by City Engineer.
   2.    Size, design and capacity approved by City Engineer.
(Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.090: PERIMETER WALL:
   A.   When Required; Waiver: The project area shall have a decorative tinted
concrete or masonry wall along all rear and side yards not fronting on a public
street, but which abut a residential use. This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Commission upon a determination that the wall is not necessary to
buffer the abutting use. Such walls shall not be located in the required
setback from a public street.
   B.   Height: All perimeter walls shall be a maximum of six feet (6') high
unless the Planning Commission requires a higher wall as part of the site plan
or conditional use approval.
   C.   Access: The Planning Commission may require appropriate access to
trails, creeks, or other open space amenities. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.100: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the O-R-D Zone shall comply with the provisions governing
landscaping and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.110: LIGHTING:
   A.   Lighting Plan Required: All proposed development shall have a
professionally designed lighting plan approved by the Planning Commission as
part of the site plan/conditional use permit process. Such plans shall
emphasize energy conservation and compatibility with adjacent uses and using
the minimum light necessary to achieve visibility and security while ensuring
the enjoyment of a starry night for all members of the community.
   B.   Height Of Light Poles: The maximum height of light poles shall be
thirty feet (30'). The light shall be low intensity, boxed/shielded from uses
on adjacent lots, and down directed to avoid light wash or flooding of any
adjacent Residentially zoned or used properties.
   C.   Surface Parking Lot Lighting: All parking lot lights, except those
required for security, shall be extinguished one hour after the end of business
hours. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total luminaries used may remain
on overnight for security reasons.
   D.   Pedestrian Walkways: Pedestrian walkways to mass transit facilities
shall be lighted.
   E.   Light Sources: All light sources shall be full cutoff fixtures,
completely concealed with an opaque housing. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.120: NUISANCE FACTORS AND HAZARDS:
Operations shall not be conducted which emit offensive or objectionable noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, dust or gases, air pollution, water pollution or
generates heavy truck traffic. Precautions shall be taken in all operations
against radiation, radioactivity, fire and explosion hazards.
   A.   Compliance Required: Activities conducted on the premises shall comply
with all local, State, and Federal laws and regulations and permits.
   B.   Noise Level: The noise level emanating from any use or operation shall
not exceed the limits in the Health Department Health Regulation 21, or its
successor, regarding noise control. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.130: SCREENING:
   A.   Trash Receptacles: All trash or refuse receptacle areas shall be
completely screened from surrounding properties by a masonry wall or other
material architecturally compatible with the building that is either a minimum
of six feet (6') high or high enough to screen the height of the container or
the container shall be enclosed within a building. Any trash or refuse
receptacle area shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any residential
use.
   B.   Mechanical Equipment: All ground mounted mechanical equipment
including, but not limited to, heating and air conditioning units shall be
completely screened from surrounding properties by a masonry wall or shall be
enclosed within a building.
   C.   Roof Appurtenances: The use of roof appurtenances is discouraged. If
roof appurtenances, including, but not limited to, air conditioning units,
elevator shafts and mechanical equipment are used, they shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the building or placed within an enclosure no
taller than the absolute minimum needed. Such structures shall comply with the
requirements for penthouses and roof structures of the International Building
Code, as adopted by the State. Such enclosures require Planning Commission
approval, and shall minimize visibility from on- site parking areas, abutting
public streets, and abutting Residentially zoned property.
   D.   Utility Connections: All utility connections shall be compatible with
the architectural elements of the site and not be exposed except where
necessary. Pad mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be
included in the site plan with an appropriate screening treatment. Power lines
and other utility cables shall be installed underground where possible.
   E.   Loading Areas And Docks: Loading areas and docks shall be screened by
landscaping and/or visual barriers from adjacent properties and public streets.
(Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.140: ACCESS AND PARKING:
   A.   Access:
      1.   The number of access points along public streets shall be minimized
by sharing and linking parking areas with adjacent properties. Reciprocal
ingress and egress, circulation and parking agreements shall be required to
facilitate the ease of vehicular movement between abutting properties. The
Planning Commission may grant an exception to this requirement if it is
satisfied that obtaining a reciprocal parking agreement is not practical or
would create an undue hardship on the developing property.
      2.   On corner sites, access points shall be located as far from the
corner as reasonably possible and in no case less than sixty feet (60') from
the point of intersection of the property lines. Vehicular circulation shall be
designed to preclude the intrusion of traffic directly into residential areas.
   B.   Vanpool; Car Pool Spaces: One vanpool/car pool space shall be provided
for every twenty five (25) parking spaces in all parking lots or parking
structures directly associated with an office, and/or research and development
use. Parking spaces for vanpool/car pool vehicles shall have a priority
location near building entrances to encourage this form of mass transit.
   C.   Prohibited Parking Areas: Parking shall not be located in the required
front setback or the required corner side setback which faces on a public
street. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.150: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
   A.   Required: Pedestrian walkways, a minimum of six feet (6') wide, shall
be required to accommodate pedestrian movement between activity centers within
the site, to adjacent uses and from building entrances directly to mass transit
facilities not to be calculated in the impervious coverage requirement.
   B.   Public Easements: Public easements for walkways, jogging paths and
similar uses may be required. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
13.45.160: DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS:
In order to meet the purposes of the O-R-D Zone, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following prior to approval of any plan:
   A.   Scale: The scale of the development shall be in character with the
surrounding land uses including adjacent development.
   B.   Access: Development may occur only when sufficient and safe access is
provided to and within the site from both public and private streets.
   C.   Design: The architectural design of all new buildings shall be
compatible in materials and finishes with the development pattern within the
zone. (Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019)
CHAPTER 13.46
P PUBLIC USE ZONE
SECTION:
13.46.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.46.020: Primary Uses
13.46.030: Accessory Uses
13.46.040: Lot Width
13.46.050: Front Yard
13.46.060: Side Yard
13.46.070: Rear Yard
13.46.080: Coverage Restrictions
13.46.090: Building Height
13.46.100: Accessory Buildings
13.46.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the P zone is to provide areas in the city for the development
of parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public and quasi-public
buildings and land uses. (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.020: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses Allowed: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the
P zone shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.030: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the P zone are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2016-19, 9-
22-2016)
13.46.040: LOT WIDTH:
The minimum lot width of any lot in a P zone shall be sixty five feet (65'), at
a distance twenty five feet (25') back from the front lot line. (Ord. 2016-19,
9-22-2016)
13.46.050: FRONT YARD:
In a P zone, the minimum depth of the front yard for a main building shall be
twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.060: SIDE YARD:
In a P zone, the minimum side yard for any main building shall be twenty feet
(20') unless reduced by the planning commission. On corner lots, the side yard
which faces on a street, for both main and accessory buildings, shall be not
less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.070: REAR YARD:
In P zones, the minimum depth of the rear yard for any main building shall be
thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.080: COVERAGE RESTRICTIONS:
No building or group of buildings in a P zone, with their accessory buildings,
shall cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot. (Ord. 2016-
19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   No building or structure in a P zone shall contain more than three (3)
stories or forty five feet (45') maximum in height including screened
mechanical equipment but excluding: 1) chimneys of six feet (6') or less; 2)
architecturally compatible elevator shafts six feet (6') or less; and/or 3)
gables four feet (4') or less. No structure shall contain less than one story.
   B.   Exceptions to this limit shall only be allowed by conditional use
permit, for typical ornamental architectural features such as steeples and
towers, etc., for buildings usually found in this zone. Such features shall not
exceed sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
13.46.100: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Prohibited Locations: No accessory building/structure may be
constructed in a front setback area, nor shall it be placed within a required
side setback area abutting a street. No accessory building/structure may be
constructed within any public utility or other easement without the express
written consent of all utility providers or parties holding interest in the
easement.
   B.   Rear Yard Requirements: An accessory building/structure may be
constructed in a rear yard provided the accessory building/structure:
      1.   Does not exceed twenty feet (20') in height above existing grade if
located in any required setback;
      2.   Meets the graduated height requirement in subsection
13.14.070B2 of this title;
      3.   Is no closer to a rear property line than ten feet (10'); and
      4.   If located entirely within the buildable envelope, the height of the
accessory building/structure shall not exceed the height of the main building/
structure.
   C.   Side Yard Requirements: Accessory buildings/structures may be
constructed between the primary structure and the side property line not
abutting a street if the accessory buildings/structures:
      1.   Does not exceed twenty feet (20') in height above existing grade;
      2.   Meets the graduated height requirement in subsection
13.14.070B2 of this title; and
      3.   Does not encroach into the required side setback area (20 feet).
   D.   Setback Reduction: For properties located in the public use zone that
abut properties in the HV zone the planning commission may grant a setback
reduction for an accessory building to within three feet (3') of the property
line for a rear yard and/or a side yard not abutting a public street, if the
following can be met:
      1.   There are no residential structures within twenty feet (20') of the
proposed accessory building; and
      2.   There are other mitigating conditions that the planning commission
may deem necessary to justify a setback reduction. (Ord. 2016-19, 9-22-2016)
CHAPTER 13.50
RO RESIDENTIAL OFFICE ZONE
SECTION:
13.50.010: Purpose
13.50.020: Residential Office Zone (RO) Established
13.50.030: Primary Uses
13.50.040: Accessory Uses
13.50.050: General Development Standards
13.50.060: Setbacks
13.50.070: Buffer Standards For Development Abutting A Residential Property
13.50.080: Parking And Access Requirements
13.50.090: Storage And Display Areas
13.50.100: Screening
13.50.110: Lighting
13.50.120: Landscaping
13.50.130: Perimeter Wall
13.50.140: Public Improvements
13.50.150: General Maintenance
13.50.160: Hazardous Activities
13.50.170: Signs
13.50.180: Review By The Design Review Board
13.50.190: Design Guidelines
13.50.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the residential office zone (RO) is to allow for the reuse of
those properties which have frontage on busy streets only where residential use
is no longer economically feasible. This zone is intended as a transition
between established residential neighborhoods and the existing commercial
developments along these corridors. RO rezone applications must establish a
clear justification for implementation of this zone over other land use
alternatives for the property in question and the general vicinity.
Primarily, the RO zone standards are designed to preserve existing housing
stock by allowing the conversion of residential properties to such
nonresidential uses that have less impact on the surrounding properties than
typical commercial uses. The conversion of a single-family home to a small
professional office or other nonresidential use is a less intrusive type of
development when compared to new construction and is better able to maintain
the existing residential character of the streetscape. While, new construction
is potentially allowed in the RO zone, it should be the exception, not the
rule, and new structures and uses within this zone must be compatible in scale
and character with surrounding residential development. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-
2014)
13.50.020: RESIDENTIAL OFFICE ZONE (RO) ESTABLISHED:
The following zone is established:
   A.   Residential Office Zone (RO): The purpose of the RO zone is to set
standards for areas where restricted and limited, small scale, nonretail, low
impact office uses are allowed adjacent to residential areas.
   B.   Rezone Requests: In evaluating any rezone application for this zone,
preference shall be given to those properties which:
      1.   Have frontage on Highland Drive, Murray Holladay Road (west of 2300
East) or 1300 East.
      2.   Occur within a general plan district of either professional office,
office/residential, commercial, or are within the Highland Drive master plan
area, and
      3.   Will result in an upgrade of the building and/or site.
   C.   Use And Site Plan Approvals: Conditional use permits and site plan
approvals for developments in the RO zone shall be made by the planning
commission as allowed by sections
13.08.040 and
13.08.080 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.030: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: The permitted and conditional uses
allowed in residential office zone (RO) shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the residential office zone (RO) are
as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   D.   Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to a permitted or
conditional use may be allowed in the residential office zone (RO), provided
the total footprint square footage of all accessory buildings does not exceed
the maximum square footage as allowed in section
13.14.110 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.050: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Development standards in the RO zone shall be as follows:
TABLE 13.50.051
 
Standard
Lot area                            No minimum
Lot width                           No minimum
Lot frontage                        No minimum
Maximum impervious surface coverage 60 percent1
Maximum aboveground square feet     New construction - 3,500 per main building
                                    Existing structures - no limit
 
Note:
1.    The total percent impervious coverage may be increased through the use of
approved permeable or porous surfaces no more than an additional 10 percent as
allowed in subsection
13.14.080C of this title.
   B.   Development of lots on a private driveway (flag lot), as defined by
section
13.04.040 of this code, is prohibited in the RO zone. No intervening
development between the street and any main building on a lot in the RO zone
shall be allowed.
TABLE 13.50.052
 
Maximum Building Height
Lot Area In Square Feet Maximum Height In Feet
Less than 15,000        32
15,000 and above        35
 
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.060: SETBACKS:
   A.   Purpose: The spacing of buildings and structures away from property
lines and rights of way play an important part in the look and feel of a
neighborhood. The residential office zone (RO) standards are intended to allow
small nonresidential development along busy streets while maintaining the look
and feel of the street's original residential character. Setbacks should be
influenced by compatibility with the surrounding residential uses while
allowing flexibility for requirements associated with nonresidential
development such as parking, security lighting and trash disposal. As with the
residential zones, setbacks should vary proportionally depending upon the size
and shape of the properties and also upon the type of the existing and proposed
land use. In some instances setbacks should be uniform assuming there is a
specific desired outcome for the setback, such as protection of views, public
safety, economic development, etc. In other instances, variability and
flexibility of setback may produce equally important outcomes such as the
protection of natural features, aesthetically pleasing streetscapes, creativity
in architectural design, and retention of fragile housing stock or other
important goals.
   B.   Implementation: Averaging of setbacks in all yard areas shall be
allowed. Variations across the setback line may not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the minimums required. Calculation of the average shall require at
least ten (10) equally spaced measurements across any one "building line", as
defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, and shown in section
13.14.050,
figure 13.14.051 of this title.
   C.   Setbacks: Setbacks for new structures within the RO zone shall be as
shown on
table 13.50.061 of this section.
TABLE 13.50.061
 
Setback                                   Setback
Corner side abutting a public street      20 feet
Front                                     See section
                                          13.14.054 of this title
Rear - abutting commercial property line  See section
                                          13.14.052 of this title
Rear - abutting residential property line See section
                                          13.14.052 of this title
Side - abutting commercial property line  See section
                                          13.14.056 of this title
Side - abutting residential property line See section
                                          13.14.056 of this title
 
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.070: BUFFER STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT ABUTTING A RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
The following additional development standards shall apply to all developments
and redevelopments within the RO zone:
   A.   Building height shall not exceed the design envelope created by
starting at a point eight feet (8') above the ground at the residential
property line and then sloping along a plane at a forty five degree (45°) angle
toward the center of the lot.
   B.   For developments in the RO zone, a five foot (5') wide landscaped
buffer strip shall be provided abutting and parallel to the perimeter wall as
required by
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.080: PARKING AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Parking in the RO zone shall be exempt from the provisions of
chapter 13.80 of this title unless otherwise specified by the standards of this
section.
   A.   Parking Required: There shall be provided at the time any building or
structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, or any use is
established, off street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the
requirements in this chapter.
   B.   Number Of Parking Spaces: The number of parking spaces required for any
use(s) allowed in the RO zone shall be:
      1.   One space for each employee,
      2.   One space for each customer at the business(es) during the peak
business hour, and
      3.   Up to a maximum of four (4) stalls per one thousand (1,000) square
feet (4/1,000 square feet) of leasable space in any main building.
   C.   Access Points: The number of access points along public rights of way
should be minimized. On corner sites, access points shall be located as far
from the corner as reasonably possible and in no case less than forty feet
(40') from the intersection of the asphalt lines.
   D.   Vehicular Circulation: Vehicular circulation shall be designed to
preclude the intrusion of traffic directly into residential areas.
   E.   Parking Near A Setback Area: No parking may be located within the first
twenty feet (20') of a front setback area or within the corner side setback
area which faces on a street.
   F.   Parking In Regards To Traffic: No parking shall be located in such a
manner as to allow direct backing into oncoming traffic.
   G.   Driveway Width: The maximum driveway width for developments in the RO
zone is twenty five feet (25') at the property line.
   H.   Parking For Uses: All parking for the use(s) allowed on a parcel or lot
in the RO zone shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use.
   I.   Design Standards For Parking Stalls: All required parking stalls shall
meet the parking design standards in section
13.80.030 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.090: STORAGE AND DISPLAY AREAS:
   A.   Storage areas shall be paved with hard surface paving (unless otherwise
approved by the planning commission) and screened with opaque fencing and/or
landscaping at least six feet (6') in vertical height at the time of planting.
   B.   No outside displays (either permanent or temporary) shall be permitted.
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.100: SCREENING:
   A.   Trash Enclosures:
      1.   No commercial type dumpsters or trash enclosures are allowed in the
RO zone.
      2.   All waste and trash shall be secured and disposed of in the same
manner as a single-family residence.
   B.   Mechanical Equipment: All noise emitting equipment shall be placed so
as to minimize noise, and visual impact on nearby properties and streets.
   C.   Utility Lines: All new utility lines such as electric, telephone, CATV,
or other similar lines serving individual sites shall be placed under ground.
Utility lines necessary within the property shall be placed under ground. All
utility lines shall be placed under ground in new construction projects that
require building permits and site redesign. All junction and access boxes shall
be located to the side or the rear of the building unless public safety
concerns dictate otherwise. All utility pads shall be shown on the project
plan. Any utility connections, meter boxes, etc., shall be integrated with the
architectural elements of the project plan. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.110: LIGHTING:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this subsection to encourage lighting
practices and systems that minimize light pollution, glare and light trespass,
conserve energy and resources, and maintain nighttime safety and utility while
ensuring the enjoyment of a starry night for all members of the community.
All site lighting shall be shielded and/or directed in such a manner that it
illuminates only the user's premises and does not spill over into neighboring
residential areas so as to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the
residential properties.
   B.   Site Illumination Plan: A site illumination plan shall be submitted
with each site plan review application which includes:
      1.   All proposed exterior lighting in relation to existing and proposed
buildings, trees, landscaping, parking areas;
      2.   Proposed mounting height and placement of all exterior lighting
fixtures.
      3.   Compliance with the adopted international building code standards.
   C.   Lighting Installations: Lighting installations shall include timers,
dimmers and/or sensors to reduce overall energy consumption and eliminate
unneeded lighting.
   D.   Architectural Feature Lighting: Architectural feature lighting
including wall washers spotlights are permitted. All building entrances should
be well lit to provide inviting access and safety.
   E.   Nonconforming Fixtures: Except where otherwise noted, all outdoor
lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operative before the
effective date of this chapter are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection. Whenever a nonconforming fixture is replaced, upgraded or moved,
the replacement fixture shall meet the requirements of this section. (Ord.
2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.120: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the RO zone shall comply with the provisions governing landscaping
and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.130: PERIMETER WALL:
   A.   The project area may be required to have a screened privacy fence along
all rear and side yards not fronting on a public street, which abut a
residential zone or a residential use.
   B.   This requirement may be waived by the planning commission upon a
determination that the fence is not necessary to buffer the abutting use. Such
screening shall not be located in the required setback from a public street.
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.140: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The developer of the project shall be responsible for the dedication
and improvement of all off site public improvements that do not presently exist
according to the width of the ultimate right of way, as called out in the
roadway classification map of the Holladay city general plan. If a property has
multiple street frontages, improvements are required along all streets. Such
improvements shall include, but are not limited to: curb, gutter, sidewalk,
streetlights, drive approaches, waterways, road base, asphalt, striping,
streetscape, storm drainage, fire hydrants, water mains, laterals, piping of
irrigation ditches and flood control systems, fencing of canals, extension of
water lines, appurtenances and sewer lines, removal of utility lines out of the
right of way (with the exception of traditionally buried lines such as sewer,
water, and natural gas transmission lines), etc.
   B.   All required improvements shall be designed and installed by the
developer according to the Holladay city standard specifications for public
works construction and approved by the city engineer and city public works
director. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.150: GENERAL MAINTENANCE:
Property (including all buildings, landscaping, fences, walls, drives, parking
lot surfacing and striping, signs, or other structures) shall be maintained in
good repair and in accordance with the approved site plan for the project.
Rights of way and pavements shall be kept true to line and grade and in good
repair. Drainage ditches shall be kept clean and free of any obstructions.
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.160: HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES:
No land or building devoted to uses authorized by this chapter shall be used or
occupied in any manner so as to create noxious or objectionable fire, explosive
or other hazards; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, or other form of air
pollution, heat, cold, dampness, glare, electrical or other disturbance, liquid
or solid refuse or waste, or other substance, condition or element in such a
manner or in such an amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.50.170: SIGNS:
All signs in the RO zone shall comply with the regulations in
chapter 13.82 of this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.180: REVIEW BY THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Application: The conceptual design of any application for development
located in the RO zone which requires approval by the planning commission shall
be reviewed by the DRB as provided in this section.
   B.   Scope: A DRB review and recommendation is required for the following
development in the RO zone:
      1.   All new building construction;
      2.   Any remodeling which increases the floor area of an existing
building; or
      3.   Any exterior remodeling, as defined by the international building
codes, of an existing main building.
   C.   Submissions: An application subject to design review shall include all
of the requirements of section
13.03.040H of this title.
   D.   Recommendation: The DRB shall review the proposed conceptual design
plan for compliance with the RO design guidelines set forth in section
13.50.190 of this chapter. At the conclusion of the review, the DRB shall make
a recommendation to the planning commission to accept the design concept as
submitted, provisionally accept the design concept subject to plan revisions
necessary to achieve compliance with the design guidelines, or continue design
concept for preparation of a new design concept if the concept is substantially
out of compliance with the design guidelines. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-2014)
13.50.190: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is not to restrict architectural
freedom in new buildings, nor choose any one specific architectural style for
any particular property or street but to address the appropriate design, size
and scale of a structure given its context within the surrounding neighborhood.
Two (2) factors influence the perception of mass and scale of a structure: the
physical relationship of the structure to the size of the adjacent structures
and the physical distance between structures.
   B.   Limitation: To avoid any large, continuous building mass of uniform
height, no portion of any new building shall continue more than forty feet
(40') horizontally without a minimum of an eighteen inch (18") break in the
roofline and/or an articulated architectural element such as overhangs,
projections, insets, material and textural changes, or other architectural
elements used to create shadow patterns along the elevation of the building.
The maximum length of any blank wall uninterrupted by windows, doors or
architectural detailing at the first floor level shall be fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Second Story Locations: Second story portions of a building shall be
designed with adjacent structures in mind. Reduction in the overall scale of
the building can be accomplished by the use of varied upper story setbacks,
providing significantly larger setbacks for the entire structure and/or
placement of the major portion of the second story over the rear portion of the
first story.
   D.   Facade Embellishment: Any building wall visible from a public right of
way shall incorporate architectural design embellishments which are compatible
with other publicly visible parts of the building. Embellishments dividing the
facade visually may include windows, a recessed entrance or other appropriate
variations as approved by the DRB.
   E.   Window And Door Designs: Windows and doors shall be used to define the
character of buildings by giving scale to the building and providing visual
interest to the composition of individual facades. Distinct window and door
designs should be used to help define building styles. There must be provided
at least one operable building entrance per elevation that faces a public
street.
   F.   Awnings And Canopies: Awnings and canopies should contribute to the
architectural theme and shall be integrated within the building design. Awnings
should be constructed of traditional materials and located over windows and
doors. Backlit awnings are prohibited.
   G.   Building Materials: Building exteriors shall be constructed from high
quality and durable materials. It is important that the materials and colors
will weather well and need minimal maintenance.
      1.   Acceptable exterior finish materials include the following:
         a.   Painted, stained or weathered wood siding such as, 4-S shingles,
board and batten and clapboard;
         b.   Artificial wood siding such as painted cementitious fiberboard;
         c.   Brick or natural stone;
         d.   EIFS (synthetic stucco) (not more than 50 percent of all exterior
finished surfaces);
         e.   Stucco;
         f.   Synthetic stone; and
         g.   Architectural finish or decorative faced concrete masonry units
(CMUs).
      2.   Materials not listed above shall be prohibited unless determined to
be part of a strong architectural design theme as approved by the planning
commission after review by the DRB.
   H.   Roofs: The character of a roof is a major feature for a structure. The
roof pitch, its materials, size and orientation are all distinct features that
should contribute to the residential character of the building. Shadows created
by traditional overhangs should contribute to the perception of a building's
scale. Roof designs should relate to the building facade articulations.
Roof materials should be in keeping with the character of the architectural
style of the building. Recommended roof materials include slate shingles,
asphalt and fiberglass shingles, metal standing seam or tiles. Crickets or
other snow guard devices should be placed in such a way that does not alter the
form of the roof as seen from the street.
   I.   Remodeling Or Additions: Remodeling or additions to residential
buildings shall be allowed only if the residential character of the exterior is
maintained. Building additions shall consist of materials, color and exterior
building design consistent with the existing structure. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-
2014)
CHAPTER 13.55
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE (NC)
SECTION:
13.55.010: Purpose
13.55.020: Neighborhood Commercial Zone Established
13.55.030: Site Plan Review
13.55.040: Primary Uses
13.55.050: Accessory Uses
13.55.060: General Development Standards
13.55.070: Additional Development Standards
13.55.080: Design Guidelines
13.55.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this limited commercial zone is to provide areas within the city
for the establishment of a variety of commercial uses, whether or not in
conjunction with office or residential uses. The development standards in this
chapter are intended to promote attractive development, support and maintain a
viable economic climate within the city and to encourage compatibility between
existing and new development. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.55.020: NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE ESTABLISHED:
The following zone is established:
   A.   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC): The purpose of the NC zone is to set
standards for areas where restricted and limited, small scale, low impact
commercial uses are allowed adjacent to residential areas. The implementation
of the NC zone is intended to be on a very limited basis and only on properties
where the existing impacts of traffic, noise or other impacts make the property
marginal for continued low density residential uses.
In evaluating any application for this zone, attention shall be given to safe
and inviting pedestrian access from the surrounding neighborhood, current and
projected traffic impacts, parking needs, past and present use of the site,
abutting uses, hours of operation, historic significance of the property, and
reuse versus redevelopment of the site. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.55.030: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All site plans for new, modified or expanded development projects in the NC
zone shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission as allowed by
sections
13.08.040 and
13.08.080 of this title. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
13.55.040: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Permitted and conditional primary uses allowed in the NC zone shall be
as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Uses not included
in the table are not permitted.
   B.   Any combination of uses may be established within the same building or
on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a conditional use,
the entire project shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.55.050: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such uses. Uses not included
in the table are not permitted. Second floor single-family residential shall be
deemed as a permitted use.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel, except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the NC zone are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.55.060: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards in the commercial zones shall be as set forth in
table 13.55.061 of this section.
TABLE 13.55.061
Standard                                         
Lot area                                        No minimum
Lot width                                       No minimum
Lot frontage                                    No minimum
Front setback                                   Maximum 20 feet
Side setback abutting commercial property line  0
Side setback abutting residential property line See subsection
                                                13.55.070A of this chapter
Rear setback abutting commercial property line  0
Rear setback abutting residential property line See subsection
                                                13.55.070A of this chapter
Maximum building height                         See
                                                table 13.55.062 of this section
Maximum impervious surface coverage             90 percent
Maximum aboveground square feet                 4,500
Hours of operation                              7:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M.
 
TABLE 13.55.062
 
Lot Area In Square Feet Maximum Height In Feet
Less than 15,000        32
15,001 to 1 acre        35
Over 1 acre             40
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.55.070: ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following additional development standards shall apply to all developments
and redevelopments within the NC zone:
   A.   Buffer Standards For Development Abutting A Residential Property:
      1.   The minimum setback for a primary structure is twenty feet (20')
from any abutting residential property line.
      2.   Building height shall not exceed the design envelope created by
starting at a point eight feet (8') above the ground at the residential
property line and then sloping along a plane at a forty five degree (45°) angle
toward the center of the lot.
      3.   A perimeter wall as per subsection H of this section is required.
      4.   For developments in the NC zone a landscaped buffer shall be
provided as required by
chapter 13.77 of this title.
      5.   A primary or accessory structure with an elevation facing a
residential property shall not have a single, unbroken facade longer than fifty
feet (50').
      6.   No trash receptacle or storage area shall be located closer than
fifty feet (50') from a residential dwelling unless located within a fully
enclosed building. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
      7.   An outdoor dining facility shall be constructed in a manner which
visually obscures the facility from abutting residential property and which
protects the property from noise and light emanating from the facility. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   Parking And Access Requirements: Parking in the commercial zones shall
be governed by the provisions of
chapter 13.80 of this title except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      1.   The number of access points along public rights of way may be
minimized by sharing and linking parking areas with abutting properties.
Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking agreements may
facilitate the ease of vehicular movement between adjoining properties. On
corner sites, access points shall be located as far from the corner as
reasonably possible and in no case less than sixty feet (60') from the corner.
Vehicular circulation shall be designed to preclude the intrusion of traffic
directly into residential areas.
      2.   Secure facilities for parking bicycles shall be provided in a
location near building entrances.
      3.   Parking shall not be located in the front yard setback or the side
yard setback which faces on a street except as approved by the planning
commission at site plan review.
   C.   Pedestrian Walkways: Pedestrian walkways, which comply with ADA
standards, should be provided. Public easements for walkways, jogging paths and
similar uses may be required.
   D.   Storage And Display Areas:
      1.   Storage areas including, but not limited to, areas containing
vehicle storage, merchandise, or equipment, etc., shall be paved with hard
surface paving (unless otherwise approved by the community development
director) and screened with opaque fencing and landscaping. Each wall or fence
shall be at least six feet (6') in and no more than eight feet (8') in vertical
height.
      2.   No outside displays (either permanent or temporary) shall be
permitted upon any landscaped area.
   E.   Screening:
      1.   Trash Enclosures:
         a.   Solid enclosures equal in vertical height to the trash dumpster
to be screened shall be provided for all garbage and/or recycling containers
(dumpsters), and design of said enclosure shall be consistent with the
architectural design of the main structures.
         b.   Enclosure gates shall be opaque, constructed of solid materials
designed for durability, and closed when not in use.
         c.   No dumpster shall be permitted in the front yard of a building
nor shall it block required driveways, traffic and parking aisles, parking
spaces, or sidewalks.
         d.   Public rights of way shall not be used directly for refuse
collection.
         e.   Commercial garbage and rubbish collection shall only occur
between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
      2.   Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment and vents (including swamp
coolers) shall be screened so as to minimize visual impacts. This may be
accomplished using one or more of the following alternatives:
            (1)   A separate continuous screening system,
            (2)   Groupings of pieces of mechanical equipment with an
architecturally designed screening system that blends with the architectural
design and materials of the proposed building, or
            (3)   Extension of the building's parapet walls to screen the
equipment from public view.
         b.   All noise emitting equipment shall be placed so as to minimize
noise impact on nearby properties.
         c.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment (including its height above
the roof) and the proposed screening system shall be shown to scale on the
building's structural plans and approved by the community development director
prior to issuance of a building permit.
         d.   All ground mounted mechanical equipment such as heating and air
conditioning units shall be completely screened from surrounding properties by
a masonry wall or shall be enclosed within a building.
      3.   Utility Lines: All new utility lines such as electric, telephone,
CATV, or other similar lines serving individual sites shall be placed
underground. Utility lines necessary within the property shall be placed
underground. All utility lines shall be placed underground in new construction
projects that require building permits and site redesign. All junction and
access boxes shall be located to the side or the rear of the building unless
public safety concerns dictate otherwise. All utility pads shall be shown on
the project plan. Any utility connections, meter boxes, etc., shall be
integrated with the architectural elements of the project plan.
      4.   Loading Areas: Loading areas and docks shall be screened by
landscaping and/or visual barrier from abutting properties and public rights of
way.
   F.   Lighting: It is the intent of this subsection to encourage lighting
practices and systems that minimize light pollution, glare and light trespass,
conserve energy and resources, and maintain nighttime safety and utility while
ensuring the enjoyment of a starry night for all members of the community. The
standards in this subsection require the proposed lighting systems to be of the
absolute minimum needed for safety and utility of the site, per Illumination
Engineering Society standards of North America.
In addition to the general provisions of this subsection, all site lighting
shall be shielded and/or directed in such a manner that it illuminates only the
user's premises and does not spill over into neighboring residential areas so
as to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of residential or public
properties. Foot-candles at the property line shall not exceed 0.1. Foot-
candles shall not exceed 0.01 at ten feet (10') from the commercial property
line as measured on the residential side. Except as provided herein, or unless
otherwise explicitly approved by the planning commission, the light source
shall be a full cutoff fixture, completely concealed within an opaque housing.
All exterior lighting fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any
portion of a site shall meet the following requirements:
TABLE 13.55.081
 
Standard                                           NC
Maximum lumens per fixture                         12,500
Maximum fixture height                             15 feet
Maximum fixture height within required buffer area 12 feet
 
      1.   Fixtures: All fixtures (luminaries) of one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) or more lumens shall be full cutoff as installed. For luminaries less
than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) the bulb must be frosted glass or
installed behind a translucent cover, which must be aimed no higher than forty
five degrees (45°) below horizontal. No fixture shall exceed the lumens per
fixture as allowed by
table 13.55.081 of this section. The hood or shield must mask the direct
horizontal surface of the light source. Fixtures used under gasoline canopies
and other structural canopies shall be flat lens, recessed lens, or drop lens
with glare shields. Use of drop lens without glare shields is prohibited. All
fixtures must comply with current IECC standards.
      2.   Mounting Of Fixtures: Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner
that the cone of light does not cross any property line of the site. Poles
shall be black, dark gray, dark brown, dark green, or earth tone. The height of
the light shall not exceed the maximum height as required by
table 13.55.081 of this section. For purposes of these regulations, the
mounting height of a lighting fixture shall be defined as the vertical distance
from the grade elevation of the surface being illuminated to the bottom of the
lighting fixture (i.e., luminaire).
      3.   Site Illumination Plan: Project plan submittals shall be prepared by
a certified lighting professional and include a site illumination plan with
values indicated on a ten foot by ten foot (10' x 10') grid measured on the
ground surface which includes:
         a.   All proposed exterior lighting in relation to existing and
proposed buildings, trees, landscaping, parking areas;
         b.   Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures including
fixture design, type of lamp, wattage, designation as "full cutoff" fixtures,
lumens or light contour study and other descriptive information on the
fixtures; and
         c.   Proposed mounting height and placement of all exterior lighting
fixtures.
      4.   Lighting Installations: Lighting installations shall include timers,
dimmers and/or sensors to reduce overall energy consumption and eliminate
unneeded lighting.
      5.   Temporary Seasonal Lighting: Seasonal lighting shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section, provided that such seasonal lighting does not
create dangerous glare on abutting rights of way or properties.
      6.   Architectural Feature Lighting: Architectural feature lighting
including wall washers spotlights are permitted. All building entrances should
be well lit to provide inviting access and safety. Building mounted lights and
display window lights should contribute to lighting of walkways in pedestrian
areas and shall be "cutoff" type.
      7.   Nonconforming Fixtures: Except where otherwise noted, all outdoor
lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operative before the
effective date of this title are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection. Whenever a nonconforming fixture is replaced, upgraded or moved,
the replacement fixture shall meet the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
   G.   Landscaping: All uses in the NC zone shall comply with the provisions
governing landscaping and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
   H.   Perimeter Wall:
      1.   The project area shall have a decorative tinted concrete or masonry
wall along all rear and side yards not fronting on a public street, but which
abut a residential zone or a residential use.
      2.   This requirement may be waived by the planning commission upon a
determination that the wall is not necessary to buffer the abutting use. Such
walls shall not be located in the required setback from a public street.
      3.   All perimeter walls shall be a minimum of six feet (6') high unless
the planning commission requires a higher wall as part of the site plan
approval.
   I.   Public Improvements:
      1.   The developer of the project shall be responsible for the dedication
and improvement of all off site public improvements that do not presently exist
according to the width of the ultimate right of way, as called out in the
roadway classification map of the Holladay City general plan, on or along the
property being developed. If a property has multiple street frontages,
improvements are required along all streets. Such improvements shall include,
but are not limited to: curb, gutter, sidewalk, streetlights, drive approaches,
waterways, road base, asphalt, striping, streetscape, storm drainage, fire
hydrants, laterals, piping of irrigation ditches and flood control systems,
fencing of canals, extension of water lines, appurtenances and sewer lines,
removal of utility lines out of the right of way (with the exception of
traditionally buried lines such as sewer, water, and natural gas transmission
lines), etc.
      2.   All required improvements shall be designed and installed by the
developer according to the Holladay City standard specifications for public
works construction and approved by the city engineer and city public works
director.
   J.   General Maintenance: Property (including all buildings, landscaping,
fences, walls, drives, parking lot surfacing and striping, signs, or other
structures) shall be maintained in good repair and in accordance with the
approved site plan for the project. Rights of way and pavements shall be kept
true to line and grade and in good repair. Drainage ditches shall be kept clean
and free of any obstructions.
   K.   Hazardous Activities: No land or building devoted to uses authorized by
this chapter shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create noxious or
objectionable fire, explosive or other hazards; noise or vibration, smoke,
dust, or other form of air pollution, heat, cold, dampness, glare, electrical
or other disturbance, liquid or solid refuse or waste, or other substance,
condition or element in such a manner or in such an amount as to adversely
affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises.
   L.   Signs: All signs in the NC zone shall comply with the regulations in
section
13.82.200, "Holladay Village Sign Regulations", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.55.080: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes design guidelines intended to improve
the quality and compatibility of developments throughout the NC zone.
Guidelines that employ the word "should" are intended to be optional but
encouraged as stated. Guidelines using the word "shall" are mandatory.
   B.   Building Mass: To avoid any large, continuous building mass of uniform
height, no portion of any building shall continue for more than fifty feet
(50') horizontally along any street frontage without a vertical break in the
roofline. The required break in the building height shall continue for a
minimum of thirty feet (30') along the horizontal plane before continuation of
the original height.
      1.   Break In Roofline: A break in the roofline is defined as:
         a.   A ten foot (10') minimum step back of the vertical plane of the
building on one or more stories, or all stories; or
         b.   A reduction in the number of stories of the remainder of the
building.
      2.   Structural Articulation: The vertical planes of a building shall be
varied so that no continuous elevation is longer than fifty feet (50')
horizontally without a structural articulation which may include facade
modulation, structural expressions, varied setbacks or heights, textural
modulations and/or projections such as balconies, cornices, covered entrances,
arcades or colonnades or other architectural element dividing the facade
visually to provide relief to perceived building mass from the street
elevation.
   C.   Facade Embellishment: Any building wall visible from a public right of
way or from a public parking structure shall incorporate architectural design
embellishments which are compatible with other publicly visible parts of the
building. In addition, a contiguous building wall (longer than 50 feet) shall
have a building element, dividing the facade visually which may include
windows, a recessed entrance or other appropriate variations. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
   D.   Reinforcement Of Design: Building design should reinforce the
building's location abutting the street edge. Buildings are encouraged to be
sited at or near the property line and larger setbacks are discouraged unless
they contribute to the pedestrian activity along the street. Buildings on
corner lots should be oriented to the corner. Corner entries and/or
architectural treatment should be used to emphasize the corner. At least one
active entrance shall face the public right of way. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   E.   Window And Door Designs: Windows and doors shall be used to define the
character of buildings by giving scale to the building and providing visual
interest to the composition of individual facades. Distinct window and door
designs should be used to help define building styles. Articulated, transparent
facades should be created along pedestrian rights of way, including display
windows as a link between pedestrians and activities in the building.
Windows on the second or third level should be vertically proportioned and the
design of surrounding window casing, the depth and profile of window sash
element, and the material of which they are constructed should be distinctly
associated with the specific building style.
   F.   Awnings And Canopies: Awnings and canopies should contribute to the
architectural theme and shall be integrated within the building design. Awnings
should be constructed of traditional materials and located over windows and
doors. Ornamental or architectural features, such as canopies, awnings,
balconies, cornices, etc., may be allowed to protrude into the right of way by
permission of the planning commission and the city manager subject to a license
agreement.
      1.   On multi-storefront buildings, separate awnings should be located
within each storefront opening so that the building frame and details are
revealed.
      2.   Retractable and fixed awnings are allowed no less than eight feet
(8') above the sidewalk.
      3.   Under awning lights that are designed to specifically illuminate the
sidewalk and storefront are permitted.
      4.   Backlit awnings are prohibited.
   G.   Building Materials: Building exteriors shall be constructed from high
quality and durable materials. It is important that the materials and colors
will weather well and need minimal maintenance.
      1.   Acceptable exterior finish materials include the following:
         a.   Painted, stained or weathered wood siding such as, 4-S shingles,
board and batten and clapboard;
         b.   Artificial wood siding such as painted cementious fiberboard;
         c.   Brick or natural stone;
         d.   EIFS (synthetic stucco) (not more than 50 percent of all exterior
finished surfaces);
         e.   Stucco;
         f.   Synthetic stone; and
         g.   Architectural finish or decorative faced concrete masonry units
(CMUs).
      2.   Materials not listed above shall be prohibited unless determined to
be part of a strong architectural design theme.
      3.   No portion of a building constructed of standard CMUs shall be
visible from an existing public right of way. Exposed concrete walls should be
architecturally treated. The enhancement must include joint treatments,
textured concrete such as exposed aggregate, sandblasted and/or colored
concrete, or other decorative finishes.
   H.   Roofs: The character of a roof is a major feature for a structure. The
roof pitch, its materials, size and orientation are all distinct features that
should contribute to the character of the building. Shadows created by
traditional overhangs should contribute to the perception of a building's
scale. Roof designs should relate to the building facade articulations.
      1.   A variety of roof types and configurations should be used to add
interest and reduce perceived building bulk.
      2.   Use of sidewalk porticoes and roof overhangs is encouraged.
      3.   Roof materials should be in keeping with the character of the
architectural style of the building. Recommended roof materials include slate
shingles, asphalt and fiberglass shingles, metal standing seam or tiles.
      4.   Crickets or other snow guard devices should be placed in such a way
that does not alter the form of the roof as seen from the street. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.56
C-1 COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
13.56.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.56.020: Site Plan Review And Approval
13.56.030: Primary Uses
13.56.040: Accessory Uses
13.56.050: Businesses And Retail Shops; Conditions
13.56.060: Lot Area
13.56.070: Lot Width
13.56.080: Front Yard
13.56.090: Side Yard
13.56.100: Rear Yard
13.56.110: Building Height
13.56.120: Coverage Restrictions
13.56.130: Hours Of Operation
13.56.140: Landscaping
13.56.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the C-1 Zone is to provide areas in the City for neighborhood
commercial development. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.020: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
All site plans for development or redevelopment in a C-1 Zone shall be reviewed
and approved in three (3) steps as required by
chapter 13.08 of this title. (Ord. 2017-20, 8-3-2017)
13.56.030: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses Allowed: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the
C-1 Zone shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the C-1 Zone are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.56.050: BUSINESSES AND RETAIL SHOPS; CONDITIONS:
The stores, shops or businesses designated above in this chapter shall be
retail establishments only, and shall be permitted only under the following
conditions:
   A.   Enclosed Building Required: Such business shall be conducted wholly
within an enclosed building, except for the parking and servicing of
automobiles, and service to people in automobiles;
   B.   Retail Sales; Entertainment Prohibited: All products, whether primary
or incidental, shall be sold at retail on the premises; no entertainment,
except music, shall be permitted in cafes, confectioneries or refreshment
stands;
   C.   Uses Free From Objections: All uses shall be free from objection
because of odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other causes. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.56.060: LOT AREA:
In C-1 zones, the minimum lot area for any building or structure shall not be
less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.070: LOT WIDTH:
In C-1 zones, the minimum width of a lot for any building or structure shall be
sixty five feet (65') at a distance twenty feet (20') back from the front lot
line. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.080: FRONT YARD:
In C-1 zones, the minimum depth of the front yard for all buildings,
structures, walls or fences more than two feet (2') in height shall be twenty
feet (20'). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.090: SIDE YARD:
None; except that wherever a building in the C-1 zone is located upon a lot
abutting a residential zone boundary, there shall be provided a side yard of
not less than ten feet (10') on the side of the building abutting the zone
boundary line, and on corner lots the side yard which faces on a street shall
be not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.56.100: REAR YARD:
None; except that wherever a building in the C-1 zone is located upon a lot
abutting a residential zone boundary, there shall be provided a rear yard of
not less than ten feet (10') on the side of the building abutting the zone
boundary line. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.56.110: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure in the C-1 zone shall contain more than two (2)
stories, or exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
In the C-1 zone, firewalls, skylights, clock or bell towers, steeples,
flagpoles, chimneys, and wireless telecommunication masts may be erected above
the height limit prescribed in this title. However, no space above the height
limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.120: COVERAGE RESTRICTIONS:
In the C-1 zone, no building or structure or group of buildings, with their
accessory buildings, shall cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of
the lot. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.130: HOURS OF OPERATION:
In the C-1 zone, hours of operation shall be between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.56.140: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the C-1 zone shall comply with the provisions governing landscaping
and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.62
C-2 COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
13.62.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.62.020: Site Plan Review And Approval
13.62.030: Primary Uses
13.62.040: Accessory Uses
13.62.050: Businesses And Uses; Conditions
13.62.060: Lot Area
13.62.070: Lot Width
13.62.080: Front Yard
13.62.090: Side Yard
13.62.100: Rear Yard
13.62.110: Building Height
13.62.120: Coverage Restrictions
13.62.130: Landscaping
13.62.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of the C-2 Zone is to provide areas in the City for community
commercial development. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.020: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
All site plans for development or redevelopment in a C-2 Zone shall be reviewed
and approved in three (3) steps as required by
chapter 13.08 of this title. (Ord. 2017-20, 8-3-2017)
13.62.030: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Primary Uses Allowed: The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the
C-2 Zone shall be as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. Any primary land
use not shown as a permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be prohibited.
   B.   Combined Uses: Any combination of uses may be established within the
same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of the proposed uses is a
conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the C-2 Zone are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.62.050: BUSINESSES AND USES; CONDITIONS:
The uses specified above in this chapter for the C-2 Zone shall be permitted
only under the following conditions:
   A.   Enclosed Building: All manufacturing shall be done wholly within a
completely enclosed building, and shall be incidental to and operated in
connection with a use permitted in this chapter.
   B.   Free From Objections: All uses shall be free from objections because of
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other causes. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.060: LOT AREA:
In the C-2 Zone:
   A.   Multiple and/or dwelling group: The minimum lot area shall be not less
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet for the first separate dwelling
structure, with ten thousand (10,000) square feet for each additional separate
dwelling structure, and two thousand (2,000) square feet additional for each
additional dwelling unit in excess of one dwelling unit in each separate
dwelling structure.
   B.   Other buildings and structures: The minimum lot area shall not be less
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.070: LOT WIDTH:
In the C-2 zone:
   A.   Multiple and/or group dwellings: The minimum width of any lot shall be
sixty five feet (65') at a distance twenty five feet (25') back from the front
lot line.
   B.   Other buildings and structures: The minimum width of a lot for any
building or structure shall be sixty five feet (65') at a distance twenty five
feet (25') back from the front lot line. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.080: FRONT YARD:
In C-2 zones:
   A.   Multiple and/or dwelling group: The minimum depth of the front yard for
dwellings and for private garages which have a minimum side yard of fifteen
feet (15') shall be twenty five feet (25'). Other private garages and all
accessory buildings other than private garages shall be located in the rear
yard at least six feet (6') from the main building.
   B.   Other buildings, walls or fences: The minimum depth of the front yard
for buildings, walls or fences more than two feet (2') in height shall be
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.090: SIDE YARD:
In the C-2 zone:
   A.   Multiple and/or dwelling group: The minimum side yard for any dwelling
shall be fifteen feet (15'), and the total width of the two (2) required side
yards shall be not less than thirty feet (30'). The minimum side yard for a
private garage shall be fifteen feet (15'), except private garages and other
accessory buildings located at least six feet (6') in the rear of the main
building shall have a minimum side yard of not less than one foot (1');
provided, that no private garage or other accessory building shall be located
closer than ten feet (10') to a dwelling on an abutting lot. On corner lots,
the side yard which faces on a street for both dwellings and accessory
buildings shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
   B.   Other buildings and structures: None; except that wherever a building
is located upon a lot abutting a residential zone boundary, there shall be
provided a side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') on the side of the
building abutting the zone boundary line, and on corner lots the side yard
which faces on a street shall be not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2015-
02, 2-5-2015)
13.62.100: REAR YARD:
In the C-2 zone:
   A.   Multiple and/or dwelling group: The minimum depth of the rear yard for
any dwelling shall be thirty feet (30'), and for accessory buildings one foot
(1'); provided, that on corner lots which rear upon the side yard of another
lot, accessory buildings shall be located not closer than fifteen feet (15') to
such side yard.
   B.   Other buildings and structures: None; except that on corner lots which
rear upon the side yard of another lot in a residential zone, the minimum rear
yard shall be fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.110: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure in the C-2 zone shall contain more than three (3)
stories, or exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, and no dwelling structure
shall contain less than one story.
In the C-2 zone, firewalls, skylights, clock or bell towers, steeples,
flagpoles, chimneys, and wireless telecommunication masts may be erected above
the height limit prescribed in this title. However, no space above the height
limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.120: COVERAGE RESTRICTIONS:
In the C-2 zone, no building or group of buildings, with their accessory
buildings, shall cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.62.130: LANDSCAPING:
All uses in the C-2 zone shall comply with the provisions governing landscaping
and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.63
LIMITED USE ZONE
SECTION:
13.63.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.63.020: Permitted Uses
13.63.030: Conditional Uses
13.63.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The general purpose of the Limited Use Zone is to allow a certain use to be
permitted. This will allow expansion and redeveloping of the traditional use.
However, when the use is discontinued a different new use may not be compatible
with the general area and thus will not be permitted. In a traditional zoning
district (zone) there are usually a number of permitted or conditional uses
listed as acceptable. There are times when only one type of use is desirable.
It is the intent of the City to protect uses and assure that they are legal and
do not risk any label of being non-conforming. Thus, the Limited Use Zone will
accomplish that intent. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
13.63.020: PERMITTED USES:
!!! None. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
13.63.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
!!! Restaurants with and without an alcoholic beverage control license. Site
plan review is required as per sections
13.08.040 and
13.08.080 of this title. (Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018)
CHAPTER 13.65
REGIONAL/MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.65.010: Vision Statement
13.65.020: Purpose
13.65.030: Scope
13.65.040: Minimum Area Requirement
13.65.050: Development Ownership
13.65.060: Site Development Master Plan (SDMP)
13.65.070: Project Approval Procedures
13.65.080: Amendments To Site Development Master Plan
13.65.010: VISION STATEMENT:
The vision for the regional/mixed-use zoning district anticipates development
of a vibrant community within the greater community based on traditional
neighborhood development (TND) patterns. These traditional patterns include a
variety of housing types and workplaces, together with shopping, various
services, entertainment, and gathering spaces. By bringing many of the
activities of daily living into walking distance, designing walkable streets
and human scale buildings, lessening the effect of urban heat islands by
reducing asphalt surfaces and increasing landscaping, residents and visitors
alike will benefit. Lifestyle changes that include walkability, using public
transit and reducing the number and length of automobile trips, lessen traffic
congestion and its associated air pollution and support a sustainable
environment throughout the whole community. Regional commercial developments
are an important commercial asset of the city's tax base and of primary
importance for the economic health of the city. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.65.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to guide development within the zoning district,
while allowing flexibility, creative expression, minimize impact on surrounding
properties and assure quality control within the site. Development standards
for the R/M-U zoning district will allow for overall development that
encompasses a mix of uses including residential and nonresidential uses within
the same building, and inviting public and private spaces in a manner that
promotes walkability and human interaction. Guiding building location, massing,
architecture and mixture of uses is intended to produce a variety of spaces
within the site. Variety within the site will create a project that is safe,
comfortable, and interesting for pedestrians, will reduce vehicular/pedestrian
conflicts and will provide ample social and economic opportunities for those
persons and businesses that occupy the land and for those who will make the
development their destination. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.65.030: SCOPE:
All development within the R/M-U zoning district is subject to the provisions
and standards found herein. Additionally, other applicable regulation within
this title shall apply. A site development master plan (SDMP) specific to any
development and approved by the city council shall control the development of
all property within an R/M-U zoning district. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.65.040: MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENT:
Any R/M-U zoning district shall be a minimum of thirty (30) contiguous acres.
This requirement does not preclude separate ownership of buildings within the
zoning district. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.65.050: DEVELOPMENT OWNERSHIP:
The development shall be in single, partnership, or corporate ownership or
under options to purchase by an individual or corporate entity at the time of
application, or the application shall be filed jointly by all owners of the
property. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.65.060: SITE DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN (SDMP):
   A.   The SDMP will serve in the same way as the city's general plan does in
guiding future growth in the larger community; it is a comprehensive but
flexible guide for the overall development and design of the entire site. The
SDMP summarizes the maximum contemplated extent of development and gives a
realistic indication of its mass, scale, appearance, relationship to
surrounding uses as well as how it internally functions.
   B.   The SDMP shall include the following elements:
      1.   Land use regulating plan showing the proposed distribution and types
of all uses, projected densities, etc.
      2.   An overall conceptual phasing/subdivision plan.
      3.   Open space/gathering place plan including location, size, etc.
      4.   Building massing and heights including proposed floor area ratio.
      5.   Utility capacity and availability.
      6.   Traffic control and circulation plans and studies including
estimated traffic impacts during construction and demand at build out with
potential impacts and possible connections with mass transit, bike and
pedestrian trails facilities.
      7.   Overall parking plan.
      8.   Thoroughfare locations, types and direction of travel.
      9.   Street cross sections.
      10.   Typical examples of streetscape design including aesthetic
elements.
      11.   Overall conceptual site lighting plan.
      12.   Civil engineering conceptual plans including grading, storm
drainage and utilities.
      13.   Architectural elevations with examples of anticipated design
architectural style(s).
      14.   Examples of anticipated building materials.
      15.   Environmental and energy efficiency statement of intent.
      16.   A general signage plan for the exterior and interior of the site.
      17.   Estimated statistical information for the project.
      18.   Estimated raw square footage of building by residential or
nonresidential use, etc.
      19.   Geotechnical studies or data supporting proposed level of
development.
      20.   Other studies/information as deemed necessary by the city.
      21.   A site construction control and overall environmental quality
control hazard mitigation and monitoring plan. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.65.070: PROJECT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Site Development Master Plan: Prior to the issuance of any building
permit and/or construction of any new, permanent buildings within an R/M-
U zoning district, excluding any temporary structures associated with
construction activities, the city shall approve a site development master plan.
      1.   The applicant shall submit a proposed site development master plan
to the community development director for review and recommendation by the
technical review committee (TRC).
      2.   The TRC shall forward the application to the planning commission for
review and recommendation.
      3.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing prior to making
a recommendation to the city council.
      4.   Approval or disapproval of a site development master site plan
(SDMP) for an overall project within the R/M-U zoning district shall be
determined by the city council after receiving a recommendation from the
planning commission.
      5.   The city shall only approve an SDMP for those projects that comply
with the vision and purpose of this chapter, and other applicable sections of
this code.
   B.   Development Agreement: A development agreement between the developer
and the city of Holladay shall grant specific rights pursuant to an approved
site development master plan (SDMP) and shall include and specifically address
any additional development related considerations integral to the proposal not
already governed by applicable land use and planning regulations. The following
items shall specifically be addressed by the development agreement:
      1.   Duration of the development agreement.
      2.   The maximum height of buildings.
      3.   Land uses permitted, their minimum and maximum intensities and the
manner in which they are combined within the development site.
      4.   The density permitted within the development site, provided in
dwelling units per acre (DUA).
      5.   The intensity permitted within the development site, provided as a
floor area ratio (FAR).
      6.   Provision for reservation or dedication of land (for example,
dedication of ROW or park land) if any, by any and all parties to the
development agreement.
      7.   Provisions relating to cost allocation, funding for infrastructure,
capital improvement costs, impact fees and the like, to be provided by any and
all parties to the development agreement.
      8.   Other corollary agreements, covenants or declarations of
restrictions accepted, which may encumber or otherwise affect the development
site.
   C.   Phasing: The site development master plan is for all parcels within the
R/M-U zoning district. Construction of the project may be phased as reasonably
needed by the developer. Each phase shall be of such size, composition and
arrangement that its construction, marketing and operation is feasible as a
unit independent of any subsequent phases. The planning commission shall review
and approve individual phases and/or subdivision plats of the project for
compliance to the SDMP and development agreement. Submissions for individual
phases of the project shall follow the submissions procedure as outlined in
chapters 13.06 and 13.08 of this title, the SDMP and/or as specified in the
development agreement.
   D.   Administrative Approval: Upon approval by the planning commission of
each phase of the project, individual elements including site preparation,
infrastructure improvements and specific buildings or structure permits shall
be approved by the community development director. No such approval shall be
granted unless the application meets requirements of the approved SDMP, the
development agreement and any other pertinent code or regulation.
   E.   Property Rezoned: For any property rezoned R/M-U, a building permit
must be issued pursuant to an approved SDMP and/or development agreement within
twenty four (24) months of the adoption of the zoning district or said zoning
shall expire reverting to the previous zone designation. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.65.080: AMENDMENTS TO SITE DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN:
   A.   Material or substantive amendments to the overall SDMP shall require an
amendment to the SDMP.
   B.   Community development director has the responsibility to determine if a
modification is substantive. The following are substantive amendments:
      1.   A proposed modification exceeds maximum allowable height, density
and/or intensity.
      2.   Proposed modification in density (residential) or intensity (floor
area ratio) which varies by ten percent (10%) or more of that approved for a
given sector (restricted, limited or open).
      3.   The height of an exclusively residential building is proposed to be
increased by more than ten feet (10') or ten percent (10%), whichever is less.
      4.   The height of any other building is proposed to be increased by more
than fifteen feet (15') or fifteen percent (15%), whichever is greater.
      5.   The footprint of a building is proposed to be moved by more than
fifty feet (50') in any horizontal direction.
      6.   Any change in the designated land use (for example, from restricted
to open).
   C.   Upon determination that a proposal meets one or more of the criteria
above, the community development director shall forward the proposal to the
planning commission for review at a public hearing and recommendation.
   D.   The city council, after a public hearing, shall approve, approve with
amendments or deny the proposed modification to the SDMP. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
CHAPTER 13.66
HOLLADAY CROSSROADS ZONE
SECTION:
13.66.010: Vision Statement
13.66.020: Purpose
13.66.030: Scope
13.66.040: Primary Uses
13.66.050: Accessory Uses
13.66.060: Non-conforming Uses And/Or Site Situations/Conditions
13.66.070: Project Approval Procedures
13.66.080: Development Standards
13.66.090: Design Standards
13.66.010: VISION STATEMENT:
   A.   It is intended that the Holladay Crossroads (HCR) Zone be an
economically healthy, primary gateway, mixed-use district within the City. The
HCR Zone is currently the second most valuable economic center in the City and
sales revenues from businesses therein greatly contributes to the City’s
budget. Future development in this area must not only provide economic benefits
to the property and business owners but contribute to the City’s overall
desirability and quality of life. Arguably positioned along the City’s most
prominent gateway, the HCR redevelopment area must create a sense of “arrival”
to people entering Holladay.
   B.   The HCR Zone offers a valuable opportunity for mixed-use and/or
commercial development as reflected in the Holladay adopted Crossroads Small
Area Master Plan (SAMP). The SAMP recommends future development that would
result in a commercial district with a higher density residential component,
or, mixed-use. The capacity of the roadways in the area can support this type
of future development and traffic growth can be accommodated with the roadway
enhancements proposed in the SAMP. This Zone anticipates the blending of older
strip commercial development with new, compatible mixed-use development through
flexible yet consistent, building design. HCR sanctioned land uses will be
influenced by traffic volumes occurring in the area and design themes will be
overseen by the City’s Design Review Board (DRB). (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.020: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to identify and enhance the HCR Zone to
create a pattern for new development that is appropriately oriented and
situated toward public rights of way, provide an opportunity for increased
human interaction and protect and increase the economic vitality of the City.
It is not the intent of the HCR Zone to impair the rights of existing
businesses and property owners. Depending on individual circumstances, some
uses and structures existing at the time of adoption of this chapter within the
area devoted to HCR Zone may become non-conforming except as expressly stated
herein. The provisions of this chapter allow lawfully established buildings and
uses to continue in accordance with section 13.88 of this title.
   B.   It is intended that the HCR Zone becomes a place of diverse land uses
within an aesthetically attractive, easily accessible, and economically healthy
environment. A range and mix of commercial, service, and residential land use
are encouraged and desirable. High quality architecture and energy efficiency
for all new structures with attractive architectural and site features will
create dramatic, visual interest in the HCR Zone. This will encourage greater
bike and pedestrian access to the site and enhance the economic vitality of the
entire City. It is essential that new development is compatible with abutting
land uses and that potential impacts are minimized for abutting residential
property owners. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.030: SCOPE:
The provisions (including design review) of this title shall apply to any new
construction or remodeling for a residential, mixed-use or nonresidential use,
building, or structure located in the HCR Zone. For the purpose of this
section, “remodeling” means:
   A.   Any proposed action that will increase the footprint of the building;
   B.   Any exterior remodel which includes more than fifty percent (50%) of a
given facade. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.040: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Primary uses of property that are, and shall be,
allowed to be developed and/or operated within the HCR Zone shall be set forth
in section
13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Primary uses of property that may be allowed to be
developed and/or operated within the HCR Zone upon issuance by the City of a
Conditional Use Permit are identified in section
13.100 “Appendix A - Allowed Uses” of this title. As per section
13.88 of this title, any use legally existing as a conditional use in the HCR
Zone on the effective date of this chapter, is allowed to continue and is
subject to the requirements of the conditional use permit issued for such use.
Except as otherwise set forth in section
13.66.060 of this chapter, each conditional use shall conform to the
development standards and design guidelines of this chapter and other
applicable requirements of this title.
   C.   Mixed Or Combined Uses: (See subsection
13.71.020B of this chapter.) Any mixture or combination of allowed primary
property uses may be established within the same building or on the same lot or
parcel. If any such proposed uses require conditional use approval, that use
shall be reviewed by the planning commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Property uses that are not allowed (i.e., are
prohibited) within the HCR Zone are, and shall be, as listed in section
13.100 “Appendix A” of this title.
   E.   Operating Hours: Businesses within the Zone are allowed to operate
between 6:00 a.m. and midnight with the exception of the following uses: Gas
station/C-store, Drive-thru restaurant, Bed-N-Breakfast, 24-hour gym, and/or
uses subject to control or operating hours by outside governmental agency or
entity such as the State of Utah. Businesses that directly abut single family
detached residential property shall close between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.050: ACCESSORY USES:
Allowable Accessory Uses: Accessory uses of property that are, and shall be,
allowed to be developed and/or operated within the HCR Zone shall be as set
forth in section
13.100 “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title. Furthermore:
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the Zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building, or structure shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the HCR Zone are set forth in
chapter
13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.060: NON-CONFORMING USES AND/OR SITE SITUATIONS/CONDITIONS:
Notwithstanding any contrary provision set forth in chapter 13.88 of this
title, any permitted or conditionally approved use of property or operation
thereon within the HCR Zone that does not conform to the development standards
and design guidelines set forth in this chapter may be continued; provided,
however, that any expansion of such use and/or operation which will not
increase the floor area of, or the amount of setback encroachment by, a
structure wherein the use is housed. Any change in use that requires a change
of occupancy type under the City’s adopted building or safety code(s) shall be
subject to the development standards and design guidelines set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.070: PROJECT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
All project/site plans for new development, construction and/or remodeling of
existing structures within the HCR Zone shall be [first] approved by the
Planning Commission as per section
13.08.080. Prior to application being made to the Planning Commission, a
project shall first receive a recommendation from the DRB where at all
available. Furthermore:
   A.   Approval of any applicable land use application, as provided for in
this chapter, within the Zone, may only be given by the Planning Commission.
   B.   Any appeals from decisions of the Planning Commission shall be made to
the City Council in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
13.66.080: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following minimum development standards shall apply in the HCR Zone:
   A.   Lot, Yard and Other Bulk Regulation/Development Standards: Except as
otherwise required by a provision of this section or section
13.71.090 of this chapter, the development standards shown on the following
chart (
13.66.1) of this section shall apply in the HCR Zone.
CHART 13.66.1
Development Standard Requirement(s)
Development Standard                                                                Requirement(s)
Front Setback (build-to line) -- For property fronting on a public right-of-way.    Minimum allowed setback/separation from a ROW line 15'; Maximum allowed setback/
                                                                                    separation from a ROW line 25' feet.
                                                                                    Ornamental architectural features including, but not limited to: arcades, canopies,
                                                                                    awnings, light fixtures, balconies, cornices, etc., sitting areas, and subsurface
Right-of-Way Encroachments Exception:                                               intrusions (e.g., footings and foundations) may be allowed by the City to encroach into
                                                                                    the public right-of-way, provided they do not interfere with the normal use of the right-
                                                                                    of-way. [Note: This exception requires review and approval of the Planning Commission and
                                                                                    may be subject to a license agreement approved by the City Council/Manager.]
Side/Rear Setbacks                                                                  Not required (0'); Exception: Buildings in the HCR Zone that directly abut residentially
                                                                                    zoned property(ies) shall be no closer than 30 feet from the residential property line.
Setback from Canals/ Laterals                                                       Minimum allowed shall be 30 feet from the top of bank or the westernmost established
                                                                                    canal structure/wall, whichever distance is greater.
                                                                                    No minimum or maximum percent (%) requirements -- Subject to buffering requirements in
Impervious Surface Coverage                                                         section
                                                                                    13.77  or as determined necessary by the Planning Commission.
Building Width                                                                      No minimum or maximum measurement is required
                                                                                    6 North of 6200 South, maximum height shall be limited to 58 feet. South of 6200 South,
Building Height: (For buildings proposed beyond:                                    maximum height shall be limited to 45 feet. [Note: Maximum height1, includes screened
   • 200 feet from residential property lines along the eastern zone boundary  mechanical equipment but excludes: 1) chimneys of 6 feet or less in height; 2)
(including canal)                                                                   architecturally compatible elevator shafts 6 feet in height or 14 feet or less for an
   • 150 feet from abutting residential property lines having access from 6060 elevator only in the case where the elevator provides access to roof-top amenities
South                                                                               (maximum 2,500 lb elevator capacity rating; 3) gables 4 feet or less in height; 4)
                                                                                    elevator shafts shall be located away from edge of roof line so as to not be readily seen
                                                                                    from street level.
Building Height.1 (For buildings proposed within 200 feet and 150 as described      Maximum shall be 32 feet -- subject also to graduated height limitation from property
above of an abutting residentially zoned property)                                  lines (see Figure 13.66.3)
Ground Floor Height:                                                                Commercial/retail: Minimum shall be 13' (floor to ceiling free and clear).
                                                                                    Ground level building(s) floor space within 60 feet from a collector or arterial right-
                                                                                    of-way (i.e., street) line (as depicted by Figure 13.66.2) shall be limited to occupancy
Land Use Limitation: Floor Space Abutting Collector or Arterial Rights-of-Way       by businesses identified by Appendix A of this title as “Primary”, and, either “Retail”,
                                                                                    or, “Professional”, or, “Personal Service(s)”, or, “Entertainment” type uses. Exception:
                                                                                    Small lobby entrances directly accessing upper story uses may be permitted by the City.
 
Notes:
1. To reasonably accommodate for grade and slope changes and as measured from
the top back of curb of the nearest street, maximum building height for multi-
story buildings may be averaged using 10 equal measurements over the length of
the roofline facing the street but at no point may exceed 4 feet above maximum.
FIGURE 13.66.1    HCR Ground Floor Use Map 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5117.png]
(Map note: the dashed line is the HCR Zone boundary at date of adoption)
FIGURE 13.66.2    GRADUATED HEIGHT ENVELOPE ILLUSTRATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5115.png]
   B.   Parking Requirements: Parking requirements for the HCR Zone shall be
the same as for the City’s Holladay Village (HV) Zone save that any “extra
parking” provided for a use shall not exceed in quantity 125% of the minimum
number of spaces required for the HV Zone- including allowances for shared
parking analysis and parking partnerships.
   C.   Parking Lot Planter Island Standards: All new or refurbished parking
lots or portions thereof, shall comply with standards listed in Section
13.77.060.
   D.   General Property Landscaping (Non-Parking Lot): Landscaping shall
comply with HCR standards listed in Section
13.77.
   E.   Outside Display: Unless expressly allowed in a pre-existing conditional
use permit, all goods, including food, beverage, and vending machines, shall be
within a completely enclosed structure. New construction of enclosures for the
storage of goods should have windows and/or other fenestration which should be
greater than sixty percent (60%) of the total wall area. This section does not
preclude temporary sales in conjunction with a special event license, sidewalk
sale, or seasonal plant sale.
      1.   Areas designated as required vehicular parking may not be used as
outdoor display areas.
      2.   If merchandise is displayed on any sidewalk, a minimum of seventy-
two inches (72") of the sidewalk shall remain open and unobstructed to
facilitate safe pedestrian circulation.
      3.   Plans for new developments shall clearly designate any areas for
outdoor display of merchandise. Outdoor display of merchandise shall only occur
in areas designated for such display on the approved plan.
   F.   signs: The sign regulations for the C-2 zone shall apply to properties
within the HCR Zone with the exception that “crown” signs may be used for
buildings, either single or multi-tenant, that are three or more stories in
height.
   G.   Outdoor Uses: The following outdoor uses are encouraged and may be
approved by the Community& Economic Development Director by special permit as
either an ongoing or one-time, periodic event:
      1.   Outdoor dining. Outdoor dining is subject to the following criteria:
         a.   The proposed seating area is located on private property or
public property (with City permission) and does not diminish parking or
landscaping.
         b.   The proposed seating area does not impede pedestrian circulation.
         c.   The proposed seating area does not impede emergency access or
circulation.
         d.   No music or noise in excess of that allowed by applicable noise
ordinance.
      2.   Outdoor events and music excluding government sponsored events.
         a.   Outdoor events and music require a business license and the
applicant shall submit a site plan and written description of the event,
addressing the following:
            (1)   Compliance with applicable noise ordinances.
            (2)   Impacts on adjacent residential uses.
            (3)   Proposed plans for music, lighting, structures, electrical
signs, etc.
            (4)   Parking demands and impacts on neighboring properties.
            (5)   Duration and hours of operation.
            (6)   Impacts on emergency access and circulation.
         b.   The applicant shall submit the required application, pay all
applicable fees, and provide all required material and plans.
   H.   Access, Service and Delivery:
      1.   All access to commercial businesses and facilities shall be located
within areas zoned for commercial use.
      2.   Service yards, loading docks, truck parking areas, and other similar
areas shall be screened from view by a combination of walls, fences, and dense
planting. Screening shall block the view of such areas from public areas of the
site, adjacent properties, and public rights of way.
      3.   Drive-through windows with corresponding driveways, curb cuts, etc.,
are allowed, subject to City site plan review and compliance with section
13.80.140 of this title.
   I.   Lighting:
      1.   Should be dark-sky friendly and not directed toward adjacent
residential neighborhoods.
      2.   Pedestrian oriented light fixtures should be incorporated into the
site design to illuminate patios, walkways, corners and to give visual variety
from one building to the next and should blend with the architectural style.
      3.    All lighting shall be low voltage, soft LED only yielding low to
medium kelvins.
      4.    All building entrances should be appropriately lit to provide
inviting access and safety.
      5.    Parking area light fixtures should be limited in height and
designed to confine emitted light to the parking area.
      6.   Light fixtures (including pole mounted and building wall packs)
shall be down directed, boxed/shielded using photo cell operation.
      7.   Neon lighting may be used as an accent lighting element, provided
that the tubes are concealed and are an integral part of the building design.
Neon tubes used to outline the building are prohibited.
   J.   Utility Lines: All new utility lines (e.g., electric, telephone, CATV,
or similar) emplaced in the HCR Zone shall be placed underground. All junction
and access boxes shall be located to the side or the rear of the building
unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise. All utility pads shall be
shown on the project plan. Any utility connections, meter boxes, etc., shall be
integrated with the architectural elements of the project plan.
   K.   Buffer Fencing: In conjunction with any new construction on a property
within the HCR Zone, a six-foot (6') high screening wall or fence shall be
constructed along any property line which is the boundary between the HCR zoned
property being developed and an abutting residentially zoned property not in
the HCR Zone. Such fence or wall shall be of masonry or concrete construction
and include design and other decorative elements consistent with the design of
the new building, unless the Planning Commission makes a specific finding that
masonry is not consistent with design of the new Zone. This requirement may be
waived, decreased, increased, or modified by the Planning Commission if it can
be demonstrated that existing walls or fences provide the desired buffering and
aesthetic effect or can be altered to do so, and such waiver may include fence
heights. The Planning Commission in its discretion, may require additional
height in accordance with the standards of this ordinance, upon the request of
a directly abutting property owner. (Additional fence standards associated with
individual project or property development in the HCR Zone are listed in
section
13.66.090(F)).
   L.   Façade: A primary or accessory structure shall not have a single,
unbroken façade longer than fifty feet (50') in span.
   M.   Trash: No trash receptacle or storage area shall be located closer than
fifty feet (50') from a residential property line unless otherwise allowed by
the Planning Commission. in no case shall a trash receptacle/dumpster be less
than 50 ft from a residential dwelling.
   N.   Outdoor Dining: Any outdoor dining space shall be designed, constructed
and landscaped in a manner which visually obscures the dining area from any
adjacent residential property and protects the same from noise and light
emanating from the dining space.
   O.   Nuisances and Hazards: Operations shall not be conducted which emit
offensive or objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust or gases, air
pollution, water pollution, or generates heavy truck traffic. Precautions shall
be taken in all operations against radiation, radioactivity, fire and explosion
hazards, and other activities that negatively impact the safe and enjoyable use
of property in the vicinity. Trash pickup for commercial uses is, and shall be,
prohibited prior to 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021; amd. Ord. 2021-27, 10-
14-2021)
13.66.090: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes certain specific design review
standards intended to improve the quality and compatibility of development in
the HCR Zone. Design standards that employ the word “should” are intended to be
applied as stated. However, an alternative measure may be considered if it
meets or exceeds the intent of the guideline. Standards using the words “shall”
are mandatory. Standards using the words “encouraged” or “discouraged” are
desirable but not mandatory.
   B.   Site Accessibility: All new development shall include:
      1.   Sidewalks, alleys, plazas, landscaping and appropriately scaled
buildings that encourage and complement pedestrian activities.
      2.   Commercial buildings shall include clearly defined primary entrances
and large windows that display goods and services to create visual unity both
on the street and internally.
      3.   Sidewalk Clearance: At least seventy-two (72") of the sidewalk width
should be preserved for pedestrian movement in front of every building fronting
on a public right of way.
      4.   Pedestrian ADA Access: All plazas, arcades, and open-air seating
shall provide handicapped access.
      5.   Bicycle Parking: New development shall provide bicycle racks in
designated areas on-site as determined reasonable by the City. The racks shall
be permanently secured to a non-permeable surface, placed within thirty feet
(30') of the main entrance of the building(s) which they serve, shall provide
at least four feet (4') of clear space around their perimeter, and otherwise,
and, shall not obstruct pedestrian movement(s)”.
   C.   Parking Area Design (non-landscaping): Parking shall complement the
pedestrian activities and visual character of the Zone. Negative impacts of
parking lots and structures should be mitigated through sensitive design,
location and configuration. The following should be integrated into the design
on any new parking lot or structure:
      1.   Parking lots shall not be located on a corner facing an
intersection.
      2.   The number of parking lot entrances, driveways and curb cuts shall
be allowed in accordance with provisions in Title 14 of the Holladay City Code.
The City desires that the number of parking lot entrances, driveways and curb
cuts be minimized, where able in favor of combined driveways and coordinated
parking areas among property owners and reserves the right to require, where
reasonable, minimization during site plan review and approval by Technical
Review Committee (TRC) recommendation and Planning Commission approval. Cross
access between properties via service drive connectivity shall be required as
recommended by Staff or the TRC and required by the Commission.
      3.   Individual parking entrances and curb cuts on Van Winkle, Highland
Drive and 6200 South shall be consolidated to complement a coordinated parking
strategy and promote walkability and to comply with the vision of the Holladay
Crossroads Small Area Master Plan. New curb cuts are discouraged.
      4.   ADA compliant walk ways shall be constructed within a parking lot to
connect the sidewalk and building entrances.
      5.   Parking structures visible from the public rights-of-way shall be:
1) architecturally compatible in design and integrated with main buildings
which they serve; and, 2) The perimeter of each floor of a parking structure
facing a public street shall be screened to shield automobiles and any
mechanical appurtenances from public view; and 3) An architectural treatment,
landscaping, and/or space for pedestrian oriented businesses along the street
side edges of the parking structure should be provided.
   D.   Streetscape: The streetscape shall include public amenities such as
plazas, fountains, kiosks, public art, landscaping, signage, and other street
fixtures such as streetlights, decorative barriers/fencing, pedestrian benches
and trash receptacles.
   E.   Building Design: All new buildings in the HCR Zone shall feature
building facades that are made of high-quality finishes and materials.
Buildings facing public streets, especially on the ground floor level shall not
“turn their back” to the street, but instead provide ample window openings,
entrances, and design features to create interest and calm traffic.
      1.   Compatibility of New Buildings: All new buildings should be designed
with a unique character compatible with the objectives of the Holladay
Crossroads Zone and SAMP.
      2.   Building Mass: To avoid any large, continuous building mass of
uniform height, no portion of any multi-story building shall continue for more
than one hundred feet (100') horizontally along any street frontage without a
vertical break in the roofline. The required break in the building height shall
continue for a minimum of thirty feet (30') along the horizontal plane.
         a.   Break in Roofline: A “break in the roofline” is defined as per
13.66.3:
            (1)   A ten foot (10') minimum step-back of the vertical plane of
the building on the third story, second and third stories, or all stories; or
            (2)   A reduction in stories of the entire building.
Figure 13.66.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5113.png]
          b.    Structur al Articula tion: The vertical planes of a building
shall be varied so that no continuo us elevation is longer than seventy five
feet (75') horizontally without a structural articulation (which may include
facade modulation, structural expressions, varied setbacks or heights, textural
modulations and/or projections such as balconies, cornices, covered entrances,
arcades or colonnades or other architectural element dividing the facade
visually to provide relief to perceived building mass from the street
elevation) as per 13.66.4.
Figure 13.66.4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5111.png]
      3.    Streetscape Perspective: All building fronts shall provide features
that are designed to be consistent with pedestrian activity and that provide a
variety of architectural interest and detail that can be viewed from both
vehicular and pedestrian perspective as per 13.66.5
Figure 13.66.5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5109.png]
      4.   Facade Embellishment: All building elevations readily visible from
public view shall provide consistency in architectural design elements/
embellishments. In addition, a contiguous building wall (longer than 50 feet)
shall have a building element to visually divide the facade (which may include
windows, a recessed entrance or other appropriate variations) as per 13.66.6
Figure 13.66.6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5107.png]
      5.    Shading for Pedestrians: At least twenty percent (20%) of walls
facing sidewalks or other pedestrian accessible space shall be architecturally
treated with a shade/weather protecting element such as an awning, arcade,
trellis, or other overhanging architectural feature(s) consistent with the
overall building(s) architecture.
      6.   Primary Entrances: Primary entrances to commercial buildings shall
be recessed, providing a shaded area that helps to define doorways and provide
shelter for pedestrians. Repetition of recessed entries shall also be used to
provide a rhythm of shadows along the street to help establish a sense of
scale. Entrance doors shall be topped with transom windows to extend the
vertical emphasis of these openings.
      7.   Maintaining an Expression Line: Upper stories of buildings shall
maintain an expression line along the facade such as a setback, change of
material, or a projection to reduce perceived building mass.
      8.   Consistency of Architectural Style: All buildings shall have an
articulated base course and cornice ornamented with details consistent with the
chosen architectural style. The middle section of the building shall be divided
either horizontally or vertically in a manner consistent with the selected
style. Buildings may have upper story features which improve the relationship
between the upper story and the street. Such features include, but are not
limited to, balconies, roof decks, bay windows, or upper story commercial
activities.
      9.   Mixing of Styles: A compatible mix of architectural styles for the
Holladay Crossroads Zone is acceptable provided that some basic design features
which complement each other are present throughout the site.
         a.   In order to encourage design consistency, all major new
construction shall include at least three (3) of the following elements on the
street facing facades:
            (1)   Window and door treatment which embellishes the façade.
            (2)   Decorative light fixtures.
            (3)   Unique facade treatment, such as decorative materials and
design elements.
            (4)   Decorative paving.
            (5)   Trellises, railings, gates, grillwork, or unique landscaping.
         b.   The DRB and TRC may recommend other elements in place of the
above elements for approval by the Planning Commission.
      10.   Oriented to the Corner: Buildings on corner lots shall be oriented
to the corner. Corner entries and/or architectural treatment should be used to
emphasize the corner.
      11.   Emphasis of HCR Identity: Any main building located at the
intersection of Highland Drive and 6200 South shall have a prominent scale and
iconic design to emphasize the importance of this vital gateway of Holladay as
indicated in the SAMP.
      12.   Window and Door Designs: Windows and doors shall be used to define
the character of buildings by giving scale to the building and providing visual
interest to the composition of individual facades. Distinct window and door
designs shall be used to help define building styles. Articulated, transparent
facades shall be created along vehicular and pedestrian rights of way,
including display windows as a link between both vehicles and pedestrians and
activities in the building.
         a.   In keeping with the intent of these design guidelines, the
following shall apply to any street level building facade:
            (1)   Major new construction shall have at least fifty percent
(50%) of the length of the ground floor facade between the height of two feet
zero inches (2'0") and eight feet zero inches (8'0") devoted to windows and
doors affording views into retail, office, or lobby space.
            (2)   Highly tinted or mirrored glass windows, shades, blinds or
screens that prevent pedestrian view into buildings shall not be permitted.
         b.   Windows on the second or third level shall be proportioned in
favor of verticality, and, the design of surrounding window casing, the depth
and profile of window sash element, and the material of which they are
constructed shall be distinctly associated with the specific building style.
         c.   Awnings and ground level canopies should contribute to the
architectural theme of the structure to which they are affixed and shall be
integrated within a building’s design. Awnings shall be constructed of
traditional materials and located over windows and doors.
         d.   On multi-storefront buildings, separate awnings shall be located
within each storefront opening so that the building frame and details are
revealed.
         e.   Retractable and fixed awnings are allowed and encouraged.
         f.   Under awning lights that are designed to specifically illuminate
the sidewalk and storefront are permitted.
      13.   Reinforcement of Design: Building design should reinforce the
building’s location abutting the street edge and public space.
      14.   Use of Customized Components: Prototype design for franchises,
formula or national chains shall use customized components consistent with the
design requirements for the HCR Zone that reinforce visual consistency with
other buildings in the Holladay Crossroads Zone area.
         a.   Building Materials: Exterior finish materials selected should be
part of a strong architectural theme and shall not appear as a material foreign
to the character of the building nor to the Holladay Crossroads Zone.
         b.   Building exteriors shall be constructed from high quality and
durable materials. It is important that the materials and colors will weather
well and need minimal maintenance. Acceptable exterior finish materials include
the following:
            (1)   Painted, stained or weathered wood siding such as, 4-
S shingles, board and batten and clapboard.
            (2)   Artificial wood siding such as painted Cementous fiberboard.
            (3)   Brick or natural stone.
            (4)   EIFS (synthetic stucco) (not more than 50 percent of all
exterior finished surfaces).
            (5)   Stucco, but as a minority material.
            (6)   Synthetic stone.
            (7)   Architectural finish or decorative faced Concrete Masonry
Units (CMUs). No portion of a building constructed of standard CMUs shall be
visible from an existing public right of way. Exposed concrete walls should be
architecturally treated. The enhancement must include joint treatments,
textured concrete such as exposed aggregate, sandblast and/or colored concrete,
or other decorative finishes.
            Beveled metal siding, mirrored glass, vinyl siding, and backlit
awnings shall not be used.
      15.   Roofs: The character of a roof is a major feature for a structure.
The roof pitch, its materials, size and orientation are all distinct features
that should contribute to the character of the building. Shadows created by
traditional overhangs should contribute to the perception of a building’s
scale. Roof designs should relate to the building facade articulations.
Accordingly:
         a.   A variety of roof types and configurations shall be used to add
interest and reduce perceived building bulk.
         b.   Use of sidewalk porticos and roof overhangs is allowed and
encouraged.
         c.   Roof materials shall be in keeping with the character of the
architectural style of the building. Recommended roof materials include slate
shingles, asphalt and fiberglass shingles, metal standing seam or tiles.
         d.   Crickets or other snow guard devices should be placed in such a
way that they do not alter the form of the roof as seen from the street.
         e.   Decorative roof accessories such as cresting, ridge caps, and
finials may be used.
         f.   Roof-top amenities are allowed provided they do not create
enclosed (i.e., walled in) space. Examples of allowable elements include, but
are not limited to: landscape features, patio covers or other overhead shade
structures, plazas, fire pits, pools, game facilities, lounge seating/spaces,
etc.
      16.   Building Color(s):
         a.   A harmonious range of colors shall be used within the HCR Zone.
            b.   Neon or very bright colors (which have the effect of
unreasonably setting the building apart from other adjacent buildings on the
street) shall not be used or allowed within the Zone.
      c.   Bright colors should be used only for trim and accents.
         d.   The TRC may recommend approval of bright colors if the use is
consistent with the building design and other design requirements.
      17.   Service Areas: See standards in Section
13.71.
      18.   Mechanical Equipment: Ground and roof-top mechanical equipment such
as heating and air conditioning units, TV antennas and satellite dishes shall
be hidden or screened so as to minimize visual impacts. All noise emitting
equipment shall be placed so as to minimize noise impacts on nearby properties.
         a.   Lattice, open brick enclosures, or vegetation may be used to
conceal mechanical equipment. Screening material should be properly maintained.
If vegetation is used for screening, the mature size of the vegetation should
be considered so that equipment air flow will not be compromised.
         b.   All mechanical equipment shall be shown on the preliminary site
plans prepared for architectural review. The Planning Commission may recommend
the location, screening, and painting of such equipment as part of the project
plan review process.
         c.   Screening materials shall be designed to be compatible or
complementary with the building.
   F.   Fencing:
      1.   Only decorative solid walls (e.g., masonry, pre-poured concrete
panel inserts, etc.) or black, wrought-iron including simulated wrought iron
fencing shall be used upon any commercially used property(ies) within the HCR
Zone.
      2.   Only decorative solid walls (e.g., masonry, pre-poured concrete
panel inserts, etc.) or black, wrought-iron including simulated wrought iron
fencing shall be used on/along the external boundary/property lines of land
within the HCR Zone. (Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021)
CHAPTER 13.70
WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE
SECTION:
13.70.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.70.020: Applicability
13.70.030: Wildland Urban Interface Overlay Map
13.70.040: Wildland Urban Interface Development Requirements
13.70.050: Review, Approval Procedure
13.70.060: Disputes, Appeal Procedure
13.70.070: Warning and Disclaimer
13.70.080: Change of Use
13.70.090: Conflicting Regulations
13.70.100: Appendix A: Wildland Urban Overlay Map
13.70.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of Holladay and minimize the potential fire
damage and related risks to public health, safety and property by encouraging
wise land use in proximity to wildland fire risk areas.
   B.   Based on, inter alia, recommendations of Unified Fire Authority, the
city’s fire enforcement authority, the city finds that certain wildland
interface areas exist in the city and that preservation of public health,
safety and welfare requires adherence to development codes in such areas
specified below, to reduce the risk of potentially devastating wildfires in the
city.
   C.   Appendix A of this chapter presents a wildland urban interface map
reflecting fire risk concerns as highlighted by the State of Utah Division of
Fire Forestry and Lands, as they specifically pertain to development within
Holladay City. The map serves as an overlay, creating the boundaries wherein
site-specific fire prevention assessments shall be performed prior to
developing project plans located within the wildland urban interface boundary
area. (Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.020: APPLICABILITY:
These regulations are applicable to all property and lands within the wildland
urban interface overlay areas within the city, as shown on the Wildland Urban
Interface map in this Appendix A. The map and all amendments thereto are made a
part of this chapter as if fully described and detailed herein. Each change in
the overlay map shall be subject to the amendment procedures set forth in
Chapter 13.07 of this title. (Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.030: WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE OVERLAY MAP:
   A.   The boundary lines of the wildland urban interface map establish
overlay boundaries and shall be determined by use of the bounding streets,
municipal boundaries appearing on the map.
   B.   Wildland urban interface area map establishes building code and
landscaping requirements as provided in
13.70.070 of this section. All land use provisions of the underlying zone
apply.
   C.   Wildland urban interface area map may be updated and amended by the
city as per
Chapter 13.07 if found to be inaccurate or in error, or as new methods or data
are developed to better define areas of potential hazards.
   D.   Where wildland urban interface overlay areas are thought by an
applicant to be inaccurate or in error and require revision, the applicant
shall submit to the city technical evidence by a qualified professional
supporting the claim and showing the proposed revision. The city will review
the information and render a decision. The applicant may appeal that decision
to the city council. (Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.040: WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Any applicant requesting development on a parcel of land within the wildland
urban interface overlay area, as shown on Appendix A of this chapter, shall
comply with all provisions set forth in the Utah Wildland Interface Code (2006)
as adopted in §
15.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.050: REVIEW, APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Review: In order to fulfill the purposes of this chapter, the community
and economic development department and Unified Fire Authority shall review any
proposed development to determine the possible risks to the safety of persons
or property from wildland fire hazards.
   B.   Standards: The area fire marshal and building code official shall
interpret and determine whether the development complies with the standards of
the Utah Wildland Interface Code.
   C.   Necessary Requirements May Be Set: The area fire marshal and building
code official may set requirements necessary to reduce the risks from wildfire-
related hazards as a condition to the approval of any development. (Ord. 2025-
22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.060: DISPUTES, APPEAL PROCEDURE:
An applicant may appeal any decision made under the provisions of this chapter
only after the city has issued a written review of a report, and shall set
forth the specific grounds or issues upon which the appeal is based. The appeal
shall be submitted in writing to the director of community and economic
development within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the written review or
other decision. The city shall assemble a professional panel of three (3)
qualified experts to serve as the appeal authority for any technical dispute.
The panel shall consist of an expert designated by the city, an expert
designated by the applicant, and an expert chosen by the city’s and the
applicant’s designated experts. If the city’s and the applicant’s designated
experts cannot reach a consensus of the third expert within thirty (30) days,
the city shall select the third expert. Decisions of the panel will be binding
and will be based on the majority decision of the panel. The costs of the
appeal process shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.070: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER:
The wildland fire hazards overlay boundaries established in this chapter
represent only those hazardous areas known to the city, and should not be
construed to include all possible potential hazard areas. The wildland urban
interface maps may be amended as new information becomes available pursuant to
procedures set forth in
chapter 13.07 of this title. The provisions of this chapter do not in any way
assure or imply that areas outside its boundaries will be free from the
possible adverse effects of wildland fire hazards. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for
any damages from wildland fires that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative requirement or decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord.
2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.080: CHANGE OF USE:
No change in use which results in the conversion of a building or structure
from one not used for human occupancy to one that is so used shall be permitted
unless the building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.090: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In cases of conflict between the provisions of existing zoning classifications,
building code, subdivision regulations, or any other ordinance of the city and
the wildland urban interface overlay and codes codified in this chapter, the
most restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
13.70.100: APPENDIX A: WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE OVERLAY MAP:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9975.png]
 
(Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
CHAPTER 13.71
HOLLADAY VILLAGE ZONE
SECTION:
13.71.010: Vision And Purpose
13.71.020: Scope
13.71.030: Primary Uses
13.71.040: Accessory Uses
13.71.050: Nonconforming Development
13.71.060: Relocation Of Existing Uses Within The Zone
13.71.065: Project Approval
13.71.070: Project Approval Procedures
13.71.075: Development Standards
13.71.080: Design Guidelines
13.71.090: Illustrations
13.71.010: VISION AND PURPOSE:
   A.   It is intended that the Holladay Village (HV) Zone reflect the vision
and goals of the Holladay Village Master Plan of the Holladay General Plan and
facilitates a special, unique place for people to gather, shop, recreate, and
enjoy the views of the surrounding mountains. The Holladay Village primarily
caters first to the residents of Holladay providing goods and services that
encourage them to shop and recreate at home rather than outside of the City. It
is intended that the character of the Holladay Village become a place of human
scaled, diverse land uses within an aesthetically attractive, easily
accessible, and economically healthy environment. A pedestrian scale
environment will be created through building height and mass, and orienting
structures toward the streets and sidewalks. A range of commercial, service,
public, and residential land use, including mixed-use is desired. Charming,
traditional, early Utah architecture with some flexibility for individual
expression employing high quality materials and energy efficiency and site
features will create visual interest, encourage greater pedestrian and bike
use, and enhance the image and economic vitality of the entire City.
   Because the Village is intersected by a crossroads, an inherent conflict
between pedestrians and vehicular traffic arises. By creating a walkable
Village with a unique character catering equally to pedestrians and vehicles in
one or all quadrants of the Village, it is hoped these objectives may be
accomplished.
   B.   Another important goal of the Village is the preservation and
enhancement of surrounding residential neighborhoods. These neighborhoods
supply much of the patronage of commercial uses within the Village;
consequently, care should be taken in the review of development of the Village
to protect nearby residential uses from adverse impacts such as uncontrolled
traffic, spillover parking, and noise and light pollution. Particular attention
shall be paid to Locust Lane-Hugo Avenue, Phylden Drive, Clearview Street,
Kentucky Avenue, and Arbor Lane to ensure that most traffic to and from the
Village is contained on arterial streets and not through surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
   To achieve these goals, in part, street level floor space immediately
abutting 2300 East, Holladay Boulevard, Murray-Holladay Road, and Laney Avenue
between 2300 East and Holladay Boulevard and abutting Holladay Village Plaza,
as shown in section
13.71.080,
figure 13.71.4 of this chapter shall be retail use only with the exception of
small street level lobby areas that lead to upper story uses.
   However, it is not the intent of this chapter to impair the rights of
existing businesses and property owners. Therefore, land uses and structures
legally existing at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be treated as
nonconforming uses and structures, except as expressly stated herein. The
provisions of this chapter allow lawfully established buildings and uses to
continue but limits their expansion or modification unless brought into
compliance with the requirements herein except for previously established drive
thru uses.
   C.   To ensure the architectural and aesthetic goals of this section are
met, any development within the HV Zone shall first be reviewed by the Design
Review Board (DRB). The DRB determines a project’s degree of overall conformity
with the architectural design guidelines set forth in this chapter and makes,
in a timely fashion, a recommendation. These guidelines are established to
create and enhance a sense of place and visual continuity within the HV Zone.
   D.   Approval of any applicable land use application, as provided for in
this chapter, within the Zone may only be given by the Planning Commission.
Recommendations of the DRB are non-binding upon the Planning Commission and
shall be considered.
   E.   Appeals from decisions of the Planning Commission or where appropriate
as set forth herein, shall be made to the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-
2014; Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any new construction or
remodeling for a mixed-use residential or nonresidential use, building, or
structure located in the HV Zone. For the purpose of this section, “remodeling”
means:
   A.   Any proposed action that will increase the floor area of the premises;
   B.   Any interior remodel which includes more than fifty percent (50%) of
the structure’s footprint; or
   C.   Any change in use that requires a change of occupancy type under the
applicable building or safety code.
   D.   The Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the Community and
Economic Development Director, may waive applicable requirements of the Zone
for buildings or uses that cannot reasonably comply within the context of goals
for the Zone due to shape of property, historic nature of structures, or the
pre-existing use of a structure. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-05,
3-4-2021)
13.71.030: PRIMARY USES:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The permitted uses allowed in the HV Zone shall be as
set forth in chapter 13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Any use legally existing as a conditional use in the
HV Zone on the effective date of this chapter, is allowed to continue and is
subject to the requirements of the conditional use permit issued for such use.
Except as otherwise set forth in section
13.71.060 of this chapter, each conditional use shall conform to the
development standards and design guidelines of this chapter and other
applicable requirements of this title.
   C.   Mixed or Combined Uses: (See subsection
13.71.020B of this chapter.) Any mixture or combination of allowed uses may be
established within the same building or on the same lot or parcel. If any of
the proposed uses are a conditional use, that use shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Commission as required by section
13.08.040 of this title. Denial of a conditional use within a mixed-use
building does not automatically result in denial of conforming use(s) and/or
the site plan.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Any primary or accessory land use not shown as a
permitted or conditional use in
chapter 13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title shall be prohibited.
   E.   Hours: None of the foregoing uses shall be open to the public between
the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. except
for hotels and bed-and-breakfast uses. (Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-2014; amd. Ord.
2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.040: ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted and conditional uses set forth in
chapter 13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title shall be deemed to
include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily
associated with and incidental and subordinate to such primary uses allowed by
chapter 13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title.
   A.   Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to
permitted and conditional uses in the Zone except as otherwise expressly
provided in this title.
   B.   No accessory use, building or structure, shall be allowed on a lot or
parcel unless a primary permitted or conditional use is currently established
on the parcel except as allowed by section
13.09.020 of this title.
   C.   Specific accessory uses allowed in the HV Zone are as set forth in
chapter 13.100, “Appendix A -Allowed Uses”, of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012; amd. Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.050: NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT:
Notwithstanding any contrary provision set forth in
chapter 13.88 of this title, an existing permitted or conditional use which
does not conform to the development standards and design guidelines set forth
in this chapter may be continued; provided, however, that any expansion of such
use which will increase the floor area of the premises, any interior remodel
which includes more than fifty percent (50%) of the structure; or any change in
use that requires a change of occupancy type under the applicable building or
safety code shall be subject to those development standards and design
guidelines set forth in this chapter to which it can reasonably comply. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.060: RELOCATION OF EXISTING USES WITHIN THE ZONE:
   A.   For the purposes of redevelopment, existing uses established within the
HV Zone may be allowed to relocate and continue the use on the same parcel or
lot on another parcel or lot within the HV Zone by approval of the Planning
Commission with a recommendation from the Holladay City Redevelopment Agency
Board, and are exempt from the provisions of
chapter 13.88 of this title.
   B.   Approval of the relocation or continued use does not exempt the use
from the other provisions of the HV Zone. (Ord. 2013-26, 10-10-2013; amd. Ord.
2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.065: PROJECT APPROVAL:
All project/site plans for new construction and/or remodeling of existing
structures within the HV Zone shall be approved by the Planning Commission as
outlined in the following section. Site layout and building design approval for
accessory structures proposed as ancillary uses for existing, primary uses may
be reviewed and approved by the Community and Economic Development Director
following a review and recommendation by the Design Review Board. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.070: PROJECT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: The conceptual design of any application for development
located in the HV Zone which requires approval by the Planning Commission shall
be reviewed by the DRB as provided in this section.
      1.   The Community and Economic Development Director shall establish
uniform submittal requirements to facilitate design review and provide
consistency in information for decision making. An application subject to
design review shall include such information as may be reasonably required by
the director and may include site plans, building sections, exterior
elevations, photographs of the subject or abutting properties, perspective
drawings, description of building materials, color samples, exterior lighting,
fence plans, signs, and landscaping plans.
   B.   Review By Community and Economic Development Director: Following
submission of a conceptual design plan, the Community and Economic Development
Director and TRC shall review the plan application for compliance with
applicable regulations.
      1.   The Community and Economic Development Director shall notify the
applicant of staff recommendation of an approval or denial (for noncompliance)
of the conceptual design plan review findings and comments, and the need for
other information which may assist the DRB in making its recommendation to the
Planning Commission.
      2.   The applicant shall address identified conflicts and mitigate
adverse aspects of the design concept plan prior to forwarding the plan to the
DRB for review.
      3.   When the Community and Economic Development Director determines,
after review of the conceptual design plan, that one or more of the application
requirements and procedural steps is not applicable to the application under
consideration, such requirements may be waived in writing.
   C.   Review By DRB: Following receipt of an application from the Community
and Economic Development Director, the DRB shall review the proposed conceptual
design plan for compliance with the HV Zone design guidelines set forth in
section
13.71.090 of this chapter. At the conclusion of the review, the DRB shall make
a recommendation to the Planning Commission to accept the design concept as
submitted, provisionally accept the design concept subject to plan revisions
necessary to achieve compliance with the design guidelines, or continue design
concept for preparation of a new design concept if the concept is substantially
out of compliance with the design guidelines.
   D.   Review By Planning Commission: Following action by the DRB, the
Planning Commission shall consider the Board’s recommendations at the
Commission’s next regular meeting. The Planning Commission shall review the
proposed design concept for compliance with the HV Zone design guidelines set
forth in section
13.71.090 of this chapter and shall consider the recommendations of the DRB. At
the conclusion of the review, the Planning Commission shall act to accept the
design concept as submitted, provisionally accept the design concept subject to
plan revisions necessary to achieve compliance with the design guidelines, or
remand back to the DRB for further study. Applicants unwilling to make
revisions directed by the Planning Commission in a provisionally accepted
concept design or continued design concept may request denial of the
application so that an appeal may be filed.
      1.   Following Planning Commission approval of a conceptual design plan,
a conceptual site plan application may be submitted as provided in chapter
13.03 of this title and acted upon as provided in section 13.08.010 of this
title. Upon approval of the conceptual site plan, the applicant may submit a
preliminary site plan. Upon approval of the preliminary site plan, a final site
plan may be submitted to the planning commission or to the technical review
committee delegated by the planning commission for final site plan approval.
The land use authority may approve a final site plan only if the final design
plans are consistent with the approved preliminary plan and the design
guidelines set forth in section
13.71.090 of this chapter.
      2.   Action by the Planning Commission shall be based on written findings
stating the reasons for the action. Findings shall be based on information in
the record. In approving a design review application, conditions may be imposed
as needed to conform the application with provisions of the Holladay general
plan, this title, and the design guidelines set forth in this chapter. The
Planning Commission may not impose any condition or require any modification
which is inconsistent with a requirement of this code.
      3.   An adversely affected person may appeal a Planning Commission
decision to approve or deny a conceptual design plan or final design plan by
filing a written appeal to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of
subsection
13.71.020G of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2016-13, 5-26-
2016; Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.075: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following minimum development standards shall apply in the HV Zone.
Application of the design guidelines set forth in section
13.71.090 of this chapter may require a higher standard to be met.
   A.   Lot, Yard And Other Development Standards: Except as otherwise required
by a provision of this section or section
13.71.090 of this chapter, the development standards shown on
chart 13.71.1 of this section shall apply in the HV Zone.
CHART 13.71.1
Development Standard Amount
Development Standard                    Amount
Lot area, minimum                       5,000 square feet
Lot width, minimum                      50 feet at 25 feet back from right-of-
                                        way
Lot frontage, minimum                   50 feet
                                        Buildings should abut the right-of-way
                                        line, where possible, except for proper
Build-to line                           architectural movement, plazas, sitting
                                        areas, art displays, or other
                                        justification as recommended by the DRB
                                        and approved by the Planning Commission
Maximum dwellings per acre              24
                                        Exception: Ornamental architectural
                                        features such as arcades, canopies,
                                        awnings, balconies, cornices, etc., and
                                        subsurface intrusions such as footings
                                        and foundations may be allowed to
Right-of-way encroachments              protrude into the right-of-way provided
                                        they do not interfere with the normal
                                        use of the right-of-way, after review
                                        and approval of the Planning Commission
                                        and subject to a license agreement
                                        approved by the City Manager
                                        Expansion and remodeling permitted so
Front setback, nonconforming            long as nonconforming setback is not
                                        expanded
                                        100 percent, except for buffering
Maximum allowable impervious surface    landscaping requirements for properties
coverage                                abutting non-HV residential uses,
                                        preservation of protected trees, storm
                                        drain detention areas, etc.
Building width, maximum                 No requirement
Building height, maximum1, including
screened mechanical equipment but
excluding: 1) chimneys of 6 feet or     See
less; 2) architecturally compatible     figure 13.71.3 of this subsection
elevator shafts 14 feet or less
(2,500 lb maximum elevator capacity
rating); 3) gables 4 feet or less
                                        The street level floor space fronting
                                        and abutting major streets, 2300 East,
                                        Holladay Boulevard, Murray Holladay
                                        Road and Laney Avenue between 2300 East
Land use for floor space abutting major and Holladay Boulevard and floor space
streets and plaza within the Holladay   abutting Holladay Village Plaza, as
Village Zone                            shown on
                                        figure 13.71.4 of this subsection shall
                                        be retail uses2 only
                                        Exception: Small street level lobby
                                        areas that lead to upper story uses
 
   Notes:
   1.   To reasonably accommodate for grade and slope changes and as measured
from the top back of curb of the nearest street, maximum building height for
multi-story buildings may be averaged using 10 equal measurements over the
length of the roofline facing the street but at no point may exceed 4 feet
above maximum.
   2.   For the purposes of this chapter the term “retail use” shall include
all allowed uses categorized under the general heading of “retail” in chapter
13.100, “Appendix A - Allowed Uses”, of this title as well as uses categorized
as “personal service” and “pet grooming/pet daycare”.
CHART 13.71.2
Street ROW Width (Feet)
Street                                     ROW Width (Feet)
2345 East                                  47 (may be reduced for existing
                                           structures)
2345 South from Kentucky to Arbor/Holladay 54
Boulevard intersection
Arbor Lane                                 54
2225 East Street                           66
Murray Holladay Road east from Holladay    77
Boulevard intersection
Phylden Drive                              77
2270 East                                  77
4720 South                                 77
2300 East from Holladay Boulevard          80
intersection north to 4500 South
Holladay Boulevard north from Laney Avenue 80
intersection to 4500 South
Murray Holladay Road west to 2225 East (45 85
feet on north side)
New connector from 2300 East to Laney      92
Avenue
Holladay Boulevard from 2300 East          102
intersection south to Murray Holladay Road
 
FIGURE 13.71.3
BUILDING HEIGHT ALLOWANCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5129.png]
FIGURE 13.71.4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5127.png]
   B.   Parking Requirements: Parking in the HV Zone shall be governed by the
provisions of chapter 13.80 of this title except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   C.   Landscaping: Landscaping is required as a buffer to areas where the HV
Zone property abuts a residential zone or property. All installed landscaping
in the HV Zone shall comply with the applicable planting and maintenance
provisions governing landscaping and buffering in
chapter 13.77 of this title.
   D.   Outside Display: Unless expressly allowed in a preexisting conditional
use permit, all goods, including food, beverage, and vending machines, shall be
within a completely enclosed structure. New construction of enclosures for the
storage of goods shall incorporate into the design; windows and/or other
fenestrations This section does not preclude temporary sales in conjunction
with a special event license, sidewalk sale, or seasonal produce or plant sale.
      1.   Areas designated as required vehicular parking may not be used as
outdoor display areas.
      2.   If merchandise is displayed on any sidewalk, a minimum of sixty
inches (60") of the sidewalk shall remain open and unobstructed to facilitate
safe pedestrian circulation.
      3.   Plans for new developments shall clearly designate any areas for
outdoor display of merchandise. Outdoor display of merchandise shall only occur
in areas designated for such display on the approved plan.
      4.   Vending machines shall be screened from view from the street.
   E.   Outdoor Uses: The following outdoor uses are encouraged and may be
approved by the Community and Economic Development Director by special permit
as either an ongoing or one-time, periodic event:
      1.   Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining is subject to the following criteria:
         a.   The proposed seating area is located on private property or
public property and does not diminish parking or landscaping.
         b.   The proposed seating area does not impede pedestrian circulation.
         c.   The proposed seating area does not impede emergency access or
circulation.
         d.   No music or noise in excess of that allowed by applicable noise
ordinance.
         e.   Open trellises, decking, or other structures shall enhance the
outdoor seating area as compatible in design, architecture, and finishes of the
associated building.
      2.   Outdoor Events and Music excluding government sponsored events.
         a.   Outdoor events and music require a business license and the
applicant shall submit a site plan and written description of the event,
addressing the following:
            (1)   Compliance with applicable noise ordinances.
            (2)   Impacts on adjacent residential uses.
            (3)   Proposed plans for music, lighting, structures, electrical
signs, etc.
            (4)   Parking demands and impacts on neighboring properties.
            (5)   Duration and hours of operation.
            (6)   Impacts on emergency access and circulation.
         b.   The applicant shall submit the required application, pay all
applicable fees, and provide all required material and plans.
   F.   Mechanical Service: Mechanical equipment such as heating and air
conditioning units, TV antennas, and satellite dishes shall be hidden or
screened so as to minimize visual impacts. All noise emitting equipment shall
be placed so as to minimize noise impacts on nearby properties.
      1.   Lattice, open brick enclosures, or vegetation may be used to conceal
mechanical equipment. Screening material shall be properly maintained. If
vegetation is used for screening, the mature size of the vegetation should be
considered so that equipment air flow will not be compromised.
      2.   All mechanical equipment shall be shown on the preliminary site
plans prepared for architectural review. The Planning Commission may recommend
the location, screening, and painting of such equipment as part of the project
plan review process.
      3.   Screening materials shall be designed to be compatible or
complementary with the building.
   G.   Access, Service And Delivery:
      1.   All access to commercial businesses and facilities shall be located
within areas zoned for commercial use. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      2.   Service yards, loading docks, truck parking areas and other similar
areas shall be screened from view by a combination of walls, fences, and dense
planting. Screening shall block the view of such areas from public areas of the
site, adjacent properties, and public rights of way.
      3.   Drive-through windows with corresponding driveways, curb cuts, etc.,
are prohibited.
   H.   Trash Facilities:
      1.   Each structure shall provide a means of storing refuse generated by
the structure’s occupants.
      2.   Garbage, recycling collection and utility areas must be enclosed and
screened around their perimeter by at least a seven foot (7') high wall or
fence, concealed on the top and must have self-closing doors.
      3.   Wet trash and nonsolid waste shall be collected and disposed of in a
manner that does not allow leakage of liquid from a trash container, including
the use of grease traps and other facilities to collect liquid waste. Nonsolid
and liquid waste shall not be hauled across a public right of way unless
enclosed within a leakproof container.
   I.   Site Lighting: It is the intent of this subsection to encourage
lighting practices and systems that will minimize light pollution, glare and
light trespass, conserve energy and resources, and maintain nighttime safety
and utility while ensuring the enjoyment of a starry night for all members of
the community.
   Except as provided herein, or unless otherwise explicitly approved by the
Planning Commission the light source shall be a full cutoff fixture, completely
concealed within an opaque housing. All exterior lighting fixtures designed or
placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet standards generally
accepted as Dark Sky compliant. Specifically, lighting sources and fixtures
shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Fixture (Luminaire): Where the design for an area may suggest the
use of lighting fixtures of a particular “period” or architectural style,
fixtures other than full cutoff fixtures may be used if the lumens generated by
each fixture do not exceed five thousand five hundred (5,500) and if the
mounting heights of such fixtures do not exceed fifteen feet (15'). Fixtures
used under gasoline canopies and other structural canopies shall be flat lens,
recessed lens, or drop lens with glare shields. Use of drop lens without glare
shields is prohibited.
      2.   Light Source (Lamp): Only LED, incandescent, fluorescent, metal
halide, or color corrected high pressure sodium may be used. LED is the
preferred light source. The same type shall be used for the same or similar
types of lighting on any one site. No colors other than white or off white
(light yellow tones in the kelvin scale of 5,000k or lower, i.e. warmer) may be
used for any light source for the lighting of signs, structures or the overall
site unless the DRB deems such lighting to be appropriate to the design theme
of the proposed development. Noncolor corrected low pressure sodium and mercury
vapor light sources are prohibited.
      3.   Mounting: Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone
of light does not cross any property line of the site. Poles shall be black,
dark gray, dark brown, dark green, or earth tone. The height of the pole
mounted light shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') above grade. Any fixtures
located within any required buffer shall not exceed twelve feet (12') above
grade. Wall mounted fixtures intended to illuminate walkways or paths shall not
exceed thirteen feet (13') above the pedestrian pathway. For purposes of these
regulations, the mounting height of a lighting fixture shall be defined as the
vertical distance from the grade elevation of the surface being illuminated to
the bottom of the lighting fixture (i.e., luminaire).
      4.   Submittal Requirements: Project plan submittals shall be prepared by
a lighting professional and include a site lighting plan at a scale of one inch
to twenty feet (1" - 20') or other scale acceptable to the city which shows:
         a.   All proposed exterior lighting in relation to existing and
proposed buildings, trees, landscaping, parking areas;
         b.   Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures including
fixture design, type of lamp, wattage, designation as “cutoff fixtures, lumens
or light contour study and other descriptive information on the fixtures; and
         c.   Proposed mounting height and placement of all exterior lighting
fixtures.
      5.   Timers And Dimmers: Lighting installations shall include timers,
dimmers and/or sensors to reduce overall energy consumption and eliminate
unneeded lighting.
      6.   Holiday Lighting: Holiday lighting during the months of October,
November, December, and January shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section, provided that such holiday lighting does not create dangerous glare on
adjacent streets or properties.
      7.   Light Trespass: In addition to the general provisions of this
subsection, all site lighting shall be shielded and/or directed in such a
manner that it illuminates only the user’s premises and does not spill over
into neighboring residential areas so as to interfere with the peaceful
enjoyment of residential or public properties.
      8.   Architectural Feature Lighting: Architectural feature lighting
including wall washer spotlights are permitted.
      9.   Nonconforming Fixtures: Except where otherwise noted, all outdoor
lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operative before the
effective date of this code are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection. Whenever a nonconforming fixture is replaced, upgraded or moved,
the replacement fixture shall meet the requirements of this code.
   J.   Utility Lines: All new utility lines such as electric, telephone, CATV,
or other similar lines serving individual sites shall be placed underground.
Where feasible, utility lines necessary within the property shall be placed
underground. All utility lines shall be placed underground in new construction
projects that require building permits and site redesign. All junction and
access boxes shall be located to the side or the rear of the building unless
public safety concerns dictate otherwise. All utility pads shall be shown on
the project plan. Any utility connections, meter boxes, etc., shall be
integrated with the architectural elements of the project plan.
   K.   Buffer Standards For Proposed Development Abutting Residential Property
Not In The HV Zone:
      1.   The minimum building setback for any building is twenty feet (20')
from any point on an abutting non-HV Zone property line.
      2.   Building height shall not exceed the “graduated height envelope” as
defined in subsection K.2.a of this section.
         a.   The “graduated height envelope” is defined by projecting a
vertical plane from the property line to a height of six feet (6') and then
slanting upward and toward the interior of the HV Zone property at a forty-
five-degree (45°) angle. Refer to
figure 13.71.5 of this section for graphic representation of the graduated
height envelope.
         b.   The graduated height envelope applies to properties within the HV
Zone that abut residentially zoned properties not in the HV Zone.
         c.   Some architectural elements may be exempt as defined in section
13.76.190 of this title.
FIGURE 13.71.5
GRADUATED HEIGHT ENVELOPE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5131.png]
      3 .    Maximum building height shall not exceed the limits shown on
figure 13.71.3 of this section.
      4.   A six foot (6') high screening wall or fence may be constructed
along the property line which is the boundary between the HV Zone and an
abutting residential zone. Such fence or wall shall include design and other
decorative elements consistent with the design of the new building. This
requirement may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission if it can be
demonstrated that existing walls or fences provide the desired buffering and
aesthetic effect or can be altered to do so.
      5.   A landscaping buffer strip (not in addition to the minimum building
setback) of five feet (5') as per chapter 13.77 of this title, shall be
provided parallel to the fence or wall to allow for the planting of appropriate
trees, or other vegetation anticipated to provide either shade, screening and/
or beauty at the common property line.
      6.   A primary or accessory building or structure shall not have a
single, unbroken facade longer than fifty feet (50').
      7.   No trash receptacle or storage area shall be located closer than
fifty feet (50') from a residence on an abutting property not in the HV Zone
unless located within a fully enclosed building.
      8.   Site lighting shall be designed to direct lighting away from
residential property. The use of energy efficient, color and intensity-
controlled LED lighting shall be as per subsection I of this section is.
      9.   An outdoor dining facility shall be constructed in a manner which
visually obscures the facility from abutting residential property and which
protects the property from noise and light emanating from the facility.
      10.   Mechanical equipment, including penthouses and elevator shafts,
shall be screened and soundproofed so that its presence or operation does not
violate the noise ordinance or create a nuisance for the occupants of any
abutting residence.
   L.   Signs: Signs in the HV Zone shall be governed by the provisions of
section
13.82.200 of this title except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-2014; 2015-02, 2-5-2015; 2016-31,
12-1-2016; 2020-02, 2-6-2020; Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.080: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes design guidelines intended to improve
the quality and compatibility of development in the HV Zone. Guidelines that
employ the word “should” are intended to be applied as stated. However, an
alternative measure may be considered if it meets or exceeds the intent of the
guideline. Guidelines using the words “shall” are mandatory. Guidelines using
the words “encouraged” or “discouraged” are desirable but not mandatory.
Following are a series of design principles viewed as fundamental in achieving
the design objectives of the Holladay Village.
   B.   Pedestrian Access: All new development shall be designed with the
pedestrian in mind. Sidewalks, pedestrian alleys, exterior plazas, landscaping,
and buildings of a size and proportion that encourage and complement pedestrian
activities including walking, outdoor dining and seating, public gatherings,
and window shopping. Commercial buildings shall include clearly defined primary
entrances and large windows that display goods and services to create a visual
unity on the street and enhance the pedestrian experience. New drive-through
uses are not conducive to safe and attractive pedestrian activity and shall not
be allowed. Those drive-through entrances currently in operation that have been
in place prior to the enactment of these standards may be continued on the same
property as part of a site plan approval or site plan amendment approved by the
Planning Commission, as allowed by section
13.71.075 of this chapter
      1.   At least sixty inches (60") of the sidewalk width shall be preserved
for pedestrian movement in front of every building fronting on a public right
of way.
      2.   Creatively designed, clean, and functional alleys provide for
vehicular access and pedestrian linkages at mid blocks locations and in between
properties. Lighting shall be provided for pedestrian safety at these
locations. Amenities such as seating, protection from the elements, and
decorative elements such as planters and art or other public space enhancements
shall be also incorporated to encourage pedestrian circulation.
      3.   All plazas, arcades, and open-air seating shall provide handicapped
access.
   C.   Parking: Parking should be integrated with the design of the Holladay
Village and complement the pedestrian activities and visual character of the
Village. Intrusive impacts of parking lots and structures should be mitigated
through sensitive design, location, and configuration. The following should be
integrated into the design on any new parking lot or structure:
      1.   Parking lots shall not be located on a corner facing an
intersection.
      2.   The number of parking lot entrances, driveways and curb cuts shall
be minimized in favor of combined driveways and coordinated parking areas among
property owners.
      3.   Individual parking entrances and curb cuts on Holladay Boulevard
and/or Murray Holladay Road shall be consolidated wherever reasonably possible
to complement a coordinated parking strategy and promote walkability.
      4.   Pedestrian walkways, which comply with ADA standards, shall be
constructed within a parking lot to connect the sidewalk and building
entrances. Raised concrete pavement should be provided where the walkway
traverses between parking stalls and/or is abutting vehicular circulation.
      5.   Parking structures visible from the public rights of way shall be
architecturally integrated or designed with an architectural theme similar to
the main buildings.
      6.   The perimeter of each floor of a parking structure facing a public
street shall have a screening mechanism designed to shield automobiles and any
mechanical appurtenances from public view. An architectural treatment,
landscaping and/or space for pedestrian oriented businesses along the street
side edges of the parking structure should be provided.
   D.   Streetscape: The streetscape in the urban landscape shall include
elements such as streets, sidewalks, plazas, fountains, kiosks, public art,
landscaping, signage, and other street fixtures such as streetlights,
pedestrian benches, and trash receptacles. New development in the Holladay
Village shall complement and incorporate design elements established by the
City within public rights of way.
   E.   Building Design: It is the intent of this subsection to encourage
timeless architectural designs and building facades in keeping with the
historical character of early Utah architecture that has been lost in the
commercial center of Holladay. Typical design elements shall include three (3)
levels: the bottom or street (storefront) level, the middle or shaft level, and
the top or parapet level with articulated or ornamental cornices or rooflines
each of the levels having different proportions and composition of openings and
ornamentation. Storefronts should include display windows, separated by simple
vertical piers or classical columns, located below, for example, decorative
cornices, fascia boards, and divide-light transom windows with simple fabric
awnings above decorative bulkheads. Signs should be mounted on the lintel above
the first story or painted directly on the inside of display windows.
      1.   Compatibility Of New Buildings: All new buildings shall be designed
with a unique character compatible with the objectives of the Holladay Village
Zone.
      2.   Building Mass: To avoid any large, continuous building mass of
uniform height, no portion of any three-story building shall continue for more
than one hundred feet (100') horizontally along any street frontage without a
break in the roofline. The required break in the building height shall continue
for a minimum of thirty feet (30') along the horizontal plane before
recontinuation of the three-story height.
         a.   Break In Roofline: A “break in the roofline” is defined as:
            (1)   A ten foot (10') minimum step back of the vertical plane of
the building on the third story, second, and third stories, or all stories; or
            (2)   A reduction to two (2) stories of the entire building.
         b.   Structural Articulation: The vertical planes of a building shall
be varied so that no continuous elevation is longer than seventy five feet
(75') horizontally without a structural articulation which may include facade
modulation, structural expressions, varied setbacks or heights, textural
modulations and/or projections such as balconies, cornices, covered entrances,
arcades or colonnades or other architectural element dividing the facade
visually to provide relief to perceived building mass from the street
elevation.
FIGURE 13.71.6
TYPICAL ROOFLINE BREAKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5143.png]
FIGURE 13.71.7
BUILDING ARTICULATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5141.png]
      3.   Pedestrian Perspective: All building fronts shall provide features
that are designed to be consistent with pedestrian activity and that provide a
variety of architectural details that can be viewed from the pedestrian
perspective.
FIGURE 13.71.8
PEDESTRIAN PERSPECTIVE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5139.png]
      4.   Facade Embellishment: Any building wall visible from a public right
of way or from a public parking structure shall incorporate architectural
design embellishments which are compatible with other publicly visible parts of
the building. In addition, a contiguous building wall (longer than 50 feet)
shall have a building element, dividing the facade visually which may include
windows, a recessed entrance or other appropriate variations. The Planning
Commission may approve the use of simulated or faux windows for neighborhood
market, large uses where transparent glass installations conflict with
necessary interior functions.
FIGURE 13.71.9
FACADE EMBELLISHMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5137.png]
      5.   Shading For Pedestrians: At least twenty percent (20%) of walls
facing the sidewalk or other pedestrian accessible space shall be
architecturally treated with a shade/weather protecting element such as an
awning, arcade, trellis, overhanging architectural feature consistent with the
overall building architecture.
FIGURE 13.71.10
SHADING FOR PEDESTRIANS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5135.png]
      6.   Primary Entrances: Primary entrances to commercial buildings shall
be recessed, providing a shaded area that helps to define doorways and provide
shelter for pedestrians. Repetition of recessed entries should also be used to
provide a rhythm of shadows along the street to help establish a sense of
scale. Entrance doors should be topped with transom windows to extend the
vertical emphasis of these openings.
      7.   Maintaining An Expression Line: Upper stories of buildings shall
maintain an expression line along the facade such as a setback, change of
material, or a projection to reduce the perceived building mass.
      8.   Consistency Of Architectural Style: All buildings should have an
articulated base course and cornice ornamented with details consistent with the
chosen architectural style. The middle section of the building is suggested to
be divided either horizontally or vertically in a manner consistent with the
selected style. Buildings may have upper story features which improve the
relationship between the upper story and the street. Such features include, but
are not limited to, balconies, roof decks, bay windows or upper story
commercial activities
         a.   In order to encourage design consistency, all major new
construction shall include at least three (3) of the following elements on the
street facing facades:
            (1)   Window and door treatment which embellishes the facade.
            (2)   Decorative light fixtures.
            (3)   Unique facade treatment, such as decorative materials and
design elements.
            (4)   Decorative paving.
            (5)   Trellises, railings, gates, grillwork, or unique landscaping.
         b.   The Design Review Board may recommend other elements in place of
the above for approval by the Planning Commission.
      9.   Mixing Of Styles: A compatible mix of styles for the Holladay
Village is acceptable providing that some basic design features which
complement each other are present.
      10.   Oriented To The Corner: Buildings on corner lots shall be oriented
to the corner. Corner entries and/or architectural treatment should be used to
emphasize the corner.
      11.   Emphasis Of Identity: Public buildings, unique community structures
and corner structures should have a prominent scale, emphasizing their
identity.
      12.   Window And Door Designs: Windows and doors shall be used to define
the character of buildings by giving scale to the building and providing visual
interest to the composition of individual facades. Distinct window and door
designs are to be used to help define building styles. Articulated, transparent
facades should be created along pedestrian rights of way, including display
windows as a link between pedestrians and activities in the building.
         a.   In keeping with the intent of these design guidelines, the
following shall apply to any street level building facade:
            (1)   Major new construction shall have at least fifty percent
(50%) of the length of the ground floor facade between the height of two feet
zero inches (2'0") and eight feet zero inches (8'0") devoted to windows and
doors affording views into retail, office, or lobby space.
            (2)   For neighborhood market, large uses where transparent facade
treatments are not possible due to interior function, simulated or faux window
may be traded as per subsection E4 of this section.
            (3)   Highly tinted or mirrored glass windows, shades, blinds or
screens that prevent pedestrian view into buildings shall not be permitted.
         b.   Windows on the second or third level shall be vertically
proportioned and the design of surrounding window casing, the depth and profile
of window sash element, and the material of which they are constructed shall be
distinctly associated with the specific building style.
         c.   Awnings and canopies contribute to architectural themes and
pedestrian oriented character of the Village and shall be integrated within the
building design. Awnings constructed of traditional and durable materials shall
be oriented over windows and doors.
         d.   On multi-storefront buildings, separate awnings should be located
within each recessed storefront opening so that the building frame and details
are revealed.
         e.   Retractable and fixed awnings are allowed.
         f.   Under-awning lights that are designed to specifically illuminate
the sidewalk and storefront are permitted.
      13.   Reinforcement Of Design: Building design should reinforce the
building’s location abutting the street edge and public space.
      14.   Use Of Customized Components: Prototype design for franchises,
formula or national chains shall use customized components consistent with the
design requirements for the HV Zone that reinforce visual consistency with
other buildings in the Holladay Village area.
   F.   Building Materials: Exterior finish materials selected should be part
of a strong architectural theme and should not appear as a material foreign to
the character of the building nor to the Holladay Village.
      1.   Building exteriors shall be constructed from high quality and
durable materials. It is important that the materials and colors will weather
well and need minimal maintenance.
         a.   Acceptable exterior finish materials include the following:
            (1)   Painted, stained, or weathered wood siding such as, 4-
S shingles, board and batten and clapboard.
            (2)   Artificial wood siding such as painted cementious fiberboard.
            (3)   Brick or natural stone.
            (4)   EIFS (synthetic stucco) (not more than 50 percent of all
exterior finished surfaces).
            (5)   Stucco.
            (6)   Synthetic stone.
            (7)   Architectural finish or decorative faced concrete masonry
units (CMUs).
         b.   Materials not listed above shall be prohibited unless determined
by the Design Review Board to be part of a strong architectural design theme
compatible with the Holladay Village Zone character.
      2.   No portion of a building constructed of standard CMUs shall be
visible from an existing public right of way. Exposed concrete walls shall be
architecturally treated. The enhancement must include joint treatments,
textured concrete such as exposed aggregate, sandblast and/or colored concrete,
or other decorative finishes.
      3.   Beveled metal siding, mirrored glass, vinyl siding, and backlit
awnings should not be used.
   G.   Roofs: The character of a roof is a major feature for a structure. The
roof pitch, its materials, size, and orientation are all distinct features that
contribute to the character of the building. Shadows created by the use of
traditional overhangs reduce the perception of a building’s scale. Roof designs
should relate to the building facade articulations.
      1.   A variety of roof types and configurations should be used to add
interest and reduce perceived building bulk.
      2.   Use of sidewalk porticoes and roof overhangs is encouraged.
      3.   Roof materials shall be in keeping with the character of the
building and not perceived as foreign to the chosen architectural style.
Recommended roof materials include slate shingles, asphalt and fiberglass
shingles, metal standing seam or tiles.
      4.   Crickets or other snow guard devices should be placed in such a way
that does not alter the form of the roof as seen from the street.
      5.   Decorative roof accessories may include cresting, ridge caps, and
finials or other similarly traditional architectural features..
   H.   Color:
      1.   A harmonious range of natural colors historically found within the
area should be used within the Holladay Village Zone.
      2.   Neon or very bright colors, which have the effect of unreasonably
setting the building apart from other adjacent buildings on the street, shall
not be used.
      3.   Bright colors shall be used only for trim and accents.
      4.   The Design Review Board may recommend approval of bright colors if
the use is consistent with the building design and other design requirements.
   I.   Amenities:
      1.   All major new construction involving combined uses of over seven
thousand (7,000) square feet of leasable area shall include at least two (2) of
the following amenities:
         a.   Plazas: Plazas should be designed as an outdoor room for use by
people as opposed to serving only as a setting for a building. Plazas should be
accessible from abutting sidewalks or pedestrian linkages. Plazas should be
located in sunny areas and provide plenty of seating on benches, steps and/or
ledges, public art, and other amenities.
         b.   Art: Art should be integrated with the public street
improvements. The location should provide for public view but not hinder
pedestrian traffic.
         c.   Water Feature: A water feature or fountain should be accessible
and/or visible by pedestrians from an abutting sidewalk or plaza. A water
feature shall be designed to use water efficiently with low water loss from
evaporation and wind.
         d.   Clock Or Landmarks: Decorative clock or decorative landmarks.
         e.   All Weather Features: Specially designed all weather features
that will make spending time outdoors feasible in all seasons.
         f.   Restrooms: Public restrooms.
         g.   Greenspace: Greenspace may be similar to a plaza, but include
significantly more landscaping than hardscape, and exceed the minimum
landscaping requirement for the property.
      2.   The Design Review Board may recommend other amenities in place of
the above for approval by the Planning Commission.
   J.   Landscaping: All uses in the FTV Zone shall comply with the provisions
governing landscaping and buffering in chapter 13.77 of this title.
      1.   Wherever possible, existing prominent trees are strongly encouraged
to be preserved. Significant vegetation should be protected during any
development activity. Preliminary plans shall show all significant vegetation
within twenty-five feet (25') of a proposed development.
      2.   All grade level parking shall be separated from the street and
screened from pedestrian view by landscaping. All parking lot or structure
landscaping shall comply with the regulations in chapter 13.77 of this title.
      3.   Building entries should be emphasized with special landscaping,
planting boxes, and/or paving in combination with lighting.
      4.   Landscaping should provide design continuity between the neighboring
properties.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Pedestrian scale light fixtures shall be incorporated into the site
design to give visual variety from one building to the next and should blend
with the architectural style.
      2.   Lighting elements shall be minimum wattage LED, metal halide or
color corrected sodium light sources which give more “warm” light.
      3.   All building entrance lighting shall be inviting, designed to
enhance access and safety.
      4.   Building mounted lights and display window lights contribute to
lighting of walkways in pedestrian areas. Wall mounted fixtures intended to
illuminate walkways or paths shall not exceed thirteen feet (13') above the
pedestrian pathway.
      5.   Parking area light fixtures shall be designed as per section I of
this chapter.
      6.   Neon lighting may be used as a lighting element, provided that the
tubes are concealed and are an integral part of the building design. Neon tubes
used to outline the building are prohibited.
   L.   Service Areas:
      1.   All on-site service areas should be located in an area not visible
from public streets or abutting residential zones.
      2.   Consideration should be given to developing common service courts at
the interior of blocks.
      3.   Refuse storage shall be enclosed and properly vented. Enclosures
shall be compatible with the architectural style of the building.
      4.   Utility meters, ground mounted mechanical units and any other
similar structures shall be hidden from public view or be screened.
      5.   Fences designed for privacy or screening should be made of masonry,
ornamental metal or wood, or some combination of the three (3). The use of
chain link, plastic or wire fencing shall be prohibited.
      6.   Mechanical units, utility equipment, elevator equipment and
telecommunication receiving devices located on the roof should be grouped
together, incorporated into the roof design, thoroughly screened and not to
exceed the height limits as allowed in section
13.71.080,
chart 13.71.1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-22, 9-
5-2013; Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-2014; Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015; Ord. 2017-01, 1-26-
2017; Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
13.71.090: ILLUSTRATIONS:
The photographs and drawings included in this section are intended to generally
illustrate appropriate and inappropriate application of the design guidelines
set forth in this chapter. They are not intended to imply that a particular
design will be approved notwithstanding its similarity to an illustration
included herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5183.png]
   Illustration 1. Development in the HV zone should be designed to encourage
pedestrian activity and bike access.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5181.png]
   Illustration 2. Outside display and outside uses are encouraged but must
leave a clear pedestrian pathway.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5179.png]
   Illustration 3. Pedestrian connections with wider pavement, decorative
lighting, benches, ornamental features and landscaping will encourage
pedestrian circulation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5177.png]
   Illustration 4. Surface parking lots should be screened from view from the
street and designed with pedestrian connectivity in mind. Walkways and ADA
accessibility must be an integral part of any surface parking lot design.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5175.png]
   Illustration 5. Street fixtures such as streetlights, pedestrian benches and
trash receptacles of a specific design and scale create a sense of place. The
design of these elements will be selected by the city and installed in the
public rights of way as part of the overall village plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5173.png]
   Illustration 6. New structures should incorporate traditional design
elements, be built to the street edge and foster unique, human scale
environments that encourage pedestrian activity.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5171.png]
   Illustration 7. Blank walls without visual or architectural features are out
of character with pedestrian oriented streets and should not be designed.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5169.png]
   Illustration 8. Recessed entryways create a shaded area that helps to define
doorways and provide shelter for pedestrians. The repetition of these entryway
features creates a sense of scale.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5167.png]
   Illustration 9. All buildings should have an articulated base course and
cornice ornamented with details consistent with the chosen architectural style.
Unornamented rooflines are contrary to the desired architectural character of
the Village.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5165.png]
   Illustration 10. Buildings may have upper story features, which cement the
relationship between the upper story and the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5163.png]
   Illustration 11. Buildings on corner lots shall be prominently oriented to
the corner. Corner entries and/or architectural treatments shall be used to
emphasize the corner and enhance the pedestrian experience.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5161.png]
   Illustration 12. Windows and doors are some of the most important character
defining features of a unique structure. They give scale to a building and
provide visual interest to the composition of individual facades including
creation of shadow.
  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5159.png]
   Illustration 13. Articulated, transparent facades should be created along
pedestrian right of way including display windows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5157.png]
   Illustration 14. Windows on the second or third level should be vertically
proportioned and the design of surrounding window casing, the depth and profile
of window sash element and the material of which they are constructed should be
distinctly associated with the specific building style.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5155.png]
   Illustration 15. Awnings and canopies should contribute to the building’s
architectural theme and be integrated within the building design. Awnings
should be constructed of traditional materials and located over windows and
doors.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5153.png]
   Illustration 16. Building colors should be muted or natural. Bright
fluorescent colors are out of keeping with the desired village character.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5151.png]
   Illustration 17. Exterior finish materials should be part of a strong
architectura l theme and should not appear as a material foreign to the
character of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5149.png]
   Illustration 18. The character of a roof is a major feature of any
structure. The roof pitch, its style, ornamentation, materials, size and
orientation are all distinct features that contribute to the character of the
building. Shadows created by traditional overhangs contribute to one’s
perception of a building’s scale. Roof designs should relate to the building
facade articulations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5147.png]
   Illustration 19. A compatible mix of architectural styles is encouraged,
however, contemporary styles incorporating large expanses of glass and
unornamented building facades are not in keeping with the desired village
character.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5145.png]
   Illustration 20. All major new construction should include pedestrian
oriented amenities such as a plaza, outdoor seating area, public art,
wayfinding signage, kiosks, or a water feature.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-2014; Ord. 2021-05, 3-4-2021)
CHAPTER 13.72
FOOTHILLS AND CANYONS OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
13.72.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.72.020: Overlay Zone; Scope And Application; General Provisions
13.72.030: Development Standards
13.72.040: Establishment Of Limits Of Disturbance
13.72.050: Approval Procedure For Development In The Foothills And Canyons
Overlay Zone
13.72.060: Administration And Enforcement
13.72.070: Definitions
13.72.080: Figures
13.72.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The general purpose of the foothills and canyons overlay zone is to
promote the health, safety, and public welfare of the residents of the city,
and while being cognizant of private property rights, to preserve the natural
character of the foothills and canyons by establishing standards for foothill
and canyon development proposed in the city.
   B.   The standards for development contained herein are intended
specifically to accomplish the following purposes:
      1.   Preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of the foothills and
canyons, including prominent ridgelines, which are vital to the attractiveness
and economic viability of the city;
      2.   Encourage development designed to reduce risks associated with
natural hazards and to provide maximum safety for inhabitants;
      3.   Provide adequate and safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
      4.   Encourage development that fits the natural slope of the land in
order to minimize the scarring and erosion effects of cutting, filling, and
grading related to construction on hillsides, ridgelines, and steep slopes;
      5.   Prohibit activities and uses that would result in degradation of
fragile soils, steep slopes, and water quality;
      6.   Provide for preservation of environmentally sensitive areas and open
space by encouraging clustering or other design techniques to preserve the
natural terrain, minimize disturbance to existing trees and vegetation,
preserve wildlife habitat, and protect aquifer recharge areas;
      7.   Reduce flooding by protecting streams, drainage channels, absorption
areas, and floodplains from substantial alteration of their natural functions.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.72.020: OVERLAY ZONE; SCOPE AND APPLICATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope/Application:
      1.   Maps On File: Maps delineating the boundaries of the foothills and
canyons overlay zone are on file with the community development department.
Such maps, as amended, are a part of this title as if fully described and
detailed herein.
      2.   Applies To All Development: The standards and regulations contained
in this chapter shall apply to all development that occurs within the mapped
foothills and canyons overlay zone, as the term "development" is defined at
section
13.04.040 of this title, including grading, clearing and other land disturbance
activities.
      3.   Applicability To Development On Lots Of Record: The standards and
regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all development that
occurs within the mapped foothills and canyons overlay zone on legally
subdivided lots that were recorded prior to the enactment of the ordinance
codified herein, including subsequent additions or expansions of buildings or
structures constructed prior to the enactment of said ordinance, except when a
waiver or exemption expressly allowed by this chapter has been granted.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Construction And Rules Of Interpretation; Delegation Of Authority:
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another
officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that provision shall
be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate the
responsibility to subordinates, unless the terms of the provision specify
otherwise.
      2.   Recognition Of Salt Lake City Extraterritorial Jurisdiction: The
city recognizes that Salt Lake City has extraterritorial jurisdiction for
protection of its watershed located in the canyons east of Salt Lake City from
City Creek Canyon south to Little Cottonwood Canyon. All development in the
city that is also located within Salt Lake City's watershed areas shall be
reviewed by Salt Lake City for compliance with the city's applicable watershed
protection standards prior to city approval or final permitting. Maps
delineating the boundaries of Salt Lake City's watershed areas are on file with
the community development department. Such maps, as amended, are a part of this
title as if fully described and detailed herein.
      3.   Inconsistent Provisions: When the provisions of this chapter are
inconsistent with provisions found in other chapters of this title, or with
provisions found in any other city ordinance or regulation, the most
restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.72.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Lot And Density Requirements:
      1.   General Rule: All development in the foothills and canyons overlay
zone shall comply with the standards for minimum lot size, minimum lot width,
and maximum density required in the underlying zone.
      2.   Exception To General Rule; When Underlying Zone Permits Smaller Than
One Acre Lots:
         a.   Lots Created After The Effective Date Hereof: If the underlying
zone permits a minimum lot size of smaller than one acre, then the minimum lot
size for development in this overlay zone shall be one acre.
         b.   Lots Of Record That Meet Underlying Zone's Minimum Lot Size
Requirement: If the underlying zone permits a minimum lot size of smaller than
one acre, then a lot of record approved prior to the effective date hereof that
meets the minimum lot size requirement set forth in the underlying zone
district shall have a minimum lot size of one-half (1/2) acre.
      3.   Exception To General Rule; Lots Of Record That Do Not Meet The
Underlying Zone's Minimum Lot Requirements: If a lot of record subject to this
chapter:
         a.   Was approved prior to the effective date of said ordinance; and
         b.   Does not meet the minimum lot size or lot width requirements set
forth in the underlying zone district; and
         c.   Is not subject to the substandard lot consolidation provisions
set forth in subsection A4 of this section;
then the minimum lot size or lot width requirements shall be waived and
development may proceed on said lot of record subject to compliance with all
other applicable development standards set forth in this chapter and in the
underlying zone.
      4.   Consolidation Of Substandard Lots:
         a.   General Rule; Consolidation Required: Two (2) or more lots or
parcels located in the foothills and canyons overlay zone shall be considered
to be a single, undivided lot or parcel for the purposes of this chapter, if
all the following factors apply:
            (1)   The lots or parcels are contiguous;
            (2)   The lots or parcels are in single and common ownership and
are of record on the effective date of said ordinance;
            (3)   No structures are located on the lots or parcels;
            (4)   All or part of the lots or parcels do not meet the minimum
lot area or lot width requirements set forth in this section; and
            (5)   Such lots have not been improved with individual and separate
connections to municipal water or sewer systems.
No portion of such lots or parcels subject to this consolidation provision
shall be used or sold in a manner that renders compliance with the lot width
and lot area requirements set forth in this section less feasible.
         b.   Exception To General Rule: Notwithstanding the general rule for
consolidation set forth in subsection A4a of this section, if a lot or parcel
that would otherwise be subject to the general consolidation rule meets the
minimum lot area or lot width requirements set forth in the underlying zone
district, then consolidation shall not be required.
      5.   Clustering: Clustering of development (see section
13.72.080, figures 5 and 6 of this chapter) is generally recommended and may be
required by the planning commission to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whether proposed by an applicant or required by the planning commission,
clustering of development may only be used to reduce otherwise applicable
minimum lot size requirements upon satisfaction of the following findings:
         a.   The clustering proposal meets all other applicable requirements
set forth in this chapter or in other applicable ordinances or regulations;
         b.   The clustering proposal, compared with a more traditional site
development plan, better attains the policies and objectives of this chapter,
such as providing more open space, preserving existing trees and vegetation
coverage, and preserving sensitive environmental areas such as stream
corridors, slide areas, wetlands and steep slopes;
         c.   The clustering proposal will have no significant adverse impact
on adjacent properties or development, or, if such impacts would result, the
applicant has agreed to implement appropriate mitigation measures such as
landscaping, screening, illumination standards, and other design features as
recommended by the community development director to buffer and protect
adjacent properties from the proposed clustered development; and
         d.   The architecture, height, building materials, building colors,
and other design features of the development blend with the surrounding natural
landscape and are compatible with adjacent properties or development.
      6.   Density Bonus For Clustering:
         a.   A density bonus of up to twenty five percent (25%) over the base
density permitted in the underlying zone district may be available for cluster
developments that satisfy the above standards taking into account the bonus
density.
         b.   For purposes of calculating this twenty five percent (25%)
cluster density bonus, the base density permitted in the underlying zone
district shall be calculated based on "net developable acreage", which is
defined as land with all of the following:
            (1)   Average slope less than thirty percent (30%);
            (2)   Soils of a suitable depth and type based on soil exploration
and percolation tests in accordance with the regulations of the Utah department
of environmental quality in order to ensure against adverse impacts on surface
and ground water quality;
            (3)   Minimum distance from any "stream corridor", as that term is
defined in section
13.04.040 of this title of one hundred feet (100'); and
            (4)   Free from any identified natural hazards such as flood,
avalanche, landslide, high water table and similar features.
      7.   Planned Unit Developments:
         a.   Minimum Lot Area And Lot Width: Lot areas and lot widths for
planned unit developments in the foothills and canyons overlay zone district
shall not be subject to the minimum lot area and lot width limits set forth in
this section. Instead, minimum lot areas and lot widths shall be determined on
a case by case basis by the planning commission pursuant to
chapter 13.78 of this title.
         b.   Maximum Density: Density of dwelling units per acre in a planned
unit development shall be the same as that allowed in the underlying zone
district in which the planning unit development is located.
   B.   Slope Protection Standards:
      1.   Prohibition Of Development On Steep Slopes: No development,
including clearing, excavation, and grading shall be allowed on slopes greater
than thirty percent (30%), except as expressly allowed in this chapter.
      2.   Structure Clearance From Steep Slopes: Structure clearance from
ascending or descending slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) shall conform
to the requirements set forth in applicable building code provisions.
      3.   Prohibition Of Development On Designated Ridgelines:
         a.   Except when a waiver has been granted pursuant to this chapter,
no development shall intrude into any ridgeline protection area that has been
identified and designated as part of an adopted city plan or has been
identified and designated by the city during the development review and
approval process set forth in section
13.72.050 of this chapter.
         b.   For the purposes of this chapter, designated ridgeline protection
area shall consist of prominent ridgelines that are highly visible from public
rights of way or trails, and shall include the crest of any designated hill or
slope, plus the land located within one hundred feet (100') horizontally (map
distance) on either side of the crest. (See section
13.72.080, figures 3 and 4 of this chapter.)
      4.   Steep Slopes; Open Space: One hundred percent (100%) of areas with
slope greater than thirty percent (30%) shall remain in natural private or
public open space, except as expressly allowed in this chapter.
   C.   Grading Standards:
      1.   Grading Prohibited Without Prior Approvals/Permits: No grading,
excavation, or tree/vegetation removal shall be permitted, whether to provide
for a building site, for on site utilities or services, or for any roads or
driveways, prior to issuance of a building permit in accordance with a grading
and excavation plan and report for the site approved by the community
development director.
      2.   Cutting To Create Benches: Cutting and grading to create benches or
pads for additional or larger building sites shall be avoided to the maximum
extent feasible. (See section
13.72.080, figures 5 and 6 of this chapter.)
      3.   Limits On Changing Natural Grade: The original, natural grade of a
lot shall not be raised or lowered more than four feet (4') at any point for
construction of any structure or improvement, except:
         a.   The site's original grade may be raised or lowered six feet (6')
if a retaining wall is used to reduce the steepness of manmade slopes;
provided, that the retaining wall complies with the requirements set forth in
this section.
         b.   The site's original grade may be raised or lowered more than six
feet (6') with terracing, as specified in subsection C8b of this section.
      4.   Grading For Accessory Building Pads Discouraged: Separate building
pads for accessory buildings and structures other than garages, such as tennis
courts, swimming pools, outbuildings, and similar facilities, shall be
discouraged except where the natural slope is twenty percent (20%) or less.
      5.   Limits On Graded Or Filled Manmade Slopes:
         a.   Slopes of twenty five percent (25%) or less are greatly
encouraged wherever possible.
         b.   Graded or filled manmade slopes shall not exceed a slope of fifty
percent (50%).
         c.   Cut manmade surfaces or slopes shall not exceed a slope of fifty
percent (50%) unless it is substantiated, on the basis of a site investigation
and submittal of a soils engineering or geotechnical report prepared and
certified by a qualified professional, that a cut at a steeper slope will be
stable and will not create a hazard to public or private property.
         d.   All cut, filled, and graded slopes shall be recontoured to the
natural, varied contour of the surrounding terrain.
      6.   Revegetation Required: Any slope exposed or created in a new
development shall be landscaped or revegetated pursuant to the standards and
provisions of subsection H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this section.
      7.   Excavation: Excavation for footings and foundations shall be
minimized to the maximum extent feasible in order to lessen site disturbance
and ensure compatibility with hillside and sloped terrain. Intended excavation
must be supported by detailed engineering plans submitted as part of the
application for site development plan approval.
      8.   Retaining Walls: Use of retaining walls is encouraged to reduce the
steepness of manmade slopes and to provide planting pockets conducive to
revegetation. (See section
13.72.080, figure 7 of this chapter.)
         a.   Retaining walls may be permitted to support steep slopes but
shall not exceed six feet (6') in height from the finished grade, except where
terraced as specified in subsection C8b of this section.
         b.   Terracing shall be limited to two (2) tiers. The width of the
terrace between any two (2) 4-foot vertical retaining walls shall be at least
three feet (3'). Retaining walls higher than four feet (4') shall be separated
from any other retaining wall by a minimum of five (5) horizontal feet.
Terraces created between retaining walls shall be permanently landscaped or
revegetated pursuant to subsection H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this
section.
         c.   Retaining walls shall be faced with stone or earth colored
materials similar to the surrounding natural landscape. (See
chapter 13.73, "Foothills And Canyons Site Development And Design Standards",
of this title.)
         d.   All retaining walls shall comply with the international building
code, except that when any provision of this section conflicts with any
provision set forth in the international building code, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
      9.   Filling Or Dredging Of Waterways Prohibited: Filling or dredging of
watercourses, wetlands, bullies, streambeds, or stormwater runoff channels is
prohibited, except that bridge construction is allowed pursuant to the
standards set forth in subsection J7 of this section.
      10.   Detention/Stormwater Facilities: Where detention basins and other
storm and erosion control facilities may be required, any negative visual and
aesthetic impacts on the natural landscape and topography shall be minimized to
the maximum extent feasible. (See section
13.72.080, figures 8 and 9 of this chapter.)
   D.   Streets/Roads And General Site Access: (See subsection E of this
section regarding driveway standards.)
      1.   Access to a building or development site shall be by road, street,
or private access road only.
      2.   Streets, roads, private access roads, and other vehicular routes
shall not be allowed to cross slopes between thirty percent (30%) and fifty
percent (50%) unless specifically authorized by the planning commission, upon
the favorable recommendation of the community development director, after
finding that all of the following conditions and constraints are applicable:
         a.   No alternate location for access is feasible or available;
         b.   No individual segment or increment of the street, road, private
access road, or other vehicular route that will cross slopes between thirty
percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%) exceeds one hundred feet (100') in
length;
         c.   The cumulative length of individual segments or increments that
will cross slopes between thirty percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%) does not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the total length of the street, road, private
access road, or other vehicular route; and
         d.   No significant adverse visual, environmental, or safety impacts
will result from the crossing, either by virtue of the design and construction
of the street, road, private access road, or other vehicular route as
originally proposed or as a result of incorporation of remedial improvements
provided by the developer to mitigate such impact.
      3.   Under no circumstances shall any street, road, private access road,
or other vehicular route cross slopes greater than fifty percent (50%).
      4.   Streets, roads, private access roads, and other vehicular routes
shall to the maximum extent feasible follow natural contour lines. (See section
13.72.080, figures 10 and 11 of this chapter.)
      5.   Grading for streets, roads, private access roads, and other
vehicular routes shall be limited to the cartway portion of the right of way,
plus up to an additional ten feet (10') on either side of the cartway as
needed, except that when developing access on slopes in excess of twenty five
percent (25%), only the cartway right of way shall be graded plus the minimum
area required for any necessary curb, gutter, or sidewalk improvements. The
remainder of the access right of way shall be left undisturbed to the maximum
extent feasible.
      6.   Roads, other vehicular routes, or trails may be required to provide
access or maintain existing access to adjacent lands for vehicles, pedestrians,
emergency services, and essential service and maintenance equipment.
   E.   Driveways: Driveways shall be provided to ensure safe, convenient, and
adequate access to individual buildings. Driveway access to a development shall
be consistent with the city general plan and highway plan, as amended. In
addition, provision of driveway access is subject to the following
requirements:
      1.   All driveways shall comply with the city highway and fire department
ordinances.
      2.   Driveways longer than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall
meet the following requirements:
         a.   Provision of a turnaround that meets the city road/street and
fire department standards; and
         b.   Provision of an adequate number of spaces turnouts along the
length of the driveway, as determined by the community development director in
consultation with the city's service providers.
      3.   Driveways longer than fifty feet (50') in length shall not be
allowed to cross slopes between thirty percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%)
unless specifically authorized by the planning commission, upon the favorable
recommendation of the community development director, after finding that all of
the following conditions and constraints are applicable:
         a.   No alternate location for access is feasible or available;
         b.   No individual segment or increment of the driveway that will
cross slopes between thirty percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%) exceeds one
hundred feet (100') in length;
         c.   The cumulative length of individual segments or increments of the
driveway that will cross slopes between thirty percent (30%) and fifty percent
(50%) does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the driveway's total length; and
         d.   No significant adverse visual, environmental, or safety impacts
will result from the driveway crossing, either as originally proposed or as a
result of incorporation of remedial improvements provided by the developer to
mitigate such impacts.
      4.   Under no circumstance shall any driveway cross slopes greater than
fifty percent (50%).
      5.   Driveways shall, to the maximum extent feasible, follow natural
contour lines. (See section
13.72.080, figures 10 and 11 of this chapter.)
      6.   Driveways may be shared by no more than two (2) residential units,
or by two (2) or more principal nonresidential uses, provided such
nonresidential uses together do not exceed a total of twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet of gross floor area. Shared driveways are greatly
encouraged.
      7.   Driveways to a building site shall have direct access to a public
street or to a private right of way approved by the planning commission.
Finished driveway grades shall comply with the following:
         a.   Driveways shall have a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%), or
as determined by the community development director on a case by case basis
based on health and safety concerns and the need for adequate access for city
service providers. In no case, however, shall the community development
director approve a maximum grade greater than fifteen percent (15%). Driveways
shall have a maximum grade of fifteen percent (15%).
         b.   Driveway grades within twenty feet (20') of the roadway shall not
exceed ten percent (10%). (See highway ordinance.)
   F.   Trail Access:
      1.   Dedication Required: For the purpose of providing trails necessary
for public access to public lands or trails shown on the city general plan, the
Salt Lake County regional trail plan, and the Salt Lake County trail access
plan, all development in the foothills and canyons overlay zone shall be
required to offer a dedication of an amount of land that is roughly
proportional to the demand for open space, recreational facilities, trails, or
public access to public lands or trails generated by the proposed development.
The city shall have the sole option whether to accept a reasonable money fee in
lieu of land dedication.
      2.   Verification Required: All land offered for dedication for trails or
public access to trails shall be verified on the ground by the community
development department before approval of the site plan. Land offered for
dedication for trails shall be located so that:
         a.   Proposed trail construction and maintenance is feasible; and
         b.   Side slopes do not exceed seventy percent (70%); and
         c.   Rock cliffs and other insurmountable physical obstructions are
avoided.
The city shall have the sole option of rejecting the applicant's offered land
dedication and instead select more suitable land; based on the above factors,
applicable plans, opportunities to link to existing or planned trails and
public lands, and/or suitability of the terrain for trail use.
      3.   Nature Of Interest Dedicated: At the city's sole option, dedications
for trails or public access may be of a fee or less than fee interest to either
the city, another unit of government, or nonprofit land conservation
organization approved by the city.
      4.   Bonus Density Allowed For Certain Dedications: The planning
commission may allow up to twenty five percent (25%) of the maximum allowable
density attributable to areas of the site with greater than thirty percent
(30%) slope to be transferred to the developable areas of the site if the
applicant shows that the offered dedication is beyond what would be roughly
proportional to the demand for such trails or trail access generated by the
proposed development. The planning commission may reduce the applicable minimum
lot area requirement within the site's developable area if necessary to
accommodate the transferred density.
      5.   Liability Releases: Liability releases related to dedicated lands
shall be prepared for a landowner in accord with the state landowner liability
act of 1987, as amended.
   G.   Fences:
      1.   No fence shall be constructed or installed unless shown on the
approved site development plan.
      2.   No fence shall be constructed or installed outside the designated
limits of disturbance on a site, except as required by the city (such as fenced
corrals for horses or other animals) or along property boundaries. (See section
13.72.080, figure 12 of this chapter.)
      3.   Fences in the front yards and along roadways shall not exceed forty
two inches (42") in height.
      4.   Fences in identified wildlife corridors shall be strongly
discouraged, but in no case shall exceed forty two inches (42") in height.
      5.   Fences shall conform to the standards set forth in
chapter 13.73 of this title, foothills and canyons development standards.
   H.   Tree And Vegetation Protection: (See section
13.72.080, figure 13 of this chapter.)
      1.   Purposes: Protection of existing tree and vegetation cover is
intended to:
         a.   Preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of the city's
foothills and canyons;
         b.   Encourage site design techniques that preserve the natural
environment and enhance the developed environment;
         c.   Control erosion, slippage, and sediment runoff into streams and
waterways;
         d.   Increase slope stability;
         e.   Protect wildlife habitat and migration corridors; and
         f.   Conserve energy, in proximity to structures, by reducing building
heating and cooling costs.
      2.   Application And Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall
apply to all development on real property that is located in the foothills and
canyons overlay zone, except that the following developments and activities
shall be exempt from this section:
         a.   The removal of dead or naturally fallen trees or vegetation, or
such that the city finds to be a threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare;
         b.   The selective and limited removal of trees or vegetation
necessary to obtain clear visibility at driveways, intersections, or for the
purpose of performing authorized field survey work;
         c.   The removal of trees or vegetation on land zoned or lawfully used
for agricultural and forestry activities, including tree farms and approved
forestry management practices. In the event a site is substantially cleared of
trees pursuant to such legitimate activities, however, no development or site
plan applications for other types of development shall be accepted by the city
for thirty six (36) months from the date the clearing is completed.
      3.   Tree/Vegetation Removal:
         a.   Outside Limits Of Disturbance: No trees or vegetation shall be
removed outside the approved limits of disturbance except as specifically
exempted in this section or chapter.
         b.   Within Limits Of Disturbance: "Significant trees", as defined in
section
13.04.040 of this title, removed from within the limits of disturbance shall be
replaced as set forth in subsection H4 of this section.
         c.   Wildfire Hazards And Tree/Vegetation Removal: In areas determined
by fire prevention officials as being highly susceptible to fire hazards,
vegetation up to thirty feet (30') from the perimeter of a structure shall be
selectively pruned and thinned for fire protection purposes.
         d.   Tree/Vegetation Removal For Views Prohibited: No trees or
vegetation shall be removed for the purpose of providing open views to or from
structures on a site.
      4.   Replacement Of Significant Trees: When a "significant tree" or
trees, as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, are removed from either inside or outside the
established limits of disturbance, the applicant or developer shall replace
such trees on the lot, either inside or outside the established limits of
disturbance, according to the following schedule and requirements:
         a.   A significant deciduous tree that is removed shall be replaced by
three (3) trees with a minimum size of two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
         b.   A significant coniferous tree that is removed shall be replaced
by two (2) trees with a minimum height of eight feet (8').
         c.   Acceptable replacement trees shall be determined by a person or
firm qualified by training or experience to have expert knowledge of the
subject.
         d.   Replacement trees shall be maintained through an establishment
period of at least three (3) years, except that single-family dwellings shall
have an applicable establishment period of only one year. The applicant shall
post an improvement warranty bond for all public street trees guaranteeing the
survival and health of all replacement street trees during the establishment
period.
      5.   Revegetation And Land Reclamation Plan:
         a.   On a parcel of land that has been or will be altered from its
natural condition by manmade activities, a revegetation and land reclamation
plan prepared and certified by a qualified professional may be required for
review and approval by the community development director.
         b.   The revegetation and land reclamation plan shall depict the type,
size, and location of any vegetation and trees being planted and illustrate how
the site will be recontoured in such a fashion and with sufficient topsoil to
ensure that revegetation is feasible.
         c.   Any slope exposed or created in new development shall be
landscaped or revegetated with native or adopted trees and other native or
adopted plant material. New vegetation shall be equivalent to or exceed the
amount and erosion control characteristics of the original vegetation cover in
order to mitigate adverse environmental and visual effects.
         d.   On manmade slopes of twenty five percent (25%) or greater, plant
materials with deep rooting characteristics shall be selected that will
minimize erosion and reduce surface runoff. The planting basin should be kept
level with a raised berm around the base of the plant to help retain moisture.
         e.   To the maximum extent feasible, topsoil that is removed during
construction shall be conserved for later use on areas requiring revegetation
or landscaping, such as cut and fill slopes.
         f.   The plan shall also indicate a time frame for revegetation that
is acceptable to the city and that takes into account optimal seasonal growing
conditions.
      6.   Tree/Vegetation Protection During Construction And Grading
Activities:
         a.   Limits of disturbance as established in accordance with the
provisions of section
13.72.040 of this chapter shall be shown on the final plans for development and
shall be clearly delineated on site with fencing or other materials or methods
approved by the community development director prior to the commencement of
excavation, grading, or construction activities on the site.
         b.   Within the limits of disturbance, fencing, at a minimum, should
be placed around each significant tree and around stands of twelve (12) or more
smaller trees a distance equal to the size of the individual or outermost
tree's drip zone. (See section
13.04.040 of this title, significant trees.)
            (1)   For purposes of this subsection, the drip zone is calculated
by measuring the diameter of the tree at breast height. Every inch of tree
trunk diameter, for example, equates to one foot (1') of drip zone.
            (2)   No construction, grading, equipment or material storage, or
any other activity shall be allowed within this area, and the fencing shall
remain in place until all land alteration, construction, and development
activities are completed.
         c.   If it is necessary to fill over the root zone, compacted soils
shall be avoided by sandwiching fabric, rocks and more fabric under the area to
be filled.
         d.   Fill placed directly on the roots shall not exceed a maximum of
six inches (6") in depth.
         e.   If fill creates a tree well or depression around a tree or
shrubs, such area shall be drained so that the vegetation is not drowned by the
pooling of rainfall or irrigation.
         f.   If a tree's roots must be cut, the branches shall be trimmed by
an amount equal to the percent of roots that were lost. Roots shall be pruned
cleanly prior to digging and not ripped off by heavy equipment. Cutting more
than thirty percent (30%) of the roots endangers the health of the tree, and
over forty percent (40%) affects the tree's stability.
         g.   Utility trenches near trees should be avoided. If a line must be
near a tree, tunneling, auguring, or other mitigation measures shall be used.
   I.   Natural Hazards: All development in the foothills and canyons overlay
zone shall comply with the requirements and standards set forth in
chapter 13.75, "Natural Hazard Areas", of this title. A natural hazards report
required by
chapter 13.75 of this title may be combined with any of the plans and reports
required by the provisions of this chapter, including geotechnical, slope, and
grading reports. The city may have a geologist review all natural hazards
reports and submit his recommendations in writing to the community development
director or planning commission prior to final action on the site plan for
development.
   J.   Stream Corridor And Wetlands Protection:
      1.   Purposes: The following requirements and standards are intended to
promote, preserve, and enhance the important hydrologic, biological,
ecological, aesthetic, recreational, and educational functions that stream
corridors, associated riparian areas, and wetlands provide.
      2.   Boundary Delineation: Unless previously delineated by the city,
boundaries for stream corridors and wetland areas shall be delineated according
to the following provisions:
         a.   Stream corridor and wetland area delineation shall be performed
by a qualified professional that has demonstrated experience necessary to
conduct site analysis. Delineations shall be subject to the approval of the
community development director.
         b.   Stream corridors shall be delineated at the "ordinary high water
mark", as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title. Stream corridors shall not include ephemeral streams
or ditches that are commonly known to be irrigation ditches and that do not
contribute to irrigation ditches and that do not contribute to the preservation
and enhancement of fisheries or wildlife.
         c.   Boundary delineation of wetlands shall be established using the
federal manual for identifying and delineating jurisdictional wetlands, dated
January 10, 1989, and jointly published by the U.S. environmental protection
agency, the U.S. fish and wildlife service, the U.S. army corps of engineers,
and the U.S. soil conservation service. Subsequent revisions of the federal
manual shall not be incorporated into this delineation methodology. Although
the federal manual may change in the future, the city will use this referenced
manual as a basis for wetland determination.
      3.   Prohibited Activities: No person shall engage in any activity that
will disturb, remove, fill, dredge, clear, destroy, or alter any area,
including vegetation, within stream corridors, wetlands, and their setbacks as
set forth below, except as may be expressly allowed in this chapter.
      4.   Minimum Setbacks: Except where Salt Lake City, pursuant to its
recognized extraterritorial jurisdiction, has defined a greater setback from
watershed resources (including stream corridors and wetland areas), the
following minimum setbacks shall be required:
         a.   Stream Corridors: All buildings, accessory structures, leach
fields, and parking lots shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100')
horizontally (plan view) from the ordinary high water mark of stream corridors.
(See section
13.72.080, figure 14 of this chapter.)
         b.   Wetlands: All buildings, accessory structures, leach fields, and
parking areas or lots shall be set back at least fifty thousand feet (50,000')
horizontally (map distance), from the delineated edge of a wetland.
         c.   Open Space/Landscaping Credit For Setback Areas: All setback
areas shall be credited toward any relevant private open space or landscaping
requirements, but shall not be credited toward trail access dedication
requirements.
      5.   Ephemeral Streams; Prohibited Activities: Development shall not be
permitted within the channel of an ephemeral stream, as defined by its ordinary
high water mark, except that the planning commission upon the recommendation of
the community development director may grant waivers or modifications from this
prohibition upon a finding that the development will have no adverse
environmental impacts, or that such impacts will be substantially mitigated.
      6.   Preservation Of Vegetation: All existing vegetation within the
stream corridor or wetland setback area shall be preserved, and where necessary
to provide adequate screening or to repair damaged riparian areas, supplemented
with additional native or adopted planting and landscaping.
      7.   Bridges: The construction of bridges over a stream corridor and
within the stream setback area is permitted, provided such bridges are planned
and constructed so as to minimize impacts on the stream corridor. (See section
13.72.080, figure 15 of this chapter and subsection
13.73.080C of this title, bridges for stream crossings.)
   K.   Wildlife Habitat Protection:
      1.   Intent And Purpose: The city finds that its foothills and canyon
areas provide important wildlife habitat for a wide variety of animal and bird
species. As a result of past development activities, many habitat areas have
been significantly impaired, altered, fragmented, and in some cases destroyed.
In combination with the tree/vegetation and stream corridor/wetlands protection
standards set forth above, the following requirements have been developed to
promote and preserve valuable wildlife habitats and to protect them from
adverse effects and potentially irreversible impacts.
      2.   Applicability: The requirements of this subsection shall apply to
development on real property in the foothills and canyons overlay zone that
contains wildlife habitats designated as "critical summer/winter [value] use",
as shown on the city wildlife habitat maps, as amended, on file with the
community development department.
      3.   Development Limitations In Areas Of Critical Habitat: All
development subject to this subsection shall, to the maximum extent feasible,
incorporate the following principles in establishing the limits of disturbance
and siting buildings, structures, roads, trails, and other similar facilities:
         a.   Maintain buffers between areas dominated by human activities and
core areas of wildlife habitat, with more intense human activities, such as
automobile and pedestrian traffic, relegated to more distant zones away from
the core habitat. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
         b.   Facilitate wildlife movement across areas dominated by human
activities by:
            (1)   Maintaining connections between open space parcels on
adjacent parcels; (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
            (2)   Locating roads and recreational trails away from natural
travel corridors used by wildlife such as riparian areas;
            (3)   Minimizing fencing types that inhibit the movement of
wildlife species; and
            (4)   Minimizing the visual contrast between human dominated areas,
including individual lots, and less disturbed terrain in surrounding areas (for
example, by retaining or planting native vegetation and trees around a house or
accessory structure).
         c.   Mimic features of the local natural landscape in developed areas
by:
            (1)   Retaining predevelopment, high quality habitat to the maximum
extent feasible, including large patches of natural, vegetated areas that have
not yet been fragmented by roads or residential development;
            (2)   Minimizing levels of disturbance to trees, the understory,
and other structural landscape features during construction;
            (3)   Designing house lots in a fashion consistent with local
natural habitats, for example, by preserving and landscaping with natural,
native vegetation; and
            (4)   Enhancing the habitat value of degraded predevelopment
landscapes with selective plantings.
      4.   Referral Requirements And Planning Commission Action:
         a.   Site development plan applications subject to this subsection
shall be referred to the Utah division of wildlife resources for review,
comment, and recommendations. The Utah division of wildlife resources' comments
and recommendations shall be incorporated into the staff report or in some
other way transmitted in writing to the community development director (for
permitted uses) or to the planning commission (for conditional uses and
subdivisions) prior to final action on submitted proposals.
         b.   The community development director and planning commission shall
give special consideration to wildlife habitats that are determined by the Utah
division of wildlife resources in their review to be of unique or critical
value, and may require project modifications or special conditions recommended
to mitigate impacts on critical wildlife habitat.
         c.   The planning commission may deny a development proposal if it
finds that the proposed development will have significant adverse impacts on
critical wildlife habitat that cannot be adequately mitigated.
            (1)   Permitted Uses: If the community development director finds
that a proposal for a permitted use may have significant adverse impacts on
critical wildlife habitat that cannot be adequately mitigated, the site
development plan shall be referred to the planning commission for final action.
            (2)   Definition: For purposes of this subsection, "significant
adverse impact on critical wildlife habitat" means elimination, reduction, and/
or fragmentation of wildlife habitat to the point that viability of an
individual species is threatened in the city and the diversity of wildlife
species occurring in the city is reduced.
   L.   Site Development And Design Standards: In addition to the development
standards set forth in this section, all residential and commercial development
within the foothills and canyons overlay zone shall comply with the development
design standards set forth in
chapter 13.73, "Foothills And Canyons Site Development And Design Standards",
of this title. To the extent that standards in
chapter 13.73 of this title conflict with the requirements set forth in this
chapter, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
   M.   Traffic:
      1.   Impact Study Required: Unless waived, a traffic and parking impact
study shall be required as part of the site development plan application for
the following developments in the foothills and canyons overlay zone:
         a.   All residential development that creates a projected increase in
traffic volumes equal to or greater than ten percent (10%) of current road/
street capacity as determined by the community development director.
         b.   All nonresidential development that creates a projected increase
in traffic volumes equal to or greater than fifty (50) trip ends per peak hour.
         c.   All development that affects a roadway identified by the
community development director as having an unacceptable level of service
(LOC).
      2.   Impact Study; Contents: A traffic and parking impact study shall
address, at a minimum, the items specified in the submittal requirements for
development proposals in the foothills and canyons overlay zone, which document
is incorporated by reference.
      3.   Standard Of Review: All development subject to this subsection shall
demonstrate that the peak hour levels of service on adjacent roadways and as
impacted intersections after development shall comply with the city's current
transportation and impact mitigation policies.
      4.   Access Management Plan Required: All development required by this
subsection to submit an impact study shall also provide an overall access
management plan to ensure free flowing access to the site and avoid congestion
and unsafe conditions on adjacent public roads and streets. The access
management plan shall be combined with the required traffic and parking impact
study. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 9-7-2023)
13.72.040: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE:
   A.   Establishment Of Limits Of Disturbance: For every development subject
to this chapter, the community development director shall establish "limits of
disturbance" that indicate the specific areas of a site in which construction
and development activity must be contained. For single-family residential
development, limits of disturbance shall include that area required for the
principal structure, an accessory structure, utilities, services, drainage
facilities, and a septic tank. Areas required for driveways and leach fields
are not included. (See section
13.72.080, figures 16 through 18 of this chapter.)
   B.   Criteria For Establishing Limits Of Disturbance: In establishing limits
of disturbance, the following criteria and standards shall be considered and
applied:
      1.   Minimize visual impacts from the development, including, but not
limited to, screening from adjacent and downhill properties, ridgeline area
protection, and protection of scenic views;
      2.   Erosion prevention and control, including, but not limited to,
protection of steep slopes and natural drainage channels (see subsections
13.72.030B, "Slope Protection Standards", and 13.72.030L, "Site Development And
Design Standards", of this chapter);
      3.   Fire prevention and safety, including, but not limited to, location
of trees and vegetation near structures (see subsection
13.72.030H3 of this chapter, wildfire hazards and tree/vegetation removal);
      4.   Preservation of significant trees or vegetation (see subsection
13.72.030H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this chapter);
      5.   Conservation of water, including, but not limited to, preservation
of existing native vegetation, reduction in amounts of irrigated areas, and
similar considerations;
      6.   Wildlife habitat protection, including, but not limited to,
preservation of critical wildlife habitat and identified migration corridors
and routes (see subsection
13.72.030K, "Wildlife Habitat Protection", of this chapter);
      7.   Stream corridor and wetland protection and buffering (see subsection
13.72.030J, "Stream Corridor And Wetlands Protection", of this chapter);
      8.   Preservation of the maximum amount of the site's natural topography,
tree cover, and vegetation.
   C.   Zero Lot Lines Allowed: Where appropriate to preserve or to protect
steep slopes or other natural features, a structure may be located on a lot in
such a manner that one or both of the side facades of a structure rest directly
on a lot line. This provision shall not be interpreted to exempt a structure
from any applicable building and fire code provisions or requirements.
   D.   Limits Of Disturbance May Be Noncontiguous: Limits of disturbance
necessary to accommodate proposed development may be noncontiguous in order to
best meet the criteria and standards set forth in this section. (See section
13.72.080, figures 16 through 18 of this chapter.)
   E.   Clustering: Clustering of building pads and parking areas within a
building site is strongly encouraged and may be required to minimize the size
of the limits of disturbance and to maintain the maximum amount of open space
in the development. (See section
13.72.080, figures 17 and 18 of this chapter.)
   F.   Maximum Limits Of Disturbance:
      1.   Single-Family Residential Uses: For lots or parcels less than one
acre in size, the limits of disturbance for an individual single-family use and
any accessory structure shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
unless:
         a.   Significant existing site vegetation is retained; or
         b.   Remedial revegetation and land reclamation improvements which
substantially advance the purposes of this chapter have been proposed and will
be implemented on the site in accordance with a revegetation and land
reclamation plan reviewed and approved by the community development director.
In such cases, the limits of disturbance for lots or parcels less than one acre
in size may be increased up to but not to exceed fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet.
For lots or parcels one acre in size or greater, the limits of disturbance for
an individual single-family use and any accessory structure shall not exceed
twelve thousand (12,000) square feet unless the aforementioned conditions
(retention of significant existing site vegetation or submittal and
implementation of an approved revegetation and land reclamation plan) are
provided, in which case the limits of disturbance may be increased up to but
not to exceed eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
      2.   All Other Land Uses: The maximum limits of disturbance, including
parking areas and accessory buildings and structures, shall be determined on a
case by case basis. Areas for leach fields constructed in connection with an on
site sewer system shall not be included in the determination of limits of
disturbance, but must be revegetated with native vegetation in accordance with
state regulations for individual wastewater systems. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.72.050: APPROVAL PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE FOOTHILLS AND CANYONS
OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purposes: The purpose of the approval procedures set forth in this
section is to ensure compliance with the land use standards and provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and codes, while encouraging
quality development in the foothills and canyons reflective of the city's
goals, policies, and objectives set forth in this chapter, and the city general
plan.
   B.   Applicability: All development proposed in the foothills and canyons
overlay zone is subject to the site development plan approval procedures set
forth in this section. No development or construction activity, including tree/
vegetation removal and grading, or subdivision of land, shall occur on property
subject to this chapter until a site development plan has been approved.
      1.   Permitted Uses: Site development plans for uses permitted by the
underlying zone may be finally approved by the community development director
upon substantiation of compliance with the land use standards and provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and codes.
      2.   Conditional Uses: Site development plans for conditional uses shall
be submitted in a form that satisfies the requirements of both this chapter and
the conditional use provisions (section
13.08.040 of this title) and shall be subject to final approval by the planning
commission pursuant to the process set forth in this section.
      3.   Subdivisions: Site development plans for subdivisions shall be
submitted in a form that satisfies the requirements of both this chapter and
the subdivision provisions of
chapter 13.10 of this title and shall be subject to the same review and
approval process as set forth therein.
   C.   Preapplication Meeting: A preapplication meeting with the community
development director is required prior to submitting a site development plan
application. The purposes of the preapplication meeting are:
      1.   To provide an opportunity for the city to explain the site
development plan review and approval process;
      2.   To discuss the proposed development of the site and its relationship
to site conditions and area characteristics;
      3.   To describe applicable provisions of this chapter and other codes
and ordinances; and
      4.   To clarify the scope of submittal requirements.
         a.   Attendance: In addition to the community development director,
other participants in the preapplication meeting may include the city
geologist, representatives from the health department, and any other person or
entity the city deems appropriate.
         b.   Request For Preapplication Meeting: To request a preapplication
meeting, the applicant shall submit a request on a form approved by the
community development department, together with any reasonable fee and
materials that the community development department deems necessary. The
materials and form submitted for the preapplication meeting shall not be
considered an application for site development plan approval.
         c.   Scheduling: Upon submittal of the applicant's form and materials,
the development proposal shall be scheduled for consideration and discussion at
the next regularly scheduled preapplication meeting.
   D.   Application For Site Development Plan Approval:
      1.   Submittal Requirements: Upon conclusion of the preapplication
meeting process, the applicant shall submit an application form, together with
the maps, plans, and reports described in the document entitled "submittal
requirements for development in the foothills and canyons overlay zone",
incorporated herein by reference, and any applicable fees, to the community
development department. In the event a waiver from this chapter's slope
protection standards for lots of record is being requested (see subsection
13.72.060A of this chapter), then such request shall also be filed with the
application. All submitted materials shall be available for public review.
         a.   Waiver/Modification Of Analysis And Study Requirements: If, as a
result of the preapplication meeting assessment of the development proposal and
any site field inspections that may have been conducted, the community
development director determines that the projected size, complexity,
anticipated impacts, or other factors associated with the proposed development
are such that a full and adequate analysis of the development may be conducted
without requiring all of the materials referenced in subsection D1 of this
section, then such materials as are determined to be unnecessary for the
analysis may be waived or modified by the director.
         b.   Corrections And Additional Information Requirements: The
community development director or, in the case of conditional uses or
subdivisions, the planning commission may require correction of any submitted
information found to be in error. Additional information as may be necessary to
substantiate compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter and
other applicable codes and ordinances may also be required.
         c.   Incomplete Applications: Applications that do not meet the
submittal requirements as set forth in this chapter shall not be accepted.
      2.   Acceptance Of Applications: The community development director shall
assess submitted applications with respect to their compliance with the
"submittal requirements for review of development proposals in the foothills
and canyons overlay zone", either in whole or as modified as authorized herein,
and notify the applicant in writing either of the adequacy and acceptance of
the application or of the specific deficiencies or errors in the submitted
materials that need to be provided prior to acceptance.
      3.   Staff Review: Upon acceptance of a complete application package, the
community development director shall review the development proposal and
document the assessment process and its conclusions through the preparation of
a written staff report describing the extent to which the proposed development,
as submitted, complies with the standards and criteria set forth in subsection
E of this section and in other applicable city and state ordinances and codes.
The report shall also specify all areas of noncompliance together with such
modifications and conditions of approval as may be necessary to incorporate
into the development to bring it into full compliance, if possible, with
applicable code and ordinance requirements and to mitigate identified impacts.
Inability to achieve compliance with applicable standards and criteria shall
warrant denial of the proposal as submitted.
         a.   Technical And Outside Agency Assistance: In making a
determination on a site development plan application, the community development
director may seek technical and policy recommendations from other public
agencies with legal jurisdiction over matters affecting or affected by the
proposed development, such as, but not limited to, the health department; Utah
division of wildlife resources; Utah division of forestry, fire and state
lands; U.S. forest services; and U.S. soil conservation services.
         b.   Failure Not Deemed Approval: Failure to complete and document the
assessment process regarding the development's compliance with applicable
regulations and standards shall not be deemed to be approval.
      4.   Community Development Director Consideration And Action On Site
Development Plans For Permitted Uses: Upon completion of the review and report
on an application for site development plan approval for a permitted use, the
community development director shall take final action on the proposal as
submitted.
         a.   Action: The community development director shall take one of the
following actions, based on application of the standards for review set forth
in subsection E of this section:
            (1)   Approve the application, either as originally proposed or as
modified by mutual agreement through the development review process;
            (2)   Approve the application with such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as are necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and
title, subject to subsection D8, "Compliance With Conditions Of Approval", of
this section; or
            (3)   Deny the application on the basis of specific findings
communicated to the applicant in writing.
         b.   Notice: The community development director shall notify any
applicant in writing of the final disposition on an application for site
development plan approval for a permitted use.
         c.   Appeals From Community Development Director Action: Appeals of a
decision of the community development director on an application for site
development plan approval for a permitted use shall be filed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in
chapter 13.09 of this title.
      5.   Community Development Director Consideration And Recommendation On
Site Development Plans For Conditional Uses And Subdivisions: Upon completion
of the review and report on an application for site development plan approval
for a conditional use or subdivision, the community development director shall
forward the request, together with a recommendation for final action, to the
planning commission. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      6.   Planning Commission Consideration And Action On Site Development
Plans For Conditional Uses And Subdivisions: Upon receipt of the community
development director's staff report and recommendation, the planning commission
shall review the application, site development plan, and related materials and
make a final decision on the proposal.
         a.   Action: The planning commission shall take one of the following
actions, based on application of the standards for review set forth in
subsection E of this section:
            (1)   Approve the application, either as recommended by the
community development director or as further modified by mutual agreement with
the applicant during the planning commission's deliberations;
            (2)   Approve the application with such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter
and title, subject to subsection D8, "Compliance With Conditions Of Approval",
of this section; or
            (3)   Deny the application on the basis of specific findings
communicated to the applicant in writing.
         b.   Optional Public Hearing: Where the planning commission finds that
the size, complexity, projected impacts, proximity to conflicting land uses, or
any other aspects of the proposed development may raise issues of particular
concern to the general public and welfare, the planning commission may hold a
public hearing pursuant to "Conditional Use Permit" noticing procedures as
required in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
            (1)   A copy of the planning commission's agenda shall be posted as
required in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
      7.   Appeals From Planning Commission Action: Appeals may be made by any
party aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission on an application
for site development plan approval. All such appeals shall be to the city
council pursuant to the procedures set forth in
chapter 13.09 of this title. The city council shall apply the review standards
set forth in subsection E of this section in determining an appeal.
      8.   Compliance With Conditions Of Approval:
         a.   Preliminary Approval Only: If the director of community
development, planning commission, or city council on appeal, condition approval
of a site development plan application upon receipt of additional information,
amendments, or other actions, the decision maker's action shall only be
considered a preliminary approval of the site development plan application.
         b.   Final Approval Upon Satisfaction Of Conditions: Except as
specified in subsection D8d of this section, the community development director
is authorized to grant final approval of the site development plan application
only after all of the conditions and requirements of the preliminary approval
have been met and satisfied. Where the conditions require the applicant to
obtain necessary city or state permits, the applicant's failure to comply shall
result in a denial of the site development plan. A determination that the
applicant has complied with all conditions shall, together with the amended
plan, constitute final site development plan approval. The community
development director shall, in either event, notify the applicant in writing of
the final disposition of the request.
         c.   Failure To Comply With Conditions Of Preliminary Approval;
Appeal:
            (1)   If the community development director's determination is that
the applicant has not substantially complied with all of the required
conditions of approval for a conditional use or subdivision, the site
development plan application shall be denied and any subsequent applicant
revisions or modifications shall be considered a new application subject to all
the requirements and procedures herein.
            (2)   The applicant may appeal the compliance determination of the
community development director on a conditional use or subdivision to the
planning commission pursuant to the procedure set forth in
chapter 13.09 of this title.
         d.   Planning Commission Consideration Of Final Approvals: The
planning commission may require as a condition of preliminary approval that a
site development plan application be brought back before the commission for
final consideration and approval.
   E.   Standards For Review: The following standards shall be utilized in the
consideration of and subsequent action on applications for site development
plan review and approval. Failure to comply with any of the following shall
constitute sufficient grounds for denial of a development subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
      1.   The development shall be consistent with the purposes and intent of
this chapter, and with the policies, goals, and objectives of any applicable
plan, including the city general plan, the county regional trails plan, as such
plans are amended from time to time;
      2.   The development complies with the requirements set forth in section
13.72.030, "Development Standards", of this chapter, except to the extent
modifications and waivers have been expressly granted;
      3.   The development complies with all applicable development
regulations, standards, requirements, or plans adopted by the state, including,
but not limited to, water quality and wastewater regulations;
      4.   Construction, grading, and development activities are restricted to
limits of disturbance that comply with the standards and criteria set forth in
section
13.72.040, "Establishment Of Limits Of Disturbance", of this chapter.
   F.   Time Limit And Effect Of Site Development Plan Approval:
      1.   Construction In Compliance With Approved Site Development Plan And
Conditions Of Approval Required: A building permit issued pursuant to this site
development plan approval process must reference all conditions or stipulations
applicable to such approval. All development, construction, and use shall be in
accordance with the approved site development plan.
      2.   Valid For Two Years: An approved site development plan shall be
valid for a period of twenty four (24) months from the date of the community
development director's or planning commission's action granting final approval.
      3.   Issuance Of Building Permit Within Two Year Period: A building
permit may be obtained at any time within the twenty four (24) month period. If
a building permit is not timely issued within the two (2) year period, approval
of the site plan shall automatically lapse and be null and void.
      4.   Extensions Of Time:
         a.   Phasing: A building permit issued for any phase of a development
that has received site development plan approval pursuant to this chapter shall
extend the life of the site development plan for the entire development for an
additional twenty four (24) months from the date of issuance of the building
permit. If any successive twenty four (24) month period expires before a
building permit is issued for a subsequent phase or phases, then the site
development plan approval shall automatically lapse and be null and void as to
all undeveloped or unbuilt phases of the development.
         b.   Other Extensions: A twelve (12) month extension of the life of
the site development plan may be obtained subject to paying an extension fee
equal to one times the original filing fee for the site plan application. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.72.060: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Waiver Of Slope Protection Standards For Lots Of Record:
      1.   Subject to the conditions set forth in subsection A2 of this
section, the planning commission may waive or modify the following standards as
applied to development on lots of record and in subdivisions that were approved
prior to the effective date hereof:
         a.   Slope protection standards regarding prohibition of development
on slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) or in ridgeline protection areas,
as set forth in subsection
13.72.030B of this chapter; or
         b.   Limitations on the crossing of slopes greater than thirty percent
(30%) with any street, road, private access road or other vehicular route, as
addressed in subsections
13.72.030D3 and D4 of this chapter.
      2.   The planning commission may waive or modify the aforementioned
standards only upon substantiation of compliance with the following findings:
         a.   Strict compliance with the slope protection standards in
subsection
13.72.030B or 13.72.030D3 and D4 of this chapter would render the site
completely undevelopable; or
         b.   Strict compliance with the slope protection standards in
subsection
13.72.030B or 13.72.030D3 and D4 of this chapter would result in a substantial
economic hardship, not created by the applicant or otherwise self-imposed; and
         c.   The development conforms with all other development, site design,
and environmental standards set forth in this chapter, in
chapter 13.73, "Foothills And Canyons Site Development And Design Standards",
of this title and in all other applicable ordinances and codes.
      3.   Notwithstanding its discretion to grant waivers for lots of record
from the slope protection standards set forth in this chapter, in no case shall
the planning commission permit development other than roads on slopes greater
than forty percent (40%).
      4.   In granting a waiver from or modification of the slope and ridgeline
protection standards set forth in subsection
13.72.030B of this chapter, the planning commission may impose such conditions
as are reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the impacts of the proposed
development on adjacent properties and area characteristics. Such conditions
may include, for example, but are not limited to, a reduction in the maximum
building height otherwise permitted by the underlying zone (e.g., a reduction
to 20 feet from the 30 feet maximum building height permitted in the FR zone).
   B.   Administrative Modification Of Standards Allowed: In establishing the
limits of disturbance for developments subject to this chapter, the community
development director shall have the discretion to modify the following
development standards up to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%), or greater
if specifically permitted by this subsection.
      1.   Minimum lot area requirements, as set forth in subsection
13.72.030A of this chapter. Additionally, modifications of greater than twenty
five percent (25%) may be approved by the planning commission pursuant to the
clustering provisions of subsection
13.72.030A5 of this chapter;
      2.   Driveway access standards, as set forth in subsection
13.72.030E of this chapter;
      3.   Tree and vegetation protection standards, as set forth in subsection
13.72.030H of this chapter;
      4.   Perennial stream corridor and wetlands setbacks, as set forth in
subsection
13.72.030J of this chapter and subsection
13.73.080B of this title, except that greater modifications may be permitted as
follows:
         a.   Modifications of up to fifty percent (50%) may be allowed where
strict application of these setback standards would render a site
undevelopable, provided that all other federal, state, and city laws are
complied with.
         b.   For renovations, alterations, or expansions of a building or
structure legally existing on the effective date hereof, modifications
exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the required stream corridor setback may
be allowed by the planning commission, provided the applicant shows the
following:
            (1)   No alternative location for the development that is further
from the stream is feasible or available; and
            (2)   The renovation, alternation, or expansion does not increase
the gross floor area of the original, existing building or structure by more
than fifty percent (50%); and
            (3)   The applicant shows that creative architectural or
environmental solutions can be applied and used to achieve the purposes of
stream corridor protection as set forth in this chapter.
      5.   Site and building design standards, as set forth in subsection
13.72.030L of this chapter. The community development director may only modify
the aforementioned standards upon substantiation of compliance with the
following findings:
         a.   Strict application of the standards would render a site
undevelopable; or
         b.   Modification would result in less visual impact, more effective
preservation of existing mature trees, vegetation and riparian areas, or
protection of wildlife habitat.
In no case shall the modification cause the maximum limits of disturbance set
forth in subsection
13.72.040F of this chapter to be exceeded. Appeals of decisions on
modifications shall be addressed as set forth in
chapter 13.09 of this title, as applicable.
   C.   Violations/Penalties For Unauthorized Land Disturbance And Tree/
Vegetation Removal: Any applicant, whether as principal, agent, employee, or
other, who violates the provisions of this chapter by removing trees or
vegetation or exceeding the prescribed limits of disturbance shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by law and/or shall be subject to
civil penalties as provided by law. Such applicant who violates this chapter
shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person. In addition, any applicant violating the provisions
of this chapter shall replace all trees/vegetation illegally removed pursuant
to the standards set forth in subsection
13.72.030H of this chapter.
   D.   Improvement Competition Assurance: Guarantee bonds for required public
improvements required under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of
the subdivision regulations set out at
chapter 13.10 and section
13.01.100 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 9-7-2023)
13.72.070: DEFINITIONS:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.72.080: FIGURES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4944.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4946.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4948.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4950.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4952.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4954.gif]
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.73
FOOTHILLS AND CANYONS SITE DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.73.010: Purpose And Intent
13.73.020: Using This Chapter
13.73.030: Site Selection And Planning Standards
13.73.040: Building Scale And Design
13.73.050: Building Materials And Colors
13.73.060: Landscaping And Vegetation
13.73.070: Grading
13.73.080: Drainage
13.73.090: Access, Circulation And Off Street Parking
13.73.100: Fences
13.73.110: Night Lighting
13.73.120: Figures
13.73.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The general purpose of these standards is to promote development that
will balance the rights of the landowner with protection of the city's
sensitive lands, especially its irreplaceable foothill and canyon environments.
Many of these standards are broad in nature to allow flexibility in design so
development can be evaluated on a site by site basis, while ensuring that
development will be comparable with the natural landscape, and consistent with
the public welfare.
   B.   The development standards contained herein are intended specifically to
accomplish the following purposes:
      1.   Preserve and enhance the beauty of the landscape by encouraging the
maximum retention of natural topographic features, such as drainage swales,
streams, slopes, ridgelines, rock outcroppings, vistas, natural plant
formations, trees, and similar features;
      2.   Encouraging planning, design, and development of building sites in a
manner that provides the maximum in safety and enjoyment while adapting
development to, and taking advantage of, the best use of natural terrain;
      3.   Establish a foundation for development in sensitive lands to ensure
a more harmonious relationship between manmade structures and the natural
setting;
      4.   Direct new development in the canyons and foothills toward areas
meeting suitability criteria as outlined in the general plan, and other
applicable general or community plans. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.020: USING THIS CHAPTER:
The development and design standards set forth in this chapter fall into two
(2) categories:
   A.   Mandatory standards, which are identified by a "+" notation in the left
hand margin; and
   B.   Advisory standards that are strongly encouraged, but not mandatory,
which are identified by a "o" in the left hand margin.
Subdivisions and development subject to this chapter shall comply with all of
the "+" standards and shall attempt to incorporate, to the extent feasible or
practical, all of the "o" standards. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.030: SITE SELECTION AND PLANNING STANDARDS:
   A.   To the maximum extent feasible, match the development program to the
available land on the site:
      + 1. A site shall be selected that is suitable for the type of building
or use being planned without major alternations to the site.
      o 2. The minimum and maximum slopes gradients that can work with each
type of land use in the development program shall be considered. Compare the
amount of land needed for the program with the amount of buildable land on the
site. Select a site that best suits the type of building or use recognizing the
particular opportunities and disadvantages of the site.
      + 3. Avoid sites that show evidence of slope instability, landslides,
avalanche, flooding, or other natural or manmade hazards. (See
chapters 13.75, "Natural Hazard Areas", and 13.74, "Flood Damage Prevention
Regulations", of this title.)
   B.   Site buildings in a manner that preserves existing landforms. (See
figure.)
      o 1. Each building shall be located so that it does not dominate the
site.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, the most prominent areas of the site
shall be left in their natural condition. Structures shall be screened using
existing land forms and vegetation. (See subsection
13.72.030H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this title.)
      + 3. To the maximum extent feasible, buildings should be placed in the
following locations on a site:
         a.   Within tree masses to screen buildings;
         b.   At the edge of trees or land masses overlooking open space; or
         c.   In open areas where they are not visible from roads, trails, or
other public lands.
   C.   Site buildings in a manner that preserves significant view. (See
figure.)
      o 1. Buildings should be designed to fit their sites and to leave natural
massing and features of the landscape intact. Treat each building as an
integral part of the site rather than an isolated object at odds with its
surroundings.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, views both to the site and to
features beyond, as seen from public rights of way, trails, and other public
lands, shall be maintained. To the maximum extent feasible, new construction
shall not dominate views or obscure the views of others.
   D.   Site buildings so their form does not break prominent skylines. (See
figure.)
      + 1. Buildings shall be sited off of highly visible places and designed
so they are not obtrusive, do not loom out over the hillside, and do not break
prominent skylines. Skylines are ridges or hilltops that do not have backdrops
behind them. Heavily traveled roads or public areas are key vantage points.
   E.   Site buildings in a manner that preserves significant trees and
vegetation. (See figure.)
      + 1. The building shall be sited in a place where a minimum amount of
trees and vegetation will need to be removed. (See section
13.72.040, "Establishment Of Limits Of Disturbance", of this title.)
      + 2. New construction shall comply with subsection
13.72.030H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this title, and section
13.73.060, "Landscaping And Vegetation", of this chapter.
   F.   Cluster buildings and parking, and coordinate neighboring developments.
(See figures.)
      o 1. Clustering is encouraged to reduce the amount of land being
disturbed and to share the cost of providing services, road and parking area
maintenance, snow removal, etc. (See section
13.73.090, "Access, Circulation And Off Street Parking", of this chapter.)
      o 2. Cooperation among adjoining landowners to achieve coordinated
development is strongly encouraged. For example, clustering buildings and
combining or sharing services into a central location reduces the number of
access roads and parking areas within a site.
   G.   Locate parking facilities to minimize their visual impact. (See
figure.)
      + 1. Parking facilities shall be located so that they can be screened to
blend into the natural environment and will not require backing onto a public
street. (See section
13.73.090, "Access, Circulation And Off Street Parking", of this chapter.)
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, parking facilities shall be located
to the rear or side of main buildings facing away from a public street or where
they can be screened so they do not dominate the streetscape. Parking
facilities shall be designed to follow the existing topography and to provide
adequate snow storage area.
   H.   Place utility lines underground.
      + 1. To the maximum extent feasible, utilities shall be placed
underground and within existing roadways or in established shoulders in order
to minimize the impact to existing natural features such as natural vegetative
patterns and land forms. (See figure.)
      + 2. Tree cutting for utility corridors shall be feathered to reduce
visual impacts. All disturbed areas shall be revegetated. (See section
13.73.060, "Landscaping And Revegetation", of this chapter, and subsection
13.72.030H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this title.) (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.73.040: BUILDING SCALE AND DESIGN:
   A.   Design buildings so they solidly meet the ground plane. (See figures.)
      + 1. Building designs requiring a strong structural statement such as
extensive cantilevers or cuts and fills on sensitive hillsides shall be
prohibited.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, placing buildings on piers such that
exterior walls do not continue down to the ground shall be prohibited because
of aesthetic and energy efficiency concerns.
      o 3. Buildings that firmly meet the ground convey an appearance of
greater permanence, and shall be strongly encouraged.
   B.   Design buildings on hillsides to follow the natural terrain. (See
figure.)
      + 1. Buildings shall be located to minimize earthwork and land
disturbance.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, buildings shall be sited in
locations that are sympathetic to existing contours rather than those that
require a building solution that would dominate the site. Buildings shall be
designed to follow natural contours rather than modifying the land to accept a
building design not tailored to the site. (See section
13.73.070, "Grading", of this chapter and subsection
13.72.030C, "Grading Standards", of this title.)
   C.   Design buildings to minimize mass and scale. (See figures.)
      + 1. To the maximum extent feasible, building design shall incorporate
changes in the planes of walls and changes in the slope and height of rooflines
to add variety, create visual interest, and minimize scale.
      o 2. Buildings can be made to seem larger or smaller depending on the
proportional relationship of separate building elements. Human scale buildings
create a comfortable and friendly atmosphere. Building scale should complement
rather than dominate the landscape.
      + 3. To the maximum extent feasible, the massing of buildings shall be
scaled to harmonize and balance with the specific site and its natural
features, especially when buildings are located at tree or landmass edges or in
the open, by incorporating the following design principles:
         o a. Rooflines and building mass should echo the angles and shapes
repeated in the natural landscape, and shift or bend to change directions; and
         + b. Building mass and wall lines shall be broken up to conform to
existing slope and avoid unbroken expanses of building mass and walls that can
intrude into the natural canyon setting and dominate a site. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.73.050: BUILDING MATERIALS AND COLORS:
   A.   Use exterior wall colors that harmonize with the landscape and
surrounding buildings;
      + 1. Indigenous materials and colors shall be used in order to mimic
natural textures.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, predominant tones on exterior walls
shall tend toward neutral colors such as warm earthy hues, dark green of
forests, whites, grays and gray brown of the mountains, the tan of grasses, and
similar colors. Bright, harshly contrasting color combinations shall be
avoided.
   B.   Use roof surfacing materials that blend with the colors of the adjacent
landscape and that are composed of materials which reduce the risk of fire.
      + 1. The color of roof surfacing materials shall be either brown, dark
green, gray, or other color that blends in with the surrounding landscape.
      + 2. Wood roofing shingles shall not be allowed in the canyons or
foothills because of their potential to ignite during wildfires and increase
structural damage. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.060: LANDSCAPING AND VEGETATION:
See also subsection
13.72.030H, "Tree And Vegetation Protection", of this title for those
properties located in the Foothills and Canyons Overlay Zone.
   A.   Preserve existing trees and vegetation:
      + 1. To the maximum extent feasible, existing concentrations of protected
trees and vegetation shall be preserved and remain undisturbed as an important
site amenity. For the purposes of this chapter, "protected trees and
vegetation" shall be defined as set forth in section
13.04.040 of this title. (See also subsection
13.73.030E of this chapter.)
         + a. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in this section,
existing vegetation located within thirty feet (30') of the primary structure
on a site shall be thinned and regularly maintained to help minimize the risk
of property damage from wildfire, and to provide space for firefighting
equipment and personnel.
         o b. When landscaping within this thirty foot (30') firebreak area,
use of fire resistant plants is strongly encouraged. (For a list of fire
resistant plants, contact the Wasatch-Cache National Forest, Salt Lake Ranger
District, or the Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands.) See also
subsection
13.72.030H3c, "Wildfire Hazards And Tree/Vegetation Removal", of this title.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, dryland species shall be selected
for slope revegetation, and irrigation will be minimized to reduce potential
problems. (Ord. 2019-04, 2-28-2019)
   B.   Landscape to retain harmony between the various elements of a landscape
and to preserve its original character:
      + 1. Landscaping for new development shall incorporate natural features
in the landscape such as trees, significant vegetative patterns, interesting
landforms, rocks, water, views and orientation.
      + 2. Landscaped areas shall be an integral part of the development
project, and not simply located in leftover space on the site. New planting
shall blend in with the existing landscape.
      + 3. All disturbed areas shall be revegetated using native or adapted
plant species and materials characteristic of the area.
      o 4. Use of fire resistant plants is also strongly encouraged. (For a
list of fire resistant plants, contact the Wasatch-Cache National Forest, Salt
Lake Ranger District, or the Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands.)
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.070: GRADING:
   A.   Limit site grading for buildings to preserve existing landforms. See
subsection
13.72.030C, "Grading Standards", of this title. (See section
13.72.080, "Figures", of this title.)
      + 1. To the maximum extent feasible, building designs that require
extensive cut and fills shall not be allowed.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, modification of the natural terrain
shall be minimized by retaining the natural landscape, including existing trees
and vegetation.
      + 3. To the maximum extent feasible, slopes steeper than thirty percent
(30%) shall not be disturbed.
      + 4. To the maximum extent feasible, buildings, driveways, and roads
shall follow the natural contours of the site. Site grading shall follow
appendix chapter 33, excavation and grading, of the Uniform Building Code (1997
edition, as amended from time to time) and Best Management Practices (1977) as
set forth in the Salt Lake County Erosion-Sediment Control Handbook (1981
edition and as amended from time to time). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.080: DRAINAGE:
   A.   Site design shall not change natural drainage patterns. (See section
13.72.080, figure 18 of this title.)
      + 1. All final grading and drainage shall comply with appendix chapter
33, excavation and grading of the Uniform Building Code (1994 edition and as
amended from time to time) and best management practices (1977) as set forth in
the Salt Lake County erosion-sediment control handbook (1981 and as amended
from time to time).
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, development shall preserve the
natural surface drainage pattern unique to each site as a result of topography
and vegetation. Grading shall ensure that drainage flows away from all
structures, especially structures that are cut into hillsides. Natural drainage
patterns may be modified on site only if the applicant shows that there will be
no significant adverse environmental impacts on site or on adjacent properties.
If natural drainage patterns are modified, appropriate stabilization techniques
shall be employed.
      + 3. Development shall mitigate all negative or adverse drainage impacts
on adjacent and surrounding sites.
      + 4. Standard erosion control methods shall be used during construction
to protect water quality, control drainage, and reduce soil erosion. Sediment
traps, small dams, or barriers of straw bales shall be located wherever there
are grade changes to slow the velocity of runoff.
   B.   Locate buildings outside stream corridor buffer zones:
      + 1. Permanent structures shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') horizontally (plan view) from the ordinary high water mark of stream
corridors or other bodies of water. (See figure.) At the discretion of the
community development director, and based on site specific studies such as
soils or vegetation, setback distances may be reduced according to the
modification provisions and criteria set forth in subsection
13.72.060B of this title, or greater setback distances may be required. The
community development department, and the health department should be consulted
in determining appropriate site specific setback requirements. See also
subsection
13.72.030J, "Stream Corridor And Wetlands Protection", of this title.
      + 2. To the maximum extent feasible, developments shall not alter natural
waterways.
   C.   Bridges for stream crossings are recommended. (See figures.)
      + 1. To the maximum extent feasible, the use of culverts to cross
perennial streams shall not be allowed. Culverts may be used on small side
drainages, across swales, and on ephemeral or intermittent streams. See
subsection
13.72.030J, "Stream Corridor And Wetlands Protection", of this title.
      + 2. Bridges and culverts shall be sized to pass 100-year storm events.
Concrete or stone head walls and side walls shall be required to maintain the
integrity of the bridge structure. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.090: ACCESS, CIRCULATION AND OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Design traffic circulation to respect existing topography, achieve
acceptable slopes, and adhere to minimum width and turning standards:
      + 1. Safe and adequate access shall be provided in all new development.
Access shall be of adequate width to allow for snowplowing and snow storage;
      + 2. Access roads shall avoid steep grades and sharp turning radii that
can make access, especially in the winter, difficult;
      + 3. Roads and driveways which run perpendicular to the contours of a
site shall be prohibited. (See figures.)
   B.   Provide safe, adequate off street parking with year round access (See
figures.)
      + 1. New development shall provide off street parking as required by this
land use ordinance.
      o 2. Shared driveways and shared parking areas with adjoining owners are
strongly encouraged in order to reduce maintenance costs and overall impacts on
the environment.
      + 3. Access to off street parking areas shall be from a private driveway
or roadway and not directly from a public street or road. Off street parking
areas shall be large enough that persons accessing or leaving the site are not
required to back out onto a public street unless the community development
director or the planning commission determines that the street is not a major
thoroughfare and that no safety or traffic flow problems will result.
      + 4. The location of off street parking facilities shall comply with this
chapter. Such areas shall be properly screened and be located on land proven to
be suitable for development.
   C.   Design new roads and driveways to reduce their visual impact:
      + 1. To the maximum extent feasible, roads and driveways shall be
screened using existing land forms and vegetation and any cuts and fills shall
be regraded to repeat adjacent land forms. To the maximum extent feasible, long
tangents shall be avoided in favor of curvilinear alignments reflecting
topography, and curve side roads as soon as possible after intersection with
arterial roads or highways.
      + 2. Cuts and fills for new roads and driveways shall be revegetated with
native plant materials. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.100: FENCES:
   A.   Place fences to respect existing landforms, follow existing contours,
and blend into the natural setting of the site. (See figures.)
      + 1. Fences as part of development on sensitive lands shall be limited to
fences necessary to screen service and outdoor areas. (See also subsection
13.72.030C8, "Retaining Walls", of this title.)
      + 2. Fencing used to screen patios, other outdoor areas, and service
areas that are adjacent to buildings may be opaque. The use of natural or
stained wood for such fencing is strongly encouraged. Other appropriate fencing
materials include brick, rock, stone and wrought iron.
      + 3. The following fencing materials shall not be allowed:
         a.   Solid board;
         b.   Concrete or concrete block;
         c.   Chainlink, except around telecommunications facilities and public
utility compounds;
         d.   Plywood;
         e.   Painted materials; and
         f.   Vinyl, except rail fences for containment of horses.
      + 4. Wooden rail fences and low rock walls may be permitted along
arterial roads and highways, and to delineate property lines.
      + 5. Fences located along property lines and arterial roads or highways
are limited to a maximum of forty two inches (42") in height.
      + 6. Solid barrier fences located along arterial roads or highways, or
placed directly on a site's front property line, are out of character with the
natural setting, block views, and shall be prohibited.
      + 7. Walls and fences shall be reviewed on a site by site basis (during
site plan review if applicable) and shall require a building permit. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.110: NIGHT LIGHTING:
Locate lighting fixtures only where needed to provide for the safe movement of
people on the site. (See figures.)
   o A. Bright lighting of large areas should only occur where absolutely
required by safety considerations, except that lighting for outdoor recreation
areas shall be permitted. However, recreation areas must be sensitive to
potential impacts its outdoor lighting may have on adjoining properties.
   + B. Outdoor lighting sources shall be shielded and directional. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
13.73.120: FIGURES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4956.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4958.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4960.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4962.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4964.gif]
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.74
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
Article I. Overview
13.74.005: Statutory Authorization
13.74.010: Findings
13.74.020: Purpose Of Provisions
13.74.030: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
Article II. Definitions
13.74.040: Definitions Of Words And Phrases
Article III. General Provisions
13.74.051: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
13.74.052: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
13.74.053: Establishment Of Development Permit
13.74.054: Compliance
13.74.055: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
13.74.056: Interpretation
13.74.057: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
Article IV. Administration
13.74.060: Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator
13.74.061: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
13.74.062: Permit Procedures
13.74.063: Variance Procedures
Article V. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
13.74.070: Special Flood Hazard Areas Permit Procedures
13.74.071: Specific Standards
13.74.072: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
13.74.073: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding
13.74.074: Floodways
13.74.080: Adoption Of Floodplain Regulations Required
13.74.081: Penalties For Noncompliance
ARTICLE I. OVERVIEW
13.74.005: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Utah has delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.010: FINDINGS:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Holladay are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
   C.   The city of Holladay hereby adopts the FEMA flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM) and effective FEMA flood insurance studies (FIS) and all subsequent maps
and studies of FEMA. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.74.020: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.030: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
   A.   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
13.74.040: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.74.051: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city of Holladay. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.052: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood
Insurance Study For City Of Holladay", dated November 19, 2021, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRMs
and FBFMs) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord.
2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.74.053: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.054: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.055: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.74.056: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.057: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
13.74.060: DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The community development director is hereby appointed the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.061: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator or designee shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Review permit applications to determine whether a proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
   D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management
agency.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section
13.74.052 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of article V of this chapter.
   I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
   J.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.062: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and
elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
   A.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
   B.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
   C.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria
of subsection
13.74.071B of this chapter;
   D.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
   E.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection
13.74.061A of this article;
Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator
shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following
relevant factors:
   A.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   B.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   C.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   D.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   E.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   F.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
   G.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
   H.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   I.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
   J.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that
area. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.063: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section
13.74.062 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (section
13.74.020 of this chapter).
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are
met, and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
13.74.070: SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS PERMIT PROCEDURES:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.071: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in: a) section
13.74.052 of this chapter, b) subsection
13.74.061H of this chapter, or c) subsection
13.74.072C of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in
this chapter, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this section be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation, or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of section
13.74.062 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.072: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
13.74.010,
13.74.020 and 13.74.030 of this chapter.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of sections
13.74.053 and
13.74.062 of this chapter, and the provisions of this article.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
13.74.052 or subsection
13.74.061H of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.073: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING:
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
13.74.052 of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These
areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply: (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest abutting grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
(Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   C.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in section
13.74.062 of this chapter, are satisfied.
   D.   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.074: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
13.74.052 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.080: ADOPTION OF FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS REQUIRED:
In accordance with section 59.2(b) of CFR 44, chapter 1, of the national flood
insurance program (NFIP) regulation, to qualify for the sale of federally
subsidized flood insurance, a community must adopt floodplain management
regulations that meet or exceed the minimum standards of section 60. "These
regulations must include effective enforcement provisions". In accordance with
section 60.1(b) of CFR 44, chapter 1, of the NFIP regulations, "These
regulations must be legally enforceable, applied uniformly throughout the
community to all privately and publicly owned land within flood prone (i.e.,
mudflow) or flood related erosion areas, and the community must provide that
the regulations take precedence over less restrictive conflicting local laws,
ordinances or codes". (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.74.081: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than
thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city of Holladay from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.75
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS (Formerly “Natural Hazards Area”)
SECTION:
13.75.010: Purpose Of Provisions
13.75.020: Critical Facilities
13.75.030: Applicability
13.75.040: Geologic Hazards Study Area Maps
13.75.050: Responsibility For Geologic Hazard Studies
13.75.060: Preliminary Sitework/Activities
13.75.070: Geologic Hazard Studies And Reports Required
13.75.080: Geologic Hazards Report
13.75.090: Review Of Reports; Approval Procedure
13.75.100: Disputes, Appeal Procedure
13.75.110: Active Fault Considerations
13.75.120: Disclosure When A Geologic Hazards Report Is Required
13.75.130: Disclosure When No Geologic Hazards Report Is Required
13.75.140: Warning And Disclaimer
13.75.150: Change Of Use
13.75.160: Conflicting Regulations
13.75.170: Appendix A: Geologic Hazards Study Area Maps
13.75.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of Holladay and minimize the potential adverse
effects of geologic hazards to public health, safety and property by
encouraging wise land use of geologic hazard areas. (Ord. 2012-15,9-20-2012)
   B.   This chapter and its appendices address surface fault rupture, slope
stability, liquefaction, and rockfall hazards, and present minimum standards
and methods for evaluating geologic hazards.
   C.   Results of geologic hazard studies shall comply with this chapter and
its appendices. The standards set forth in the appendices are minimum
requirements and shall not supersede other more stringent requirements that
maybe required by other regulatory agents
   D.   Appendix A of this chapter presents geologic hazards study area maps
reflecting geological concerns pertaining to development within Holladay City.
Site specific geologic hazard assessments performed by qualified engineering
geologists shall be required prior to developing projects located within a
geologic hazards study area. In the event known or readily apparent geologic
hazards exist in an area subject to a development application, which area is
not depicted on the geologic hazards study area maps, the developer shall
submit the applicable study and follow the process as outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.020: CRITICAL FACILITIES:
For the purposes of this title, critical facilities are defined as:
   A.   Lifelines, such as major communication, utility and transportation
facilities and their connection to emergency facilities; or
   B.   Essential facilities, such as:
      1.   Hospitals and other medical facilities having surgery and emergency
treatment areas;
      2.   Fire and police stations;
      3.   Tanks or other structures containing, housing or supporting water or
other fire suppression materials or equipment required for the protection of
essential or hazardous facilities, or special occupancy structures;
      4.   Emergency vehicle shelters and garages;
      5.   Structures and equipment in emergency preparedness centers;
      6.   Standby power generating equipment for essential facilities;
      7.   Structures and equipment in government communication centers and
other facilities required for emergency response; or
   C.   Hazardous facilities, such as structures housing, supporting or
containing sufficient quantities of toxic or explosive substances to be
dangerous to the safety of the general public if released; or
   D.   Special occupancy structures, such as:
      1.   Covered structures whose primary occupancy is public assembly
(capacity greater than three hundred (300) persons);
      2.   Buildings for schools through secondary or daycare centers (capacity
greater than two hundred fifty (250) students);
      3.   Buildings for colleges or adult education schools (capacity greater
than five hundred (500) students);
      4.   Medical facilities with fifty (50) or more resident incapacitated
patients, but not included above;
      5.   Jails and detention facilities;
      6.   All structures with occupancy greater than five thousand (5,000)
persons;
      7.   Structures and equipment in power generating stations and other
public utility facilities not included above, and required for continued
operation. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.030: APPLICABILITY:
These regulations are applicable to all lands within the geologic hazard
special study areas in the city, as shown on the geologic hazards maps in this
Appendix A. Such maps and all amendments thereto are made a part of this
chapter as if fully described and detailed herein. Each change in the geologic
hazards maps shall be subject to the amendment procedures set forth in
Chapter 13.07 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-
14-2021)
13.75.040: GEOLOGIC HAZARDS STUDY AREA MAPS:
   A.   The boundary lines of the special study areas shown on the geologic
hazards' maps shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
Maps intend to represent generalized scientific information designed to
indicate areas where hazards may exist and where geologic hazards studies are
required. Because the geologic hazards study area maps are prepared at a non-
site specific scale, hazards may exist that are not shown on the geologic
hazards study area maps. A site that is not shown in a geologic hazards study
area for a particular hazard does not exempt the applicant from considering the
hazard if evidence is found that it may exist. If it is subsequently determined
that the site features a geologic hazard not represented on the geologic
hazards study area maps, the review process will be pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Geologic hazards study area maps may be updated and amended by the city
as per
Chapter 13.07 if found to be inaccurate or in error, or as new methods or data
are developed to better define areas of potential hazards.
   C.   Where geologic hazards study area maps are thought by an applicant to
be inaccurate or in error and require revision, the applicant shall submit to
the city technical evidence by a qualified professional supporting the claim
and showing the proposed revision. The city will review the information and
render a decision. The applicant may appeal that decision to the city council.
(Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.050: RESPONSIBILITY FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES:
Geologic hazard studies often involve both engineering geology and geotechnical
engineering. Engineering geologic studies shall be performed under the direct
supervision of a qualified professional engineering geologist. Geotechnical
engineering studies shall be performed under the direct supervision of a
qualified professional geotechnical engineer. (Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.060: PRELIMINARY SITE WORK/ACTIVITIES:
This section shall apply to any geologic hazard investigation for the purpose
of determining the feasibility of development or for the purpose of exploring,
evaluating or establishing locations for permanent improvements.
   A.   Scoping Meeting: The developer or consultant shall schedule a scoping
meeting with the city's technical review committee (TRC) to evaluate the
engineering geologist/geotechnical engineer's investigative approach. At this
meeting, the consultant shall present a work plan that includes locations of
anticipated geologic hazards and locations of proposed exploratory activities
necessary to minimum standard of practice. The investigation approach should
allow for flexibility due to unexpected site conditions. Field findings may
require modifications to the work plan. Upon completion of a successful scoping
meeting, a grading permit application may be submitted to the City.
   B.   Grading Permit: As required by title 13 of this code and except as
otherwise noted therein, no person shall commence or perform any grubbing,
grading, earthwork, or any other land disturbance activity, without first
obtaining a permit. Application shall be filed with the community and economic
development department on forms provided and maintained by the city for such
purpose. (Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.070: GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES AND REPORTS REQUIRED:
Any applicant requesting development on a parcel of land within a geologic
hazards study area, as shown on the Appendix A: Geologic Hazards Maps, and as
indicated in
Chart 13.75.071 of this section, shall submit to the community and economic
development department two (2) copies and one digital copy of site specific
geologic hazard studies and reports. (Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
Chart 13.75.071 Uses Requiring Special Study Area Report
Land Use           Liquefaction Potential             Surface Fault Repture
(Type Of Facility) High And Moderate Low And Very Low Special Study Area
Land Use               Liquefaction Potential             Surface Fault Repture
(Type Of Facility)     High And Moderate Low And Very Low Special Study Area

Critical facilities
(essential and
hazardous facilities,
and special occupancy  Yes               Yes              Yes
structures, as defined
in section
13.75.020  of this
chapter)
Industrial and
commercial buildings
(greater than 2        Yes               No               Yes
stories or 5,000
square feet)
Multi-family
residential structures
(4 or more units per   Yes               No               Yes
acre), and all other
industrial and
commercial
Residential            Yes               No               Yes
subdivisions
Residential single
lots and multi- family No*               No               Yes
dwellings (less than 4
units per acre)
*Although no special study is required, disclosure is required as described in
section
13.75.100  of this chapter.
 
(Ord. 2021-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.080: GEOLOGIC HAZARDS REPORT:
   A.   Preparation: The geologic hazards report shall be prepared by an
engineering geologist. In the case of a snow avalanche hazard, the report shall
be prepared by an experienced avalanche expert. The report shall be signed by
the preparer and shall also include the qualifications of the preparer.
   B.   Content: The report shall be site specific and identify all known or
suspected potential geologic hazards, originating on site or off site,
affecting the particular property. The report shall reflect current
professional practice similar or to exceed the guidelines suggested in Utah
Geologic Survey Circular 122 (2016) or it beyond the minimum reporting
standards may be required to adequately address the fault hazard. Minimum
replacement document. Considering the complexity of evaluating surface and
near-surface faults, additional effort reporting standards required or
inferred, does not relieve the engineering geologist from his/her duty to
perform additional geologic or engineering services he/she believes are
necessary to assess the fault rupture potential at a site.
   C.   Site Map: The report shall include a detailed site map (scale: 1-inch
equals 200 feet or larger), showing the location of the hazards with
delineation of the recommended setback distances from hazards and the
recommended location for structures.
   D.   Effects Addressed: The report shall address the potential effects of
the hazards on the proposed development and occupants thereof in terms of risk
and potential damage.
   E.   Recommendations: The report shall contain recommendations for avoidance
or mitigation of the effects ofthe hazards, consistent with the purposes set
forth in section
13.75.010 of this chapter. The evidence on which recommendations and
conclusions are based shall be clearly stated in the report. Trench logs
(scale: 1-inch equals 5 feet, or larger), aerial photographs, references with
citations, and other supporting information as applicable, shall also, be
included in the report. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-
2021)
13.75.090: REVIEW OF REPORTS; APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Review: In order to fulfill the purposes of this chapter, the planning
commission (for conditional uses and subdivisions), and the community
development department (for permitted uses) shall review any proposed
development which requires preparation of a geologic hazards report under this
chapter to determine the possible risks to the safety of persons or property
from geologic hazards.
   B.   Expert Review; Costs: Prior to consideration by the planning commission
or the community development department of any such development, the community
development department shall submit the report to the city engineer, the Utah
geological and mineral survey, the U.S. forest service, and/or other experts
for reviewand recommendation. Any cost the city must pay for the review shall
be paid by the applicant prior to planning commission or community development
department action. The community development department shall file a copy of
the geologic hazards report in the city geologic hazards library and another
copy with the Utah geological and mineral survey.
   C.   Standards: The city geologist and other retained experts in their
review of the report, and the planning commission or community development
director in their consideration of the development, shall determine whether the
development complies with the following standards:
      1.   The development does not present an unreasonable risk to the safety
of persons or property (including public streets), or to the aesthetics and
geologic functions of the landscape (e.g., drainage, wildlife habitat, etc.)
because of the presences of geologic hazards.
      2.   At the planning commission's discretion, with advice from the city's
consulting geologist, such area may be approved for development if the
applicant submits substantial evidence that, using best available practices,
the identified hazards can be mitigated to a level where the risk to human life
and damage to property, as well as the risk to the aesthetics and geologic
functions of the site, are reduced to a reasonable and acceptable level in a
manner which has a minimum effect on the geologic environment.
   D.   Necessary Requirements May Be Set: The planning commission or community
development director may set requirements necessary to reduce the risks from
geologic hazards as a condition to the approval of any development which
requires preparation of a geologic hazards report. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012;
amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.100: DISPUTES, APPEAL PROCEDURE:
An applicant may appeal any decision made under the provisions of this chapter
only after the city has issued a written review of a report, and shall set
forth the specific grounds or issues upon which the appeal is based. The appeal
shall be submitted in writing to the director of community development within
thirty (30) days ofthe issuance of the written review or other decision. The
city shall assemble a professional panel of three (3) qualified experts to
serve as the appeal authority for any technical dispute. The panel shall
consist of an expert designated by the city, an expert designated by the
applicant, and an expert chosen by the city's and the applicant's designated
experts. If the city's and the applicant's designated experts cannot reach a
consensus of the third expert within thirty (30) days, the city shall select
the third expert. Decisions of the panel will be binding and will be based on
the majority decision of the panel. The costs of the appeal process shall be
paid by the applicant. (Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.110: ACTIVE FAULT CONSIDERATIONS:
No critical facility (excluding transportation lines or utilities which by
their nature may cross active faults) or structures designed for human
occupancy shall be built astride an active fault. If a fault is discovered in
the excavation for such a structure, a special study, as described in section
13.75.080 of this chapter, shall be performed to determine if the fault is
active, and if the fault is determined to be active, the procedures set forth
in section
13.75.090 of this chapter shall be followed. No structure designed for human
occupancy shall be built on a fault scarp. Footing setbacks from a fault scarp
shall meet the requirements of chapter 29 of the uniform building code. The
community development director may increase footing setback requirements where
information from a geotechnical report indicates slope conditions warrant a
greater setback distance. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-
2021)
13.75.120: DISCLOSURE WHEN A GEOLOGIC HAZARDS REPORT IS REQUIRED:
Whenever a geologic hazards report is required under this chapter the owner of
such parcel shall record a restrictive covenant running with the land in a form
satisfactory to the city prior to the approval of any development or
subdivision of such parcel, which includes the following:
   A.   Notice that the parcel is located within a geologic hazards special
study area as shown on the geologic hazards map;
   B.   Notice of the existence and availability of the geologic hazards report
for public inspection in the city geologic hazards library; and
   C.   An agreement by the owner of the parcel and any successor in interest
to comply with any conditions set by the planning commission or community
development director to minimize potential adverse effects of the geologic
hazards. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.130: DISCLOSURE WHEN NO GEOLOGIC HAZARDS REPORT IS REQUIRED:
Whenever the applicant for any new development for human occupancy is not
required under this chapter to prepare a geologic hazards report, although the
parcel to be developed is located within a high or moderate liquefaction
potential special study area, or surface fault rupture special study area, as
shown on thegeologic hazards maps, notice that the parcel is located within
such areas shall be recorded by the landowner in a form satisfactory to the
city prior to the approval of any such development. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012;
Ord. 2021-26, 10- 14-2021)
13.75.140: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER:
The geologic hazards ordinance codified in this chapter and geologic hazards
maps represent only those hazardous areas known to the city, and should not be
construed to include all possible potential hazard areas. The geologic hazards
ordinance and the geologic hazards maps may be amended as new information
becomes available pursuant to procedures set forth in
chapter 13.07 of this title. The provisions of this chapter do not in any way
assure or imply that areas outside its boundaries will be free from the
possible adverse effects of geologic hazards. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any
damages from geologic hazards that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative requirement or decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.150: CHANGE OF USE:
No change in use which results in the conversion of a building or structure
from one not used for human occupancy to one that is so used shall be permitted
unless the building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.160: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In cases of conflict between the provisions of existing zoning classifications,
building code, subdivision regulations, or any other ordinance of the city and
the geologic hazards ordinance codified in this chapter, the most restrictive
provision shall apply. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
13.75.170: APPENDIX A: GEOLOGIC HAZARDS STUDY AREA MAPS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5275.png]
(Ord. 2021-26, 10-14-2021)
CHAPTER 13.76
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.76.010: Effect Of Chapter Provisions
13.76.020: Occupancy Permit (Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.030: Uses Not Listed; Administrative Determination (Rep. by Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.76.035: Appeal Of Planning Commission Decision (Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.76.040: Dwellings To Be On Lots
13.76.050: Lots In Separate Ownership
13.76.060: Separately Owned Lots; Reduced Yards (Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.065: Public Use; Reduced Lot Area And Setback
13.76.070: Division Of A Two-Family Dwelling (Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.080: Lots And Buildings On Private Rights Of Way (Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-
9-2007)
13.76.090: Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Width And Area
13.76.100: Sale Of Space Needed To Meet Requirements
13.76.110: Setback Space For One Building Only
13.76.130: Accessory Buildings; Area Of Coverage (Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.150: Front Setback Measurement From Map
13.76.153: Setback Areas To Be Unobstructed; Exceptions
13.76.155: Landscaped Setback; Commercial Zones 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-
2013)
13.76.160: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
13.76.168: Garage Or Carport Required
13.76.170: Height Limitations; Buildings Less Than One Story
13.76.180: Height Limitations; Accessory Buildings (Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-
2007)
13.76.190: Height Limitations; Exceptions
13.76.200: Additional Height Allowed When
13.76.210: Off Site Improvements
13.76.220: Water And Sewage Facilities
13.76.240: Animal And Fowl Restrictions
13.76.250: Temporary Sales/Seasonal Sales Permit
13.76.260: Commercial Daycare/Commercial Preschool Facilities
13.76.280: Commercial Renting Of Dwellings Prohibited
13.76.290: Single-Family Or Two-Family Dwelling; Standards
13.76.300: Development On Hillsides And Slopes
13.76.400: Waterways Protection
13.76.500: Garage Sales
13.76.501: Temporary Uses
13.76.600: Street Tree Protection 2  (Rep. by Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.76.610: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
13.76.700: Fill Work And Land Excavations; Special Requirements
13.76.710: Fences
13.76.715: Bed And Breakfast
13.76.720: Home Daycare/Preschool
13.76.725: Home Daycare/Preschool, Small
13.76.730: Home Occupation
13.76.735: Short Term Rental
13.76.740: Junk
13.76.745: Manufactured Or Mobile Homes
13.76.750: Resource Recycling Collection Facility
13.76.755: Arcade
13.76.765: Motor Vehicle Repair
13.76.770: Mobile Food Businesses
13.76.775: Mobile Food Courts
 
Notes
1 1. See
  chapter 13.77 of this title.
2 2. See section
  13.77.080 of this title.
13.76.010: EFFECT OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the land use regulations appearing elsewhere in this title.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.020: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.030: USES NOT LISTED; ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.035: APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.040: DWELLINGS TO BE ON LOTS:
   A.   Every dwelling shall be located and maintained on a single "lot", as
defined in this title. Except for group dwellings and accessory dwelling units
where allowed, not more than one dwelling structure shall occupy one lot.
   B.   If a dwelling has been built across one or more property lines, all
affected parcels and/or lots, whether metes and bounds or platted, shall be
deemed consolidated and shall not thereafter be treated as multiple lots
without an approved subdivision as per this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012;
amd. Ord. 2021- 24, 9-9-2021)
13.76.050: LOTS IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP:
Any lot legally held in separate ownership at the time of adoption of this
Code, which lot is below the requirements for lot area, lot width or frontage
for the zone in which it is located and was legally created under the
provisions of a previous land use ordinance, shall be classified as a legal
nonconforming lot under this Code.
   A.   In any zone, when a lot lacks sufficient area to meet the minimum
required by this Code and there is abutting property under the same ownership,
the two (2) parcels shall be combined. If the combined parcels do not meet the
minimum requirement and there is sufficient area upon which to construct a
residence reasonably comparable to those in the vicinity with required
setbacks, the lot may be determined to be legal nonconforming and a single-
family dwelling shall be permitted if such lot is in a residential zone.
Provisions herein shall not violate maximum lot size limits of section
13.14.040, chart 13.14.040 of this title.
   B.   If there is not sufficient area for a buildable area, comparable to the
other residences in the area, or of at least thirty feet by fifty feet (30' x
50'), a building permit shall not be issued. (Ord. 2018-05, 5-17-2018)
13.76.060: SEPARATELY OWNED LOTS; REDUCED YARDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.065: PUBLIC USE; REDUCED LOT AREA AND SETBACK:
The requirements of this title as to minimum lot area and minimum setback may
be reduced by the Planning Commission for a public use. The Planning Commission
shall not authorize a reduction in the lot area or setback requirements unless
the evidence presented is such as to establish that the reduction will not,
under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health,
safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity, or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.76.070: DIVISION OF A TWO-FAMILY DWELLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.080: LOTS AND BUILDINGS ON PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.090: SALE OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM WIDTH AND AREA:
No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements
for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a large parcel of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or development as a
lot, except by permit of the Administrative Appeals Officer. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.76.100: SALE OF SPACE NEEDED TO MEET REQUIREMENTS:
No space needed to meet the width, setback, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased away
from such lot or building. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.110: SETBACK SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
No required setback area or other open space around an existing building, or
which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this title, shall be considered as providing a setback
area or open space for any other building; nor shall any setback area or other
required open space on an abutting lot be considered as providing a setback
area or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected or established.
This section shall be so construed to mean only one main building may be
permitted on one lot, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 2015-02,
2-5-2015)
13.76.130: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS; AREA OF COVERAGE:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.150: FRONT SETBACK MEASUREMENT FROM MAP:
Wherever a lot is adjacent to a mapped street on the adopted circulation map of
the city of Holladay general plan, there shall be a required front setback area
provided, that is measured from the mapped right of way centerline or the
planned edge of the future right of way. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.153: SETBACK AREAS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
Every part of a required setback area shall be open to the sky, unobstructed
except for permitted accessory buildings in a rear yard, the ordinary
architectural projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices,
chimneys, flues, and other ornamental features that project into a yard not
more than three feet (3'), and open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof
outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a
setback area not more than five feet (5'). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.155: LANDSCAPED SETBACK; COMMERCIAL ZONES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  chapter 13.77 of this title.
13.76.160: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
   A.   Corner Lots: In all zones, no obstruction to view in excess of two feet
(2') in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area
formed by the edge of the paved surface and a line connecting them at points
forty feet (40') from the intersection of the paved surfaces, except a
reasonable number of trees pruned so as to permit unobstructed vision to
automobile drivers (figure A of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4966.gif]
   B.   Clear View At Driveways: All driveways entering onto a public street,
or right of way, shall have a clear view for drivers entering onto the street.
That clear view shall be measured two feet (2') above the surface of the ground
and form a triangle fifteen feet (15') from the intersection of the driveway,
or right of way, except a reasonable number of trees pruned so as to permit
unobstructed vision to automobile drivers (figure B of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4968.gif]
(Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016)
13.76.168: GARAGE OR CARPORT REQUIRED:
No existing garage or carport (area) in or on any residential property shall be
eliminated unless replaced with a garage or carport located on the same
property. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.170: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS; BUILDINGS LESS THAN ONE STORY:
No building shall be erected to a height less than one story above grade. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.180: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS; ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-01, 1-9-2007)
13.76.190: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
In the C-1, C-2, O-R-D, HV and R-M zones, penthouse or roof structures for the
housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls,
skylights, architectural feature towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys,
wireless or television aerials, theater lofts, or similar structures, may be
erected a maximum of eight feet (8') above the height limits prescribed in this
title, and provided the protrusion meets the graduated height requirement. No
space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing
additional floor space. (Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-2014)
13.76.200: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED WHEN:
Public or semipublic utility buildings, when authorized in a zone, may be
erected to a height not exceeding forty feet (40') if the building is set back
from each otherwise established building line at least one foot (1') for each
additional foot of building height above the normal height limit required for
the zone in which the building is erected. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.210: OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Off Site Improvements Required: The applicant for a building or
conditional use permit for all dwellings, commercial or industrial uses, and
all other business and public and quasi-public uses shall provide curb, gutter
and sidewalk along the entire property line which abuts any public road or
street in cases where it does not exist at city standards. Vehicular entrances
to the property shall be provided as allowed in the city ordinances. Height,
location, structural specifications, maximum and minimum cut radii and minimum
roadway approach angles to the centerline of the street are subject to the
approval of the agency concerned.
   B.   Fee In Lieu Of Improvements:
      1.   Where conditions exist which make it unfeasible or impractical to
install such curb, gutter and sidewalk, the Community and Economic Development
Director may require the applicant to pay to the city a fee equal to the
estimated cost of such improvements, as determined by the Community and
Economic Development Director. Upon payment of such fee by the developer, the
city shall assume the responsibility for future installation of such
improvements.
      2.   The fees shall be placed in the special account established in
section 13.01.100 of this title, and shall credit to such account a
proportioned share of interest earned from investment of city monies. Records
relating to identification of properties for which fees have been collected,
fee amounts collected for such properties, and money transfer requests shall be
the responsibility of the Community and Economic Development Department.
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   The City Manager with a positive recommendation from the (TRC) may
grant an exception to the installation of required off site improvements by
following the requirements set forth in subsection 14.12.150B of this code.
(Ord. 2015-15, 10-8-2015; amd. Ord. 2021-08, 4-8-2021)
13.76.220: WATER AND SEWAGE FACILITIES:
In all cases where a proposed building or proposed use will involve the use of
sewage facilities, and a sewer, as defined in the health department
regulations, is not available, and all cases where a proposed supply of piped
water under pressure is not available, the sewage disposal and the domestic
water supply shall comply with requirements of the health department, and the
application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of
approval from the health department. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.240: ANIMAL AND FOWL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Separation From Residential Properties: No animals or fowl shall be
kept or maintained closer than forty feet (40') from a dwelling on an abutting
parcel of land, and no barn, stable, coop, pen or corral shall be kept closer
than forty feet (40') from a street. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   Animals For Family Food Production:
      1.   Small Livestock: "Small livestock", as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title, on a lot of at least ten thousand (10,000) square
feet, shall be limited to the numbers of animals as allowed by
table 13.76.240.1 of this section, and subject to a permit issued by the city.
Such permits are personal to the property owner and do not run with the land.
TABLE 13.76.240.1
 
Lot Area                                                    Large Livestock
(R-1-4, R-1-8, R-1-10        Small Livestock                (Excluding Horses)
And R-1-15 Zones)
Less than 10,000 square feet None allowed                   None allowed
10,000 to 1/2 acre: Up to 3  10 rabbits, 25 chickens, 25
kinds of animals or fowl and pheasants; 5 ducks, 5 turkeys, None allowed
no more than                 5 geese; or 10 pigeons
                             10 rabbits, 62 chickens, 62
Each additional 1/2 acre1    pheasants; 12 ducks, 12        None allowed
                             turkeys, 12 geese; or 25
                             pigeons
 
Note:
1.    Over the minimum number of square feet required for a single-family
residential lot in the zone.
      2.   Livestock In R-1-21, R-1-43 Or R-1-87 Zones: Livestock, large and
small, as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title, on a lot in the R-1-21, R-1-43 or R-1-87 zones
shall be limited to the numbers of animals as allowed by
table 13.76.240.2 of this section.
TABLE 13.76.240.2
 
Lot Area                                                     Large Livestock
(R-1-21, R-1-43               Small Livestock                (Excluding Horses)
And R-1-87 Zones)
Less than 10,000 square feet  None allowed                   None allowed
10,000 to 1/2 acre: Up to 3   10 rabbits, 25 chickens, 25
kinds of animals or fowl and  pheasants; 5 ducks, 5 turkeys, None allowed
no more than                  5 geese; or 10 pigeons
                              20 rabbits, 50 chickens, 50    2 cows
Over 1/2 acre but less than 1 pheasants; 10 ducks, 10        2 goats
acre                          turkeys, 10 geese; or 20       2 sheep
                              pigeons
                              40 rabbits, 250 chickens, 250  4 cows
Over 1 acre                   pheasants; 50 ducks, 50        4 goats
                              turkeys, 50 geese; or 100      4 sheep
                              pigeons
                              20 rabbits, 50 chickens, 50    2 cows
Each additional 1/2 acre over pheasants; 10 ducks, 10        2 goats
the first acre1               turkeys, 10 geese; or 20       2 sheep
                              pigeons
 
Note:
   1.    Over the minimum number of square feet required for a single-family
residential lot in the zone.
      3.   Horses: For residential properties in the R-1-21, R-1-43 or R-1-87
zones, the maximum number of horses allowed on a lot shall be as shown on
table 13.76.240.3 of this section.
TABLE 13.76.240.3
 
Lot Area
(R-1-21, R-1-43 And R-1-87 Zones)
Less than 1/2 acre                            None allowed
Over 1/2 acre but less than 1 acre            1
Over 1 acre                                   4
Each additional 1/2 acre over the first acre1 1
 
Note:
   1.    Over the minimum number of square feet required for a single-family
residential lot in the zone.
   C.   Livestock In The FR Zones: The planning commission may approve the
above listed types and numbers of livestock kept on a lot in the forestry and
recreation (FR) zones provided that:
      1.   The area proposed for animals is not a watershed area, as determined
by the health department; and
      2.   The use will not create unreasonable on site erosion, downstream
siltation, bacteriological or biological pollution in subsurface or surface
waters, destruction of vegetation, air pollution, including dust and odors or
other detrimental environmental effects. In determining the environmental
effects of the use, the planning commission shall seek and consider
recommendations from the health department and other concerned agencies, and
may require the applicant to submit scientific studies including analysis of
slope, soils, vegetative cover, availability of water, and other elements
necessary to establish environmental effects of the proposed use; and
      3.   The planning commission may limit the number of animals and fowl, or
limit the amount of ground to be devoted to such use, or make other conditions
to ensure environmental protection; and
      4.   After the use is established, if the planning commission determines,
based on findings of facts, that unreasonable environmental degradation is
occurring, the planning commission may, after notification to the applicant and
public hearing, establish additional conditions or order the use to be abated.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Beekeeping:
      1.   All beekeeping activities shall comply with the requirements of
title 8 of this code.
      2.   The keeping of bee colonies on a lot of at least eight thousand
(8,000) square feet shall be limited to the numbers of colonies as allowed by
table 13.76.240.4 of this section.
TABLE 13.76.240.4
Single-Family Residential (R-1) Colonies
Single-Family Residential (R-1)         Colonies
Less than 8,000 square feet             None allowed
8,000 square feet to 16,000 square feet 2
Over 16,000 square feet to 1/2 acre     4
Over 1/2 acre but less than 1 acre      6
1 acre and over                         8
                                        Where all hives are situated at least
                                        200 feet in any direction from all
Exemption - 1 acre and over             property lines of the lot/parcel on
                                        which the apiary is situated, there
                                        shall be no limit to the number of
                                        colonies
                                        So long as all abutting property that
                                        is within a radius of 200 feet from any
Exemption - 1 acre and over             hive, remains undeveloped property,
                                        there shall be no limit to the number
                                        of colonies
 
(Ord. 2014-08, 6-5-2014)
13.76.250: TEMPORARY SALES/SEASONAL SALES PERMIT:
   A.   Temporary Sales Permit Issuance: The community development director may
issue a temporary use permit for a transient circus and/or carnival or other
amusement enterprise of a similar nature, not to exceed three (3) consecutive
days in one week as provided in section
13.08.090 of this title.
   B.   Seasonal Sales Permit Issuance: The community development director may
issue a seasonal sales permit for Christmas tree sales, seasonal iced treat
sales, seasonal fruit and vegetable sales or enterprise of a similar nature,
not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year at the same
location or within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a previously approved
location, provided the proposed use meets the following requirements:
      1.   The location is on improved property including a main building with
paved parking, and landscaping, curb, gutter and sidewalk as required by
provisions of this title;
      2.   The display area outside the portable structure, is located a
minimum of ten feet (10') behind the property line, is not on landscaped areas,
or required parking spaces and does not obstruct access to the property;
      3.   All associated signs comply with the sign ordinance;
      4.   The structure complies with the yard requirements of the zone;
      5.   The structure, including display area, shall not be located within
the clear view of intersecting streets; and
      6.   Written approval from the property owner to locate on the site, must
accompany an application for a permit.
   C.   Permit Stipulations: In issuing a permit, the community development
director may stipulate:
      1.   The length of time the permit may remain valid;
      2.   Hours of operation of the use; and
      3.   Other regulations that are necessary for the public welfare. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.260: COMMERCIAL DAYCARE/COMMERCIAL PRESCHOOL FACILITIES:
Commercial daycare/preschool facilities, as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Compatibility: Must be compatible with existing and proposed land uses
in the vicinity;
   B.   State Recommendation: Receive recommendation of the state department of
social services;
   C.   Parking: Provide required parking spaces on the site and an adequate
pick up and delivery area;
   D.   Design And Scale: New construction must be compatible in design and
scale of building with existing development in the area; and
   E.   Frontage: Site must have frontage on a street with an existing or
proposed right of way of sixty feet (60') or greater, as identified on the road
widening and improvement map attached to the ordinance codified herein and
available in the planning commission office (except where the site is located
in the P, R-M, C-1, C-2, or O-R-D zone). (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord.
2022-03, 1-20-2022)
13.76.280: COMMERCIAL RENTING OF DWELLINGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be deemed a commercial use and unlawful to rent or lease any dwelling
or portion thereof located within any forestry or residential zones listed in
chapter 13.11 of this title for lodging or accommodation purposes for a period
less than thirty (30) consecutive days except as specifically allowed in the R-
2-8, R-2-10, and R-M zones. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.290: SINGLE-FAMILY OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLING; STANDARDS:
Any detached single-family or two-family dwelling located on an individual lot
outside of a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision must meet the off
street parking requirements in
chapter 13.32 of this title and the following standards in addition to any
others required by law except as provided in subsection I of this section:
   A.   Code Requirements: The dwelling unit must meet the city building code
or, if it is a manufactured home, it must be certified under the national
manufactured housing construction and safety standards act of 1974, and must
have been issued an insignia and approved by the U.S. department of housing and
urban development, and must not have been altered in violation of codes. A used
manufactured home must be inspected by the city building official or his
designated representative prior to placement on a lot to ensure it has not been
altered in violation of such codes.
   B.   Taxation: The dwelling must be taxed as real property. If the dwelling
is a manufactured home, an affidavit must be filed with the state tax
commission pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1115.
   C.   Utility Connection: The dwelling must be permanently connected to and
approved for all required utilities.
   D.   Storage Area: The dwelling must provide a minimum of seventy two (72)
square feet (per dwelling unit) of enclosed storage, with a minimum height of
six feet (6'), located in the basement or garage area or in an accessory
storage structure. Such structure shall conform to all applicable building
codes.
   E.   Foundation: The dwelling must be attached to a site built permanent
foundation which meets the uniform building code or, if the dwelling is a
manufactured home, the installation must meet the ICBO guidelines for
manufactured housing installations, including any successors to these
standards, and the space beneath the structure must be enclosed at the
perimeter of the dwelling in accordance with such ICBO guidelines, and
constructed of materials that are weather resistant and aesthetically
consistent with concrete or masonry type foundation materials. At each exit
door there must be a landing that is a minimum of thirty six inches by thirty
six inches (36" x 36") and that is constructed to meet the requirements of the
uniform building code. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and
wheels must be removed at the time of installation.
   F.   Roof Pitch: At least sixty percent (60%) of the roof of the dwelling
must be pitched at a minimum of two and one-half to twelve (2.5:12) and shall
have a roof surface of wood shakes, asphalt, composition, wood shingles,
concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles or slate or built up gravel materials.
   G.   Siding: The dwelling shall have exterior siding material consisting of
wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or metal or vinyl lap, or any
material meeting the uniform building code or materials of like appearance
approved by the community development director. The roof overhang must not be
less than six inches (6"), including rain gutters which may account for up to
four inches (4") of overhang, measured from the vertical side of the dwelling.
The roof overhang requirement shall not apply to areas above porches, alcoves
and other appendages which together do not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the length of the dwelling. The roof overhang may be reduced to two inches (2")
on the side of the dwelling facing the rear yard except on corner lots.
   H.   Width: The width of the dwelling shall be at least twenty feet (20') at
the narrowest part of its first story for a length of at least twenty feet
(20') exclusive of any garage area. The width shall be considered the lesser of
the two (2) primary dimensions. Factory built or manufactured homes shall be
multiple transportable sections at least ten feet (10') wide unless
transportable in three (3) or more sections, in which case only one section
need be ten feet (10').
   I.   Deviations May Be Approved: The community development director may
approve deviations from one or more of the developmental or architectural
standards provided in subsections E through H of this section on the basis of a
finding that the architectural style proposed provides compensating design
features and that the proposed dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with
existing structures in the vicinity. The determination of the community
development director may be appealed to the administrative appeals officer
pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 13.09 of this title.
   J.   Replacement; Compliance Required: Replacement of an existing
nonconforming manufactured home on a lot outside a mobile home park or mobile
home subdivision shall comply with all requirements herein. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.76.300: DEVELOPMENT ON HILLSIDES AND SLOPES:
   A.   Prohibited Excavations: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
code, it shall be unlawful to grade, fill or excavate any land in any manner
which presents an unreasonable risk of erosion, flooding, landslide or any
other unsafe condition. It also shall be unlawful to erect any structure which
will not be reasonably safe for use as human habitation because of risk of
erosion, flooding, landslide, earthquake related hazard or any other unsafe
condition.
   B.   Cross Slopes Permitted; Conditions: Any area within a subdivision, or
other parcel of real property, which has a slope greater than thirty percent
(30%) shall remain ungraded, except for streets, roads, private access roads,
and other vehicular routes. These routes shall be allowed to cross slopes
between thirty percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%) if specifically authorized
by the planning commission, upon the favorable recommendation of the community
development director, after finding that all of the following conditions and
constraints are applicable:
      1.   No alternate location for access is feasible or available;
      2.   No individual segment or increment of the street, road, private
access road, or other vehicular route that will cross slopes between thirty
percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%) exceeds one hundred feet (100') in
length; and
      3.   The cumulative length of individual segments or increments that will
cross slopes between thirty percent (30%) and fifty percent (50%) does not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the total length of the street, road, private
access road, or other vehicular route.
   C.   Subdivisions: Any area within a subdivision, or other parcel of real
property, which has a slope greater than thirty percent (30%) shall not be
graded, except for roadway purposes as provided in subsection B of this
section. Areas with slopes between twenty percent (20%) and thirty percent
(30%) may be graded; provided, that the area to be disturbed shall be less than
one-half (1/2) of the area of such slopes.
   D.   Grading Plan: No grading, filling or excavation of land shall take
place on a hillside or an area with an average slope of twenty percent (20%) or
greater until a grading plan has been submitted and approved by the city
engineer and a grading permit issued by the community development department.
   E.   Preparation And Compaction Of Fill Material: Any fill material shall be
prepared and compacted as specified in the city's then effective building code.
   F.   Steepness Of Slopes: Cut and fill slopes shall be no steeper than two
feet (2') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
   G.   Tops Or Toes Of Slopes: Tops or toes of slopes shall be set back from
property boundaries as required by the city's then effective building code.
   H.   Lot Size And Usable Area For Single-Family Dwelling Units: The minimum
lot size and minimum usable area with respect to parcels of real property upon
which single-family dwelling units may be located shall be determined by
reference to the following table:
 
Average Slope Of Minimum Lot Size      Minimum Lot Width Minimum Usable Area
Development Site
                 As indicated by       70 ft. at front   3,200 sq. ft. not less
0 - 15%          zoning                setback line      than 50 ft. in width
                                                         or length
                 The greater of 10,000 80 ft. at front   4,000 sq. ft. not less
Over 15% - 20%   sq. ft. or as         setback line      than 50 ft. in width
                 indicated by zoning                     or length
                 The greater of 15,000 100 ft. at front  5,000 sq. ft. not less
Over 20% - 30%   sq. ft. or as         setback line      than 50 ft. in width
                 indicated by zoning                     or length
Over 30%         Not permitted
 
   I.   Location Of Single-Family Dwelling Structures: Single- family dwelling
structures shall not be located farther than one hundred fifty feet (150') from
the nearest public street; provided, however, that the planning commission may
grant all exception to this requirement if its review of utility services, fire
access, surrounding land conditions, coordination of development or similar
circumstances warrants the exception.
   J.   Maintenance And Erosion Control: Areas which have been graded shall be
prepared and perpetually maintained to control erosion. After approval of the
city engineer and its building inspector, and prior to calling for final
inspection, the area shall be planted with appropriate vegetation. Where
necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap and other devices or methods approved
by the city engineer shall be employed to control erosion. If the final grading
is completed between October 15 and March 15 of the next year, then organic
cover material shall be placed on the graded area to eliminate erosion until
the soil can be permanently planted.
   K.   Natural Vegetation: Natural vegetation shall remain in areas where
grading is not permitted, and additional mitigation measures may be required by
the city engineer in ungraded and graded areas to prevent erosion and slope
failures.
   L.   Drainage Systems For Surface Water: Surface water runoff drainage
systems shall be designed and installed to carry water to the nearest
practicable drainageway. Drainage systems shall be approved by the city
engineer.
   M.   Ridgeline Protection Areas: No development shall intrude into any
ridgeline protection area that has been identified and designated by the city
during the development review and approval process for any development or
redevelopment within the city. For the purposes of this chapter, "designated
ridgeline protection areas" shall consist of prominent ridgelines that are
highly visible from public rights of way or trails, and shall include the crest
of any designated hill or slope, plus the land located within one hundred feet
(100') horizontally (map distance) on either side of the crest. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.76.400: WATERWAYS PROTECTION:
   A.   Purpose Statement: This section consists of supplemental regulations
pertaining to the development or redevelopment of land uses, near waterways.
Protection areas are therefore established within one hundred feet (100') of a
natural waterway and twenty feet (20') from a canal system. Development
standards within these areas are established to minimize erosion and stabilize
stream banks, improve water quality, reduce potential for flood damage,
preserve tree canopy, as well as to preserve in function and capacity all man-
made canals, ditches and other irrigation facilities. Whenever there is a
conflict between the regulations of a base zoning district and those described
within this section, the regulations of this section shall prevail.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Applicability: The regulations set forth in this section supplement
those regulations in the underlying base zoning district. In General, no person
shall engage in any ground disturbing activity, development or demolition
within 100 feet of a natural waterway and or 20 feet from a canal on a lot or
parcel that will remove, fill, dredge, clear, grub, destroy, armor, terrace, or
otherwise impact a waterway protection area through manipulation of soil or
other material except as allowed by:
         a.   Provision defined within this section.
         b.   Site plan approval by Planning Commission in conjunction with the
site plan approval processes set forth in
chapter 13.08 of this title.
         c.   The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Salt Lake County Flood Control,
the Utah State Engineer, or any other government agency with jurisdiction over
land within waterway protection buffer, and
      2.   Relationship to Other Laws: The requirements of this section shall
apply to other applicable federal, state, county, or city law or regulation.
         a.   Compliance with the requirements of this section shall not
relieve a landowner from compliance with other applicable provisions of Title
13 and Title 17 of this code except as expressly otherwise set forth in this
section.
         b.   If a landowner proposes a use or development which is dually
located within the areas described in this section and those areas located
within the jurisdiction of a federal or state government agency or Salt Lake
County, the landowner shall apply for approvals from both applicable
jurisdictions. If the relevant federal, state, or county agency approves the
use or development as in compliance with the agency’s requirements, then the
City shall issue a Waterway Protection Permit, subject to compliance with the
federal, state, or county approval and shall not independently review the use
or development for compliance with this section.
         c.   Salt Lake County utility services shall not be required to obtain
a Waterway Protection Permit for any county flood control activity authorized
by the Utah code within or along a natural waterway. However, Salt Lake County
shall obtain a Waterway Protection Permit for any stream restoration and non-
flood control development or other use located within the areas as described in
section
13.76.400E(2).
         d.   A city department or other canal company, irrigation water
provider or agency that conducts a use or development within a protection area
shall follow the requirements of this section and obtain a Waterway Protection
Permit if required.
   C.   Decision Making Authority:
      1.   Community and Economic Development Director (CED Director): Upon
receiving a recommendation from the city engineer, the CED Director shall be
responsible for implementing and administering the provisions of this section.
The CED Director:
         a.   May not make any decision involving land use, zoning,
subdivision, legal-conformity in a zoning district, historic preservation,
restoration, rehabilitation, or demolition of any structure except as expressly
set forth in this section;
         b.   Shall expedite the permit review process only if an applicant
reasonably demonstrates imminent danger to individuals or property is
associated with the subject land;
         c.   May adopt reasonable procedures, including approval of general
permits, to implement the provisions of this section; and
         d.   May designate one or more staff persons within the department to
carry out these responsibilities. Wherever this section refers to the CED
Director, such reference shall also include the Director’s designee.
      2.   Technical Review Committee (TRC): The TRC shall review the
application for completeness and make recommendation as per the process and
procedure set forth in subsection D.
      3.   Appeal Of Decision: Any person adversely affected by any decision
made may, within thirty (30) days, apply for an appeal as per 13.101 Appendix
B.
   D.   Review Process and Procedure:
      1.   Waterway Protection Permit: An application for all activity, as
regulated within this section, shall be created and maintained on file by the
Community and Economic Development Department.
      2.   Site plan requirements: To accompany the Waterway Protection Permit
application the following site plan elements shall be provided.
         a.   Subject property with all recorded property lines marked and;
         b.   The name, location and dimensions of the applicable water;
         c.   The Annual High Water (AHWL) Line and each protection area as
defined, labeled with contour elevations;
         d.   The location and setback of existing and proposed buildings and
structures from the AHWL;
         e.   Existing and proposed grades, labeled with contour elevations;
         f.   All trees greater than 2" caliper, with trees proposed for
removal highlighted and tree replacement plan as per Section
13.77;
         g.   FEMA floodplains, geological faults, high liquefaction areas, and
slopes thirty percent (30%) or greater;
         h.   Such other and further information or documentation as the City
Engineer may reasonably deem necessary for proper consideration of a particular
application, including, but not limited to, geotechnical and hydrological
reports required under subsection F8 of this section.
      3.   Annual High-Water Line: The waterway corridor delineated at the
elevation of water during annual high-water level. The AHWL is to be located at
the horizontal soil and vegetative boundary that distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial lands.
         a.   A boundary location or delineation required under this section
shall be prepared by a qualified licensed professional engineer or qualified
environmental scientist.
         b.   When the AHWL cannot be found, the City Engineer may approve the
AHWL delineation which meets the intent of this section.
      4.   Determination Of Completeness: Upon receipt of an application for a
Waterway Protection Permit, the TRC shall make a determination of completeness
of the application and remit the application the CED Director for review.
   E.   Waterway Protection Areas:
      1.   Undeveloped Land: The following protection areas are established for
undeveloped lots of record, created after the adoption date of this ordinance:
         a.   Big Cottonwood, Heughs Canyon Creek, Spring Creek:
            (1)   Area A: located between the AHWL and fifty feet (50') from
the AHWL; and
            (2)   Area B: located between fifty (50') one hundred feet (100')
from the AHWL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5195.png]
   Figure A.
         b.    U pper , Jordan and Salt Lake Can als: refer to 2(b) of this
section
      2.     Developed Land: The following protection areas are established for
existing and developed lots or parcels:
         a.   Big Cottonwood, Heughs Canyon Creek, Spring Creek:
            (1)   Area A: located between the AHWL and twenty-five feet (25')
from the AHWL;
            (2)   Area B: located between twenty-five (25') and fifty feet
(50') from the AHWL; and
            (3)    Area C: locat ed betw een fifty (50') and one hun dred feet
(100 ') from the AH WL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5193.png]
   Figure B.
         b.   Upper, Jordan and Salt Lake Canals:
            (1)   Area A: located between the AHWL and top of bank; and
            (2)    Area B: located between the AHWL and twenty feet (20') from
the AHWL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5191.png]
   Figure C.
      3.   Steep Slope And Soil Stability Standards: Steep slopes are
vulnerable to erosion and rely on vegetation to help stabilize them. Area A as
described in this section, Area A shall be extended in relation to the
steepness of the slope as provided in Figure C.
         a.   As part of a WWPP, when unstable soils are suspected or observed,
regardless of the slope the City Engineer may require a geotechnical report and
increase the no disturbance line or setbacks for structures or buildings from
the AHWL to ensure safety.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5189.png]
   Figure D.
   F.   Permitted Uses and Activities by Area:
      1.   Undeveloped Land: Permitted uses and activities allowed on an
undeveloped lot of record abutting Big Cottonwood Creek, Heughs Canyon Creek or
Spring Creek established on or after the adoption date of this ordinance are
shown on
Chart 13.76.401
         a.   Any use or development not shown on this table shall be
prohibited unless determined by the CED Director, upon recommendation by the
City Engineer, to be substantially similar in use to those shown as permitted.
         b.   Uses proposed on undeveloped land abutting a canal shall adhere
to
Chart 13.76.402, Abutting Upper, Jordan and Salt Lake Canals.
CHART 13.76.401
USES ALLOWED ON UNDEVELOPED LAND
Abutting Big Cottonwood Creek, Heughs Canyon Creek, Spring Creek:
Activities and Uses Area A (50 ft) Area B Comments
Abutting Big Cottonwood Creek, Heughs Canyon Creek, Spring Creek:
Activities and Uses         Area A (50 ft) Area B Comments
New primary or accessory                          See subsection D9 Df of this
structures as allowed by    -              P      section
underlying land use zone
Any action not constituting
emplacement of a structure  P              P       
or a ground disturbing
activity
Manual removal of trash,
storm debris, invasive      P              P       
plants and fallen trees by
the landowner
Minor ground disturbing     P              P      See subsection G1, 2 and 4 of
activity                                          this section
Pruning or tree removal
within utility easements by P              P       
responsible entity
Maintenance of existing
landscaping including tree  P              P       
and shrub pruning
Planting or replanting                            See Tree Selection Guide on
noninvasive trees and       P              P      file with department
vegetation
Tree and or stump removal                         See subsection G5,
and replacement of live     WPP            P      13.77.090
trees
Activities approved by U.S.                       See subsection B2b of this
army corps of engineers or  WPP            P      section
state engineer
Herbicide, pesticide and    -              P      in accordance with best
fertilizer application                            management practices
Commercial parking lot      -              WPP/   See subsection B1b of this
                                           P      section
Public utilities work       WPP/           WPP/   See subsection H3 of this
                            P              P      section
Trail on publicly owned     WPP            WPP    See subsection I of this
right of way                                      section
Leach field, stormwater
retention pond, and         -              -       
detention basin
Note: Uses allowed by right are indicated by the letter “P” (permitted); uses
which require a Waterway Protection Permit are indicated by the letters “WPP”
(permit required); and prohibited uses are indicated by a blank space (-).
 
      2.   Developed Land: Permitted uses and activities on a developed lot or
parcel within the waterway protection area are shown on
Chart 13.76.402.
         a.   Any use or development not shown on this table shall be
prohibited unless determined by the CED Director, upon recommendation of the
City Engineer, to be substantially similar in use to those shown as permitted.
         b.   Maintenance, upkeep and use of any lawfully established land use,
development, or structure existing on or after the 4th of March which is found
to be in violation of these provisions shall be deemed legal, non-conforming
and is authorized to continue as provided in this Section
13.76.400 of this Title.
CHART 13.76.402
USES ALLOWED ON DEVELOPED LAND
Abutting Big Cottonwood Creek, Heughs Canyon Creek, Spring Creek:
Activities and Uses Area A Area B Area C Comments
Abutting Big Cottonwood Creek, Heughs Canyon Creek, Spring Creek:
Activities and Uses           Area A Area B Area C Comments
New primary or accessory                           See subsection D9 Df and
structures as allowed by      -      -      P      E1bof this section
underlying land use zone
Replacement of a lawfully     -      WPP    P       
established structure
Expansion of a lawfully       WPP    WPP    P      See subsection G, F2(b) of
established structure or use                       this section
Maintenance of a lawfully     P      P      P       
established structure or use
Any action not constituting
development emplacement of a
structure or a ground         P      P      P       
disturbing activity except as
otherwise set forth on this
table
Manual removal of trash,
storm debris, invasive plants P      P      P       
and fallen trees by the
landowner
Removal of debris or trees    WPP    WPP    WPP    See subsections E3 and E4 of
with heavy equipment                               this section
Minor ground disturbance,     WPP    WPP    P      See subsections H1 G Df and
grading activities                                 E1b of this section
Pruning or tree removal
within utility easement by    P      P      P       
responsible entity
Maintenance of existing
landscaping including tree    P      P      P       
and shrub pruning, pathways
Planting or replanting                             see Tree Selection Guide on
noninvasive trees and         P      P      P      file with department
vegetation
Tree and or stump removal and WPP           P      See subsection G5,
replacement of live trees                          13.77.090
Activities approved by U.S.                        See subsection D7g of this
army corps of engineers or    P      P      P      section
state engineer
Herbicide, pesticide and      -      P      P      in accordance with best
fertilizer application                             management practices
Public Works and utilities    WPP/P  WPP/P  WPP/P  See subsection E11 of this
                                                   section
Trail maintenance or                               See subsection E9 of this
expansion on publicly owned   WPP    WPP    P      section
right of way
Leach field, septic system    -      -      WPP     
stormwater retention pond,    -      P      P       
and detention basin
Outside Storage of chemicals, -      -      -       
salts and fuels
Maintenance of existing fence P      P      P       
Open fence, new               WPP    P      P       
                                                   See subsections D8, Df and
Open patio, deck, stairways   WPP    P      P      E1b of this section. Any
and paths, new                                     decking not allowed within
                                                   Zone A
Compost from yard debris      -      P      P       
Commercial parking lot        -      -      WPP    see subsection D9 of this
                                                   section
Low impact stream crossing    WPP    na     na      
Maintenance of existing
irrigation and flood control  WPP    WPP    P       
devices
Installation and maintenance  WPP    WPP    WPP     
of erosion control devices
 
Abutting Upper, Jordan and Salt Lake Canals:
Activities and Uses Area A Area B Comments
Abutting Upper, Jordan and Salt Lake Canals:
Activities and Uses             Area A Area B Comments
New primary or accessory                      See subsection D9 Df and E1bof
structures as allowed by        -      -      this section
underlying land use zone
Replacement of a lawfully       -      WPP     
established structure
Expansion of a lawfully         -      WPP    See subsection G, F2(b) of this
established structure or use                  section
Maintenance of a lawfully       P      P      See subsection G, F2(b) of this
established structure or use                  section
Any action not constituting
development emplacement of a
structure or a ground           P      P
disturbing activity except as
otherwise set forth on this
table
Manual removal of trash, storm
debris, invasive plants and     P      P
fallen trees by the landowner
Removal of trees, live dead or  -      WPP    See subsections E3 and E4 of this
fallen with heavy equipment                   section
Minor ground disturbance,       -      WPP    See subsections H1 G Df and E1b
grading activities                            of this section
Pruning or tree removal within
utility easement by responsible P      P
entity
Maintenance of existing
landscaping including tree and  P      P
shrub pruning, pathways
Planting or replanting                        see Tree Selection Guide on file
noninvasive trees and           P      P      with department
vegetation
Tree and or stump removal and          WPP    See subsection G5,
replacement of live trees                     13.77.090
Herbicide, pesticide and        -      P      in accordance with best
fertilizer application                        management practices
Public Works and utilities      WPP/P  WPP/P  See subsection E11 of this
                                              section
Trail maintenance or expansion                See subsection E9 of this section
on publicly owned right of way
Leach field, septic system      -      -
stormwater retention pond, and  -      WPP
detention basin
Outside Storage of chemicals,   -      -
salts and fuels
Maintenance of existing fence   P      P
Open fence, new                 -      P
Open patio, deck, stairways and               See subsections D8, Df and E1b of
paths, new                      -      WPP    this section. Any decking not
                                              allowed within Zone A
Compost from yard debris        -      P
Commercial parking lot          -      -      see subsection D9 of this section
Low impact canal crossing       WPP    na
Maintenance of existing
irrigation and flood control    P      P
devices
Installation and maintenance of WPP    WPP
erosion control devices
Note: Uses allowed by right are indicated by the letter “P” (permitted); uses
which require a Waterway Protection Permit are indicated by the letters “WPP”
(permit required); and prohibited uses are indicated by a blank space (-).
 
      3.   Public Works and Utilities: In addition to the uses listed on the
foregoing tables, the city public works and utility providers may work within
the waterway protection area as provided herein:
         a.   Emergency Work: Emergency work to protect an immediate threat to
continuity of services, life or land is permitted. Work shall adhere to the
following procedures:
            (1)   The utility undertaking the work shall notify the city of
activity within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter.
            (2)   Any stream channel or riparian area damaged as a result of
utility work shall be restored. The Community and Economic Development
Department shall issue a WPP for such restoration work and shall inspect and
approve the work undertaken
            (3)   Temporary emergency structures, sandbags, and other emergency
related materials shall be removed from the site in a timely manner.
         b.   Other Work: the following work may be undertaken without a
Waterway Protection Permit:
            (1)   Channel or riparian restoration;
            (2)   Maintenance, including storm drainage system, irrigation
structures, utility and street work;
            (3)   Projects approved by the city, including, but not limited to,
new utility or street work; bridge maintenance, repair, replacement, or new
construction; public trails, such as bike and pedestrian paths located on
publicly owned land;
            (4)   Public gathering places such as amphitheaters and gazebos
located on publicly owned land;
            (5)   Maintenance of access roads or easements; and
            (6)   Utility service devices such as stormwater lift stations and
irrigation structures.
         c.   Equipment: Plans submitted for a WPP shall include a description
of equipment to be used for any work proposed. Such equipment shall be
sufficiently sized for the task and chosen to minimize any impact to a stream
channel and the riparian corridor area.
         d.   Construction Design Standards: The project engineer shall develop
construction design details and standards applicable to projects approved under
this subsection.
   G.   Use, Activity and Development Standards: The following standards are
established and shall be conducted as per WPP approval and shall be consistent
with any other federal or state regulations.
      1.   Area A: Minor Ground Disturbing work without the use heavy equipment
shall be allowed as follows:
         a.   Replacement of a structure within Area A is not allowed;
         b.   New construction or maintenance of access stairs and paths using
natural materials;
         c.   Minimal Ground Disturbance; maximum cut, fill of 6";
         d.   An open permeable patio using natural materials and constructed
in a manner that:
            (1)   Will not impede any high-water flow above the AHWL;
            (2)    Does not change the existing grade; and
            (3)   Is not greater than one hundred fifty (150) square feet;
         e.   Low impact stream crossings;
         f.   Construction of open fencing which is non-parallel to a waterway;
         g.   Maintenance of existing irrigation and flood control devices; and
         h.   Installation and maintenance of erosion control devices,
approved, if necessary, by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Salt Lake County
Flood Control, the Utah State Engineer or any other governmental authority with
jurisdiction.
      2.   Area B: Use and Activities shall be allowed as follows:
         a.   Open, paver or flagstone patios which do not involve footings or
foundations or existing a grade change of more than two feet (2'), and floating
surface decks with pre-cast deck block footings measuring no higher than two
feet (2') above existing grade;
         b.   Minimal Ground Disturbance; maximum cut, fill of 24";
         c.   Replacement of a structure within Area B shall require a WPP and
is allowed, consistent with the continuation of a legal, nonconforming uses and
structures as set forth in
chapter 13.88 of this title, if all of the following apply:
            (1)   The structure replaces a preexisting use or lesser impact of
a similar use pursuant to compliance with the underlying zoning district
standards;
            (2)   No portion of the footprint of the replacement structure is
any closer to the AHWL than the nearest point of the preexisting footprint;
            (3)   The total square footage of the portion of the footprint of
the new structure to be located within area A and/or B does not exceed the
total square footage of the original footprint;
            (4)   Does not require further armoring of the stream bank; and
            (5)   Is not located in any unstable area due to movement of a
steep slope, unstable soils, or geological activity along a fault that will not
support the structural footprint.
      3.   Building Expansion and Replacement: An existing, legally established
structure may be expanded or replaced as follows:
         a.   Area A: expansion of accessory structures of up to ten percent
(10%) as provided by a WWPP if such expansion does not result in any structure
being built closer to the AHWL than any portion of the existing structure.
            (1)   As a tradeoff for allowing expansion or with a larger
accessory structure, The CED Director shall require, as a condition of the
WWPP, that the landowner spend five percent (5%) of the project cost on stream
bank restoration or specify a minimum number of linear feet of stream bank that
shall be restored based on the size of the expansion and consistent with any
purpose or goals of the General Plan or as may be adopted and any subsequent
restoration project applicable to the waterway corridor. Completion of required
work to be verified by the City Engineer.
         b.   Area B: Replacement of a primary or accessory structure within
Area B as provided by a WWPP and does not result in any portion being built
closer to the AHWL. Expansion of the structure is limited to Area C and beyond
the Waterway protection area.
      4.   Use Of Heavy Equipment In Areas A and B: Heavy equipment may be used
as provided by a WPP issued pursuant to standards promulgated by the public
utilities director to minimize and mitigate impacts from the use thereof, and
subject to any applicable federal, state, and county requirements.
      5.   Tree Removal And Replacement: Trees located in areas A, B, or C as
described in this section are protected and regulated as Community Trees under
section
13.77.090 of this title.
         a.   The CED Director may review and approve a general permit for tree
stump removal with area B or C. Removal of any tree stump located within zone A
(25') of the AHWL shall be approved by the city engineer.
   H.   Piping of Existing Canals and Ditches: Irrigation ditches, also known
as “laterals”, and canals were historically designed and used as open channel
water conveyances, however, urban encroachment has created a need to pipe these
facilities. Piping of existing open channel facilities is permissible subject
to the following:
      1.   A WPP approval and signed recordable instrument, kept on file with
the department (“Irrigation Protection Agreement”) is required for altering
size or alignment of any irrigation canal, ditch, or other means of conveyance.
      2.   The permit will be subject to the review and approval of the City
Engineer and as appropriate the City Attorney; and
      3.   The Irrigation Protection Agreement shall be recorded against title
of the property conveying the purpose of perpetual and continual maintenance
and condition of the facility within the subject property.
   I.   Trails: Trails may be established along a publicly owned right of way
within any area located in the Waterway Protection Area.
      1.   A WPP shall be required for a trail located in area A.
      2.   Public access to private land adjoining a stream channel shall be
prohibited unless authorized by the landowner or pursuant to an access
easement. (Ord. 2021-04, 3-4-2021)
13.76.500: GARAGE SALES:
The following standards shall apply to all garage sales at residences within
the City:
   A.   Frequency: Frequency limited to three (3) times per calendar year.
There shall be no more than three (3) garage sales at a residence per calendar
year. The "calendar year" is defined as January 1 through December 31. Garage
sale events must be separated by at least a fourteen (14) day period.
   B.   Duration Of Sale: A garage sale is permitted for a period no longer
than three (3) consecutive days.
   C.   Location Of Garage Sale: The garage sales shall be located at the
actual residence of the owner of the materials to be sold. In the occurrence of
a neighborhood garage sale event (i.e., 3 to 5 neighbors pool their belongings
into a super garage sale), the materials must be located at the residence of
one of the participating sellers.
   D.   Commercial Areas: Temporary sales within commercial areas are permitted
as regulated elsewhere in this Code. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.501: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Permanent Foundation Required: In all commercial zones, all structures
including prefabricated units, enclosures and metal containers are to be on a
permanent foundation except those approved by the Community Development
Director to be temporary and for a limited designated time period not to exceed
four (4) months in a twelve (12) consecutive month period of time.
   B.   Removal Of Structure: Temporary buildings for uses incidental to
construction work must be removed upon the completion of the construction work.
If such buildings are not removed within ninety (90) days upon completion of
construction work and thirty (30) days after notice, the building will be
removed by the City at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.600: STREET TREE PROTECTION 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  13.77.080 of this title.
13.76.610: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
See section
13.98.020 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.700: FILL WORK AND LAND EXCAVATIONS; SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: This section is adopted to promote public safety
and the general public welfare; to protect property against loss from erosion,
earth movement and flooding; to maintain a superior community environment; to
provide for the continued orderly growth of the City; and to ensure the maximum
preservation of the natural scenic character of major portions of the City by
protecting against detrimental impacts to neighboring properties due to large
changes in the natural grade and topography; to prevent large unsightly exposed
surfaces of retaining walls that attract graffiti, generate large amounts of
heat and runoff, and create significant incompatibility between the grades of
neighboring properties; and to encourage preservation of the natural grade and
topography, and to encourage adaptation of new development to existing grades;
to establish minimum standards and requirements relating to land grading,
excavations, and fills, and procedures by which these standards and
requirements may be enforced. It is intended that this section be administered
with the foregoing purposes in mind and specifically in an attempt to:
      1.   Ensure that the development of each site occurs in a manner
harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of drainage, erosion,
earth movement and similar hazards.
      2.   Ensure the public lands and places, watercourses, streets, and all
other lands in the City are protected from erosion, earth movement or drainage
hazards.
      3.   Ensure that the planning, design and construction of all development
will be done in a manner which provides maximum safety and human enjoyment and
except where specifically intended otherwise, makes such construction as
unobtrusive in the natural terrain as possible.
      4.   Ensure the maximum retention of natural vegetation to aid in
protection against erosion, earth movement and other hazards and to aid in
preservation of the natural scenic qualities of the community.
      5.   Provide for a recordable instrument of acknowledgement executable by
the property owner accepting maintenance of grading and/or surface water
retention improvements. (Ord. 2018-16, 10-11-2018)
   B.   Permit Required:
      1.   Grading permits are required for work on new developments,
construction projects, rivers, washes, streams, floodplains, detention basins,
dams, ditches, drainage culverts, slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%),
rock pits, roads, utilities, well drilling. Permitted and non-permitted work
shall not encroach nor impact on adjacent properties. Sanitary (garbage)
landfills and hazardous material depositories shall not be allowed. A grading
permit may be combined with a building permit.
      2.   For work requiring a permit, plans and specifications shall be
completed by a registered professional engineer and/or a registered
professional landscape architect or registered professional arborist.
      3.   Retaining walls in excess of four feet (4') require a permit. Plans
shall be submitted in accordance with subsection F of this section. (Ord. 2019-
04, 2-28-2019)
      4.   Approved permits shall be issued upon execution of an
acknowledgement of "Site Grading Management Agreement" kept on file with the
City, which shall be recorded against the property.
   C.   Responsibility: Failure of the City officials to observe or recognize
hazardous or unsightly conditions, or to recommend denial of the conditional
use permit, or of the Planning Commission to deny said permit shall not relieve
the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damages resulting
therefrom.
   D.   Retention Of Plans: Plans, specifications and reports for all
conditional use permit applications submitted to the City for approval shall be
retained by the City for a minimum period of two (2) years.
   E.   Inspections:
      1.   The Community Development Director and building official, with
assistance from the City Engineer, shall make the inspections of all projects
under "permit". Where it is found that conditions substantially differ from
those stated or shown in the conditional use permit application, the City may
stop further work until and unless approval is obtained for a revised grading
plan conforming to the existing conditions.
      2.   Plans for grading work shall be maintained at the site during the
progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, the building
permit shall be prominently displayed near the front property line of the
property involved so as to be visible from the street on which the property
fronts.
      3.   In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the City
twenty four (24) hours before said inspection is to be made.
      4.   Inspections shall be made:
         a.   Before commencement of grading operations and after required
construction stakes have been set; and
         b.   When all rough grading has been completed; and
         c.   When all work, including installation of all drainage and other
structures and required planting, has been completed.
   F.   Standards And Specific Requirements For Grading And Retaining Wall
Systems:
      1.   All grading, fill work and excavation shall comply with the
requirements set forth in this chapter in addition to other requirements of
this Code.
      2.   All grading and excavation in or adjacent to residential
neighborhoods shall comply with the City's noise ordinance.
      3.   All graded or disturbed surfaces of excavations, and all equipment
materials and roadways on the site shall be dampened or suitably treated,
managed, or contained to prevent the deposit of dust on neighboring properties;
all materials transported to or from the site shall be so contained during
transportation as to prevent spillage on streets or other property outside of
the site.
      4.   Maximum unretained or exposed slope of a permanent cut and fill area
shall be thirty percent (30%). The City Engineer may require the percent of
slope of a cut or fill to be reduced if it is found that the cut or fill is
subject to unusual or excessive erosion, or if other conditions make such
requirements necessary for stability.
      5.   All fill, except in publicly approved refuse disposal or other
landfill operations, shall be earth, rock, or other inert materials free from
organic material and free of metal, and except that topsoil spread on cut and
fill surfaces may incorporate humus for desirable moisture retention and plant
growth properties.
      6.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from
damaging the cut face of an excavation or any portion of a fill. All drainage
ways and structures shall carry surface waters without producing erosion to the
nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse acceptable to the
City Engineer as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters. The City
Engineer may require such drainage structures to be constructed or installed as
necessary to prevent erosion damage or to prevent saturation of the fill or
material behind cut slopes.
      7.   Exposed or finished cuts or slopes of any fill or excavation shall
be smoothly graded to a maximum slope of thirty percent (30%). All exposed
slopes of any cut or fill shall be protected from erosion or sloughing by
approved plantings or graded terracing, crib walls or walls and planting,
terracing, or combination thereof.
      8.   Artificial Grade Alterations:
         a.   Grading intended to raise and level the developable area of a
site to support driveways, patios or other structures shall be limited to a
maximum of two feet (2') above the averaged grade elevations of the abutting
properties.
         b.   Maximum depth of backfilled grades within four feet (4') of a
property line shall be two feet (2') and finished at a 1:1 slope.
      9.   Retaining walls or retaining wall systems within a required yard
setback require review and approval by the City Engineer and shall be located,
designed and constructed as follows.
      For the purposes of this section a retaining wall or grade retaining
system may include, but is not limited to, gravity, crib, gabion, cantilever,
rip-rap boulder or anchored systems designed to retain lateral soil loads.
      FIGURE 13.76.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5041.png]
         a.   Prohibited Locations: No retaining wall or retaining wall system
shall be constructed on a property line, or within a recorded easement(s) as
shown in
figure 13.76.1.
         b.   Retaining walls holding the cut soil of the natural slope shall
designed and constructed as shown in
figure 13.76.1.
            (1)   Minimum one foot (1') setback to any footing of the retaining
wall.
            (2)   The maximum height of any retaining wall shall not exceed six
feet (6') below the natural grade.
            (3)   The area to be cut and retained shall not to exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the required setback area.
            (4)   Retaining walls located in a required front yard or required
corner side-yard setback, along a public or private right-of-way, shall be set
back a minimum of four feet (4') from the right-of-way line.
            (5)   Each subsequent retaining wall must be accompanied by a
horizontal landscaped offset measuring no less than the height of the retaining
wall.
            (6)   Guard rails, barriers, or other screening type structures
used in conjunction with a retaining wall shall not exceed forty two inches
(42") above the top of the wall.
         c.   Retaining walls or retaining wall systems holding artificially
backfilled grades within a required setback shall be designed and constructed
as shown in
figure 13.76.1, Retaining Backfilled Grades.
            (1)   Minimum of an eight foot (8') setback required for any
retaining wall system.
            (2)   Each subsequent retaining wall must be accompanied by an
additional, horizontal landscaped offset of eight feet (8').
            (3)   The maximum height of any retaining wall shall not exceed
four feet (4') measured from the natural grade. Height shall be stepped
horizontally every ten feet (10') to accommodate the natural topography.
            (4)   Guard rails, barriers, or other screening type structures
used in conjunction with a retaining wall shall not exceed forty two inches
(42") above the top of the wall.
         d.   Retaining walls or retaining wall systems adjacent a natural
waterway or canal shall adhere to the provisions set forth in section
13.76.400 of this title.
      10.   Retaining walls associated with a residential or nonresidential,
planned development use may be approved by the Planning Commission upon
recommendation of the Technical Review Committee according to procedures set
forth in section
13.78 of this title.
      11.   Any pipe trench or other trenching or excavation made in any slope
of any excavation or filled site shall be backfilled and compacted to the level
of the surrounding grades.
      12.   Unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer, all fills governed
by this Code intended to support buildings, structures, or where otherwise
required to be compacted for stability, shall be compacted, inspected and
tested in accordance with the following provisions:
         a.   The natural ground surface shall be prepared by removal of
topsoil and vegetation and, if necessary, shall be graded to a series of
terraces;
         b.   The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not
exceeding six inches (6") in thickness, and shall be compacted by "sheepsfoot"
roller compactor (after each layer is spread) or other method acceptable to the
City Engineer;
         c.   The moisture content of the fill material shall be controlled at
the time of spreading and compaction to obtain required maximum density;
         d.   The fill material after compaction shall have an average dry
density of not less than ninety five percent (95%) of maximum dry density and a
minimum of ninety percent (90%) in all portions of the fill requiring
compaction as determined by the AASHO soil compaction test method T180-57, or
other testing method acceptable to the City Engineer;
         e.   A written report of the compaction, showing location and depth of
test holes, materials used, moisture conditions, recommended soil bearing
pressures, and relative density obtained from all tests, prepared by a civil
engineer or soils engineer licensed by the State of Utah, shall be submitted to
the City Engineer; and
         f.   The Community Development Director and/or the City Engineer may
require additional tests or information if, in his opinion, the conditions or
materials are such that additional information is necessary, and may modify or
delete any of the above listed requirements that in his opinion are unnecessary
to further the purpose of this Code.
      13.   All cut and fill surfaces created by grading except for firebreak
purposes shall be seeded with a ground cover that is compatible with the
natural ground covers in the City. Topsoil is to be stockpiled during rough
grading and used on cut and fill slopes. When slopes too steep to support
continuous ground cover have been permitted and in lieu thereof niches and
ledges provided for planting, such slopes need not be planted with a continuous
ground cover, but may instead be screened with vines and plantings. Cuts and
fills along public roads may be required to be landscaped so as to blend into
the natural surroundings. All plant materials must be approved by the Community
Development Director prior to issuance of a conditional use permit.
      14.   Filling of the ground for agricultural or fire protection purposes
shall be accomplished with such practices as will prevent erosion and damage to
natural drainage channels. (Ord. 2018-16, 10-11-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-12, 7-16-
2020))
   G.   Final Inspection:
      1.   If upon final inspection of any grading it is found that the work
authorized by the conditional use permit has been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the requirements of this Code and any other requirements
imposed, the Community Development Director shall issue a certificate of
compliance.
      2.   The Planning Commission shall have the power to revoke any
conditional use permit whenever it is found that the work covered by the
certificate has been materially extended or altered without prior approval, or
that any planting, retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, or other
protective devices as shown on the approved plans and specifications submitted
with the application for a permit have not been maintained in good order and
repair.
      3.   Before such revocation, the Community Development Director shall
first give fifteen (15) calendar days' written notice to the owner of the
property involved, specifying the defective condition and stating that unless
such defective condition is remedied satisfactorily, the conditional use permit
may be revoked. If the defective condition is remedied to the satisfaction of
the community development director, the certificate shall not be revoked.
   H.   Special Precautions:
      1.   Special precautions shall be taken to preserve life, property
values, stable soils conditions and aesthetics, including, but not limited to,
the following:
         a.   Requiring a level exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of
plant materials for erosion control, and reports of a registered soils engineer
and/or engineering geologist whose recommendation may be made a requirement for
further mitigation of unstable conditions. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
         b.   Where it appears that storm runoff damage may result from work
performed hereunder, such work may be stopped and the permittee required to
take such measures as may be necessary to protect adjacent property or the
public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail,
the community development director may specify the time at which grading may
proceed and the time of completion or may require that the operation be
conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures
or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   I.   Excavations:
      1.   All excavations shall be limited as follows:
         a.   No cut slope shall exceed a vertical height of fifty feet (50')
unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of twenty feet (20') are
installed at each fifty feet (50') of vertical height.
         b.   No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than
two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise approved by the community
development director based on the recommendation of a professionally prepared
soils report and/or after supporting data supplied by the applicant. In no case
shall slopes be cut steeper than the bedding planes, fault or joint in any
formation where the cut slope will lie on the dip side of the strike line of
the fracture, bedding plane, fault or joint. No slopes shall be cut in an
existing landslide, mudflow, or other form of naturally unstable slope except
as recommended by a qualified geological engineer. Where the excavation is
exposed straight above the top of the cut that will permit the entry of water
along bedding planes, this area shall be sealed with a compacted soil blanket
having a minimum thickness of two feet (2'). The soil for this blanket shall be
relatively impervious and must be approved for such use by the soils
engineering geologist. If the material of the slope is of such composition and
character as to be unstable under the anticipated maximum moisture content, the
slope angle shall be reduced to a stable value.
      2.   No excavation for construction of new utility lines shall be made in
paved public streets within three (3) years after paving. During said three (3)
year period, utility excavations may be authorized by the city for emergency
reasons and when delaying such excavation would cause undue hardship provided
that pavement repair and mitigation measures acceptable to the city engineer
are implemented.
   J.   Fills:
      1.   All fills shall be limited as follows:
         a.   No fill slope shall exceed a vertical height of fifty feet (50')
unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of twenty feet (20') are
installed at each fifty feet (50') of vertical height.
         b.   No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in
slope than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise approved by
the community development director based on the recommendations of a
professionally prepared soils report and/or other supporting data provided by
the applicant.
   K.   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting
the removal of topsoil solely for resale, or of permitting quarrying of any
site within the limits of the city.
      2.   This chapter shall also not be construed as authorizing any person
to maintain a private or public nuisance upon his or her property, and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any
action to abate such nuisance.
   L.   Remediation: In addition to enforcement provisions pursuant to
chapter 13.94 of this title, violations of this section shall be subject to
mandatory remediation of the site as specified by the community development
director with technical assistance from the city engineer. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.76.710: FENCES:
No fence, wall or hedge shall be erected or reconstructed unless in conformity
with the regulations specified in this chapter.
   A.   Fencing Permit Required: No fence, wall or hedge shall be constructed
or reconstructed within the setback area abutting a public street or private
right of way without a fencing permit signed by the community development
director or his designee.
   B.   Fences In The Front Yard Area:
      1.   The maximum height of any fence in the front yard area as defined in
section
13.04.040 of this title and abutting a public street shall be four feet (4').
      2.   Exception:
         a.   A six foot (6') fence may be allowed when directly abutting the
following public streets:
            Big Cottonwood Road (6200 South Street)
            Cottonwood Lane north of Walker Lane
            Highland Drive
            Holladay Boulevard
            Spring Lane
            Walker Lane west of the easternmost intersection of Cottonwood Lane
            2300 East north of Holladay Village zone boundary
            3900 South
            4500 South
            5600 South
         b.   In the front yard of any lot in an R-1 zone which has an area
equal to or greater than one acre and:
            (1)   Is not view obscuring; or
            (2)   Made of chainlink.
         c.   And, the proposed fencing complies with the setback to height
ratio as shown on
figure 13.76.710(B) of this section.
FIGURE 13.76.710(B) - FENCING IN FRONT YARD AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4970.gif]
      3.   The community development director may approve a fence up to five
feet (5') in height in the second front yard area of a double frontage lot on a
public street if the proposed fence is set back from the property line a
minimum of two feet (2'). Gated access from the street is subject to a minimum
setback from the property line of at least eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 2017-02,
1-26-2017)
   C.   Fences In The Side And Rear Yard Areas:
      1.   The maximum height of any fence in the rear or side yard area, as
defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, is six feet (6').
      2.   The community development director or his designee is authorized to
approve, by permit, the installation of a fence up to eight feet (8') in height
in the side and/or rear yard area of any lot or parcel provided that all the
following conditions are met:
         a.   The proposed fencing is located along an interior side or a rear
property line only. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
         b.   The proposed fencing does not encroach into any required setback
area abutting a public street, any area designated for future street widening,
and/or trail designation. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
         c.   The abutting property owners have agreed in writing to the
request for additional height.
         d.   In the event an abutting property owner(s) to the rear
(perpendicular) of a proposed interior side fence objects to the additional
height, the additional height may be approved provided that the additional
height does not commence any closer than ten feet (10') to the abutting
property line of the objecting owner. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
The community development director finds the additional fencing is justified by
the particular circumstances of the property such as, lot configuration,
building placement on the lot, slope, and/or negative impacts to the property
from adjacent uses. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
FIGURE 13.76.710(C) - AREA OF REDUCED FENCE HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4972.gif]
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Fences In The Corner-Side Yard Area Abutting The Street:
      1.   The maximum height of a fence in the corner-side yard area as shown
in
figure 13.76.710(D1) of this section shall be five feet (5').
FIGURE 13.76.710(D1) - CORNER-SIDE YARD AREA1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4974.gif]
Note:
1.   Subject also to clear view restrictions.
      2.   The community development director may approve a fence up to six
feet (6') in height in the corner-side yard area if the proposed fence is set
back from the property line as shown on figure 13.76.710(D2) of this section.
FIGURE 13.76.710(D2) - FENCING HEIGHTS ON CORNER LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4976.gif]
(Ord. 2017-02, 1-26-2017)
   E.   Sport Court Fencing: The community development director or his designee
is authorized to approve the installation of nonsight obscuring sport court
fencing up to twelve feet (12') in height under the following circumstances:
      1.   The fence is not in the front yard area of the lot.
      2.   Sport court lighting shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height;
and
         a.   The fixture must be hooded, shielded, and/or directed in such a
manner that it illuminates only the user's premises.
         b.   The hood or shield must mask the direct horizontal surface of the
light source. The light must be aimed to ensure that the illumination is only
pointing downward onto the ground surface, with no escaping light permitted to
contribute to sky glow by shining upward into the sky.
         c.   All fixtures shall be designed, installed, located and maintained
such that nuisance glare onto adjacent properties shall be prohibited and all
direct illumination kept within the boundaries of the fixture owners' property.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      3.   The abutting property owner(s) have agreed in writing to the request
for additional height. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
      4.   In the event an abutting property owner(s) objects to the additional
height, the additional height may be approved provided that the additional
fence height does not commence any closer than ten feet (10') to the abutting
property line of the objecting owner.
   F.   Measurement Of Fence Heights: All fence heights shall be measured from
natural grade as noted in the following illustration, except for fences
abutting public roads/streets the basis for measuring height shall be the top
back of curb or the elevation of the edge of the existing roadway.
FIGURE 13.76.710(F1) - HOW TO MEASURE FENCE HEIGHTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4978.gif]
   G.   Landscaping: When a fence is set back from the public right of way, the
area in front of it shall be landscaped and maintained. The city encourages
water wise landscaping wherever possible.
   H.   Clear View:
      1.   No obstruction in excess of two feet (2') in height shall be placed
within the required clear view area of a corner lot as shown in
figure 13.76.710(H) of this section.
FIGURE 13.76.710(H) - CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4980.gif]
      2.   No fences or other obstruction in excess of two feet (2') in height
shall be placed within the required clear view area at driveways as shown in
figure 13.76.710(H) of this section.
   I.   Vehicular Gates:
      1.   All gates must be set back from the public right of way at least
eighteen feet (18') to permit vehicles to pull off the right of way before
being stopped by the gate.
      2.   Decorative or ornamental features of entrance gates are allowed to
exceed the permitted fence height up to a maximum height of eight feet (8').
   J.   Fencing Along Private Rights Of Way: Fences along private rights of way
are exempt from the provisions of this section except that no fence constructed
along the property line shall exceed eight feet (8') in height.
   K.   Nonconforming Fences: Existing fences within the corporate limits of
the city as of June 19, 2003, are to be considered nonconforming.
   L.   Maintenance: All fences, both existing and new, and all parts thereof,
shall be maintained in a safe and aesthetically pleasing condition. Graffiti
shall be removed immediately upon notification. The owner or his designated
agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the fence. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.76.715: BED AND BREAKFAST:
A bed and breakfast use may be approved by the planning commission if it meets
all of the following standards:
   A.   The dwelling must:
      1.   Have frontage on a street with a minimum right of way of eighty feet
(80');
      2.   Contain a maximum of five (5) guestrooms; and
      3.   Be occupied by the owner or individual responsible for operating the
facility.
   B.   Breakfast may be served during the A.M. hours. Lunch or dinner may not
be served.
   C.   This use shall not change the character of the dwelling or property for
residential purposes.
   D.   The business shall meet the applicable requirements of titles 5 and 15
of this code, the Salt Lake Valley health department and the unified fire
authority.
   E.   For a bed and breakfast use in the FR zones the following additional
requirement shall apply:
      1.   The access to the site and the on site parking are available for use
and maintained, including snow removal, throughout the entire year; and
      2.   An approved drinking water supply and wastewater disposal system is
available that is capable of supporting the use throughout the entire year, and
is approved by the health department prior to issuance of a license.
   F.   In the R-M zones, a bed and breakfast use shall only be approved on
lots with a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 2012-15,
9-20-2012)
13.76.720: HOME DAYCARE/PRESCHOOL:
A home daycare/preschool may be approved by the planning commission if it meets
all of the following standards:
   A.   There shall be a maximum of twelve (12) children on premises at one
time, including the caregiver's own children under the age of six (6) and not
in full day school.
   B.   There shall be no more than one employee present at one time who does
not reside in the dwelling.
   C.   The home daycare/preschool caregiver shall comply with all applicable
licensing requirements under title 5 of this code.
   D.   The use shall comply with all applicable noise regulations.
   E.   The play yard shall not be located in the front yard and only shall be
used between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   F.   The lot shall contain one available on site parking space not required
for use of the dwelling, and an additional available on site parking space not
required for use of the dwelling for each employee not residing in the
dwelling. The location of the parking shall be approved by the community
development director to ensure that the parking is functional and does not
change the residential character of the lot.
   G.   No signs shall be allowed on the dwelling or lot except a nameplate
sign.
   H.   The use shall comply with all local, state and federal laws and
regulations.
   I.   Upon complaint that one or more of the requirements of this section or
other city ordinance is being violated by a home daycare/preschool caregiver,
the city shall review the complaint and, if substantiated, may: 1) set a
hearing before the planning commission to revoke the conditional use permit;
and/or 2) institute a license revocation proceeding under title 5 of this code.
   J.   All property owners within a five hundred foot (500') radius of the
caregiver's property shall be mailed notice concerning the licensing of a home
daycare/preschool, at such property.
      1.   Such notice shall not be a condition precedent to the legality of
such license, and
      2.   No such license shall be deemed invalid or illegal because of a
failure to mail such notice. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.725: HOME DAYCARE/PRESCHOOL, SMALL:
A small home daycare/preschool is exempt from the home occupation requirements
under section
13.76.730 of this chapter, but must meet all of the following standards:
   A.   There shall be a maximum of six (6) children on premises at one time,
including the caregiver's own children under the age of six (6) and not in full
day school.
   B.   There shall be no employees that do not reside in the dwelling.
   C.   The small home daycare/preschool caregiver shall comply with all
applicable licensing requirements under title 5 of this code.
   D.   The use shall comply with all applicable noise regulations.
   E.   The play yard shall not be located in the front yard and only shall be
used between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   F.   The lot shall contain one available on site parking space not required
for use of the dwelling. The location of the parking shall be approved by the
community development director to ensure that the parking is functional and
does not change the residential character of the lot.
   G.   No signs shall be allowed on the dwelling or lot except a nameplate
sign.
   H.   The use shall comply with all local, state and federal laws and
regulations.
   I.   Upon complaint that one or more of the requirements of this section or
other city ordinance is being violated by a small home daycare/preschool
caregiver, the city shall review the complaint and, if substantiated, may
institute a license revocation proceeding under title 5 of this Code.
   J.   All property owners within a five hundred foot (500') radius of the
caregiver's property shall be mailed notice concerning the licensing of a small
home daycare/preschool, at such property.
      1.   Such notice shall not be a condition precedent to the legality of
such license, and
      2.   No such license shall be deemed invalid or illegal because of a
failure to mail such notice. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.730: HOME OCCUPATION:
   A.   Purpose: Home occupations, as an accessory use to a primary residential
use, promote local and sustainable economic growth and development. The purpose
of this section is to permit allow, by license, permitted and conditional types
of home occupations within single-family, duplex, and multi-family dwellings
within zones as shown in the Table of Allowed Uses (
13.100.010) and ensure that home occupations are compatible within the zone in
which they are located, having decidedly no negative minimal and reasonable
impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. Home occupations are an accessory use
to the residential use and are intended to promote local and sustainable
economic growth and development.
   B.   No home occupation license shall be required for businesses that:
      1.   Do not have customers or clients that come to the home;
      2.   Do not have employees who come to the home; and
      3.   Do not have combined offsite impacts of the home-based business and
the primary residential use that exceed the impact of the residential use
alone.
   C.   Home Occupations that do not comply with the standards of this section
shall apply for a Conditional Use Permit as per
13.08.040.
   D.   Permitted Home Occupations: All home occupations not specifically
listed as prohibited may be permitted subject to their compliance with the
standards specified in subsection I of this section.
   E.   Home Occupations Prohibited: The following businesses, regardless of
their conformance with the standards in subsection I of this section, are
prohibited as home occupations. This section supersedes any other allowed uses
within this Title.
      1.   Motor and recreational vehicle repair
      2.   Kennels
      3.   Welding, metal fabrication, or machine shops
      4.   Large appliance/electronics or equipment repair or service (washers,
dryers, refrigerators, and other appliances or equipment that are too large to
be carried in 1 individual’s arms)
      5.   Truck hauling
      6.   Deliveries
      7.   Stables/Boarding
      8.   Bottling plant
      9.   Commercial bakery
      10.   Industrial assembly
      11.   Laboratory, medical, dental, optical
      12.   Laboratory, testing
      13.   Sale or repair of firearms
      14.   Stocking and sale of ammunition
      15.   Stock and trade
      16.   Tattoos and body art
   F.   Applications for home occupations shall include the following
information:
      1.   Completed Business License Application
      2.   A complete description of the type of business proposed including
the location of the storage and operations area for the home occupation.
      3.   The expected hours of operation of the business
      4.   The expected number of clients per hour and total expected number of
clients visiting the home per day.
      5.   Drop off and pick up routes and locations
      6.   Location of parking for clients in relation to the nature of the
business
   G.   License required: It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
association to engage in a “home occupation” as defined in chapter of this
title without first obtaining a license pursuant to the provisions of Title 5,
Section
5.06.020 of this code. Prior to issuance of said license, the criteria set
forth in this title must be satisfied and all applicable fees shall be paid.
All home occupation permits shall be valid for one year, and may be renewed
annually, provided there have been no reported violations, subject to
subsection J of this section.
   H.   Determination of Completeness: Upon receipt of an application for a
home occupation, the Business License Official shall make a determination of
completeness.
   I.   Standards: All home occupations shall comply with the following
standards:
      1.   The home occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
primary use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
      2.   The dwelling unit must be the primary place of residence for the
person(s) conducting the home occupation.
      3.   The area of the residence used for home occupations shall remain in
character with the rest of the home except for minor renovations necessary to
conduct an approved home occupation.
      4.   The home occupation shall not be conducted in, nor in any way use, a
carport, or any portion of the yard. A home occupation may use a garage or
other fully enclosed accessory structure provided all other standards in this
section are met. A home occupation may not eliminate or occupy required parking
areas for a dwelling within a garage. A home occupation license to distribute
produce grown on the premises for off-premises sales may be conducted in the
rear yard and include the use of accessory buildings but may not occupy
required parking areas; Home occupation work conducted at the residence shall
not involve more than one employee other than the business owner(s);
      5.   Except for the applicant’s personal transportation, there shall be
no vehicles or equipment stored outdoors, which would not normally be found at
a residence. Service vehicles which double as a personal vehicle such as
taxicabs, limousine, or other vehicles used for mobile businesses and used for
off-site services may only be parked on-site in a legal parking area;
      6.   Delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment, to the site of the
home occupation, shall be made by a vehicle typically employed in residential
deliveries. No deliveries to the site of the home occupation by semi-tractor/
trailer truck shall be permitted. Loading and deliveries to the site of the
home occupation shall be limited to the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o’clock (6:00) P.M.;
      7.   Tools, items, equipment shall be limited to those that are commonly
associated with a residential use or are customary to home crafts. Tools,
items, equipment, or occupations which are offensive or noxious by reason of
the emission of odor, smoke, gas, fumes, dust, vibration, magnetic or
electrical interference, noise, or other similar impacts extending beyond the
property line of the lot where the occupation is located, are prohibited.
Operations shall not violate noise ordinance as detailed in City of Holladay
Code Title 9, Chapter 9.48.
      8.   No outdoor storage is permitted in conjunction with the occupation
other than produce for off premises sales, outlined in subsection H4 of this
section;
      9.   Customers/Clients shall be allowed at the residence only if
scheduled on an appointment basis and are only allowed between the hours of
seven a.m. and nine p.m. Group lessons or sessions shall not exceed six people
at a time.
      10.   In addition to the parking spaces required for the residents of the
dwelling, parking for clients and for an employee, if allowed under subsection
(E) above, must be provided in the driveway or garage. On-street parking may be
approved by the Community and Economic Development Director, upon application,
and with a recommendation by the TRC, under circumstances where on-site parking
creates a safety issue or is in conflict with property access and use. On-
street parking proposals may not exceed one vehicle space and must be located
immediately in front of the residence or within 200 feet of the residence. Off-
site parking agreements may be utilized to fulfil parking requirements.
Temporary exceedance of allowed parking on-site may only occur twice within a
single calendar month.
      11.   Stock in trade, and/or direct retail sales are prohibited.
Incidental or secondary sales ensuing from the services provided in conjunction
with the home occupation are permitted. Commodities produced on the premises
may be sold on the premises only under the conditions of this title.
      12.   The premises of a home occupation may be inspected during
reasonable stated business hours to determine compliance with the provisions of
this title.
      13.   If additional home occupations are being conducted within ¼ mile at
the time of application, additional conditions to mitigate increased traffic or
other potential impacts in the area may be applied by the Community and
Economic Development Director, upon review and recommendation by the TRC.
   J.   Decision By The Community and Economic Development Director: The
Community and Economic Development Director shall, with a recommendation by the
TRC, issue a permit for the home occupation if they find that:
      1.   The provisions of this title are satisfied;
      2.   The home occupation will be in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood and will not adversely affect the desirability or stability of the
neighborhood;
      3.   The home occupation does not diminish the use and enjoyment of
adjacent properties or create an adverse parking impact on adjacent streets or
properties;
      4.   The home occupation will not negatively impact the future use of the
property as a residence;
      5.   The home occupation will not adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare; and
      6.   The home occupation conforms with all fire, building, plumbing,
electrical and health codes.
   K.   Loss Of Home Occupation Use: The Community and Economic Development
Director may apply any associated land use fine according to Title 3, Chapter
3.35 and/or terminate any home occupation use upon making findings that support
either or both of the following conclusions:
      1.   Any of the required licenses or permits necessary for the operation
of the business have been revoked or suspended; or
      2.   Any of the provisions of this title have been violated.
   L.   Termination of Home Occupation:
      1.   The licensee shall be responsible for the operation of the licensed
premises in conformance with this code. Any business license issued by the city
may be suspended or revoked per the provisions of Title 5, Section
5.10.020 of this code.
   M.   Appeals:
      1.   Any termination of a home occupation may be appealed pursuant to the
provisions of Title 5, Section
5.11.050 of this code as if the termination were a business license revocation.
      2.   Any person adversely affected by the denial or issuance of a permit
for a home occupation may appeal that decision to the appeals hearing officer
pursuant to Title 5, Section
5.11.010 of this title.
   N.   Existing Home Occupation Licenses: Existing licenses for home
occupations which were legal under the prior zoning ordinance regulating home
occupations but which are not permitted under this title are subject to the
following:
      1.   May continue in operation, subject to the approved conditions of
their conditional use permit.
      2.   Shall discontinue operation upon transfer of ownership of the
property. Any new owner shall reapply for a Home Occupation Permit under the
provisions of this section.
   O.   Non-transferability: Permits for home occupations are personal to the
applicant, non-transferable and do not run with the land.
(Ord. 2017-17, 6-15-2017; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 3-21-2024)
13.76.735: SHORT TERM RENTAL:
Short term rentals, as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title, shall only be approved by the Planning Commission
if:
   A.   The dwelling unit is located in a single-family or two- family
dwelling, but not located in a planned unit development.
   B.   The dwelling or portion thereof that is available for accommodations or
lodging of each guest or guests, for a period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
   C.   A short term rental shall not contain more than four (4) bedrooms.
   D.   A short term rental shall be maintained to the following minimum
standards:
      1.   Structures shall be properly maintained, painted and kept in good
repair, and grounds and landscaped areas shall be properly maintained and
watered in order that the use in no way detracts from the general appearance of
the neighborhood; and
      2.   Required parking areas and access to parking areas shall be
maintained and available for use at all times. Parking for this use shall be
contained on the site, and shall not be allowed on the public rights-of-way;
and
      3.   Snow shall be removed from sidewalks and driveways within one (1)
hour after the snow has ceased falling; provided, that in case of a storm
between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., the
sidewalk shall be cleaned before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the morning
following the storm. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   E.   Occupants of a short term rental shall not create excessive noise that
is incompatible with adjacent land uses. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   F.   A short term rental use shall not have signs on the premises that
advertise the use.
   G.   The use of a dwelling as a short term rental shall not change the
appearance of the dwelling or property for residential purposes.
   H.   Outdoor pools, hot tubs or spas shall not be used between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
   I.   The site has frontage on a street with an existing or proposed right of
way of at least sixty six feet (66'), as identified on the map entitled
"circulation map" adopted as part of the city of Holladay general plan. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.740: JUNK:
For the purpose of this title all the following shall be considered junk:
   A.   Salvaged or scrap metal, rope, rags, batteries, paper, wood, trash,
plastic, rubber, tires and waste, or other articles or materials commonly
designated as junk.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection A or C of this section, shall also
mean dismantled, wrecked or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof which
are stored or parked on property outside of an enclosed building and which
remain in such condition for a period of time in excess of sixty (60) days. An
automobile, truck or bus shall be considered inoperable if it is not currently
registered and licensed.
   C.   One truck with a capacity up to one ton or automobile which is not
currently licensed and registered in this state or another state but is
otherwise operable may be stored on property for a period not to exceed one
year if it is secured with the windows closed, the trunk and hood closed and
the doors locked and is not damaged exposing jagged metal; or
   D.   One truck with a capacity up to one ton or automobile which is
inoperable may be stored in a side yard, except a side yard which faces on a
street or a rear yard on property for a period not to exceed two (2) years,
provided:
      1.   The automobile or truck is secured with the windows closed, the
trunk and hood closed and the doors locked and is not damaged exposing jagged
metal;
      2.   The automobile or truck is not visible from a public street; and
      3.   The automobile or truck is entirely concealed by a covering
maintained in good condition and which does not extend closer to the ground
than the lowest point of the vehicle body.
      4.   All existing legal nonconforming motor vehicles as of the effective
date hereof, or an amendment hereto, shall comply with the provisions of this
section within one year from the date of the enactment of this section or
amendment thereto. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.745: MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   The requirements of this title shall not be construed to prevent the
use of a mobile or manufactured home for residential purposes if approved by
the planning commission as a temporary use incidental to construction work.
   B.   Except as provided herein, a mobile home shall not be used for
residential or sleeping purposes unless the mobile home is located in an
approved mobile home park or an approved mobile home subdivision. (Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.750: RESOURCE RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY:
A location for "resource recycling collection" facility as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title shall be approved by the community development
director provided it meets the following requirements:
   A.   A location on improved property including a main building with paved
parking, and landscaping, curb, gutter and sidewalk if required by the city;
   B.   All material shall be contained within an enclosed container;
   C.   The structures or bins comply with the yard requirements of the zone;
   D.   Written approval from the property owner to locate on the site; and
   E.   Maintenance of the site in a clean, neat and orderly manner. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.755: ARCADE:
An "arcade" as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title shall not be located within a one thousand foot
(1,000') distance, via the most direct pedestrian route, of the property line
of a school or private educational institution having an academic curriculum
similar to that ordinarily given in public schools. For purposes of measuring
distance, a pedestrian route shall not include a route which requires crossing
a physical barrier such as a fence, canal or freeway, or include trespassing
across private property. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.765: MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR:
All "motor vehicle repair" uses as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title shall be located within an enclosed building.
Overnight storage of inoperable vehicles shall be approved as a conditional use
by the planning commission as part of a site plan approval as per
chapter 13.08 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.76.770: MOBILE FOOD BUSINESSES:
   A.   Mobile Food Business Allowed:
      1.   No person shall engage in a mobile food business or employ or hire
another to engage in a mobile food business without possessing a valid mobile
food vending permit issued by the city of Holladay as provided in title 5 of
this code.
      2.   Persons selling food or beverages from mobile food businesses may do
so by use of private property only, except as allowed by subsection A3 of this
section. Use of private property by mobile food businesses shall be arranged
with the real property owner and proof of such property owner authorization
shall be required prior to the issuance of a business license.
      3.   Persons selling food or beverages from mobile food businesses may do
so by use of public property other than a public right of way by permit or
concession agreement from the city of Holladay or the public entity holding
title to that property. Provisions of this section do not apply to special
event permits allowed by the city under other provisions of this code.
      4.   Mobile food businesses are allowed only within those zones as
allowed by
chapter 13.100 of this title and in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
      5.   Provisions found in this section shall not apply to mobile ice cream
vendors, seasonal farm stands and other temporary or seasonal sales or uses
that are specifically authorized by this title or other city ordinances.
   B.   Business License And Fees Required: No mobile food business shall
continue in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual business
regulatory fee and has met all applicable requirements as set forth in title 5
of this code or its successor section for each mobile food business.
   C.   Separate Applications: Separate business license applications shall be
required for each mobile food business, including a mobile food court. Separate
business license fees shall be required for each mobile food business vehicle
operating under one business license.
   D.   Business Activity To Be Temporary: All business activity related to
mobile food businesses shall be of a temporary nature subject to the
requirements below:
      1.   A mobile food truck may not operate in one individual location for
more than sixteen (16) hours during any twenty four (24) hour period. Any
mobile vending truck or trailer shall be removed during the hours of
nonoperation.
      2.   The mobile food truck shall be occupied by the owner or operator
thereof at all times.
      3.   No overnight parking is allowed.
   E.   Location And Placement Requirements: The business operating location
must be on private property within the specified zones as allowed by
chapter 13.100 of this title, or as otherwise authorized by applicable city
ordinance, subject to the requirements below:
      1.   Parking on a park strip, or otherwise landscaped area is not
allowed.
      2.   A mobile food business shall park on a hard surface. Alternatives to
asphalt and cement may be approved by the community development director.
      3.   Mobile food business vehicles must be parked so that neither the
vehicle nor the customers block driveways of existing buildings or uses, or in
such a manner as to create a traffic hazard.
      4.   No mobile food business shall occupy required parking stalls of the
primary use.
      5.   No mobile food business shall interfere with the internal parking
lot circulation.
      6.   Mobile food businesses shall not use the public right of way unless
otherwise allowed by ordinance.
      7.   Power required for the operation of the mobile food truck may be
self-contained or by the use of public or private power sources upon providing
written consent from the property owner.
      8.   All materials generated from a mobile food business that are to be
disposed of shall be disposed of properly.
      9.   Mobile food businesses shall comply with all other applicable city
ordinances.
   F.   Design And Operation Guidelines: Mobile food trucks operating in the
city of Holladay shall comply with the following design requirements:
      1.   Mobile food truck vehicles shall be designed to meet all applicable
health department requirements.
      2.   No mobile vending truck or trailer shall be larger than twenty four
feet (24') long by eight feet six inches (8'6") wide by twelve feet (12') high,
provided that the operation of attached venting while the unit is in operation
shall not be cause for violation of this paragraph.
      3.   The mobile food truck shall not have a drive-through.
      4.   Mobile food truck vehicles shall be kept in good operating
condition; no peeling paint or rust shall be visible.
      5.   All grounds utilized by a mobile food business shall at all times be
maintained in a clean and attractive condition.
      6.   Trash and recycling containers shall be provided by the mobile food
business for use of the business patrons and shall be emptied daily.
      7.   Any enclosures or canopy extensions must be integrated into the
design of the mobile food business vehicle and must not project onto the public
sidewalk or any other part of the public right of way not authorized by the
city.
      8.   A mobile food truck or trailer operating within fifty feet (50') of
a dwelling shall:
         a.   Cease all operations and vacate the location by ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. each day; and
         b.   The use of portable generators to supply electricity for the
mobile food truck operation is prohibited.
   G.   Signs: No signs shall be used to advertise the conduct of a mobile food
business at the premises other than that which is physically attached to the
vehicle, except temporary signs authorized by section
13.82.210 of this title.
   H.   Professional And Personal Services Prohibited: The performance of
professional or personal services for sale shall not be provided from a mobile
food business. (Ord. 2013-20, 9-5-2013)
13.76.775: MOBILE FOOD COURTS:
   A.   Mobile Food Courts As A Conditional Use:
      1.   Operating a mobile food court is unlawful without first obtaining
conditional use approval and site plan approval subject to the qualifying
provisions written below as well as those in this title.
      2.   Mobile food courts are allowed by conditional use approval only
within the zones as specified by
chapter 13.100 of this title, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   Provisions found in this section shall not apply to seasonal or
temporary sales that are specifically authorized by this title or other city
ordinances.
   B.   Qualifying Provisions:
      1.   A mobile food court is required to be on a parcel of at least two
thousand (2,000) square feet in size.
      2.   No less than two (2) and no more than ten (10) individual mobile
food vendor pads or other authorized vendors are allowed on a parcel.
      3.   No participating mobile food business or other authorized vendor
shall continue in operation at the mobile food court unless the holder thereof
has paid an annual business regulatory fee as set forth in title 5 of this
code.
      4.   All lot size, lot width, and landscaping requirements of the zone in
which the mobile food court is approved shall be met prior to the issuance of a
site plan approval.
      5.   Mobile food courts are for the sale of food products only, except
for the sale of nonfood, promotional items directly related to the mobile food
business.
      6.   A master sign plan for the mobile food court shall be submitted for
review and approval as part of the site plan approval. The plan shall provide
information relating to permanent signs for the court and shall comply with the
requirements of
chapter 13.82 of this title.
      7.   All the proposed activities will be conducted on private property
owned or otherwise controlled by the applicant and none of the activities will
occur on any portion of a public right of way including sidewalks or landscaped
park strips.
      8.   The proposed mobile food court will not impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic in the public way.
      9.   All activities associated with a mobile food court must comply with
all health department requirements.
      10.   A detailed site plan demonstrating the following is required:
         a.   The location and orientation of each vendor pad.
         b.   The location of any paving, trash enclosures, landscaping,
planters, fencing, canopies, umbrellas or other table covers, barriers or any
other site requirement by the international building code, or health
department.
         c.   The location of all utility hookups provided by the property
owner for use by the mobile food truck.
         d.   The location of all existing and proposed activities on site.
         e.   The circulation of all pedestrian and vehicle traffic on the
site.
         f.   The mobile food court shall not occupy required parking stalls of
any primary use of the site.
      11.   Live music will not be performed in the mobile food court area
unless the decibel level is within conformance with the Holladay City noise
control ordinance, section
9.48.010 of this code.
      12.   Parking for a mobile food court is required at a ratio of one stall
per mobile food business. This requirement may be waived by the planning
commission as part of the conditional use process. Hard surface paving at the
vehicular entrance to the mobile food court, and for each individual mobile
food business is required. Alternatives to asphalt and cement may be approved
as part of the conditional use process. (Ord. 2013-20, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.77
LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
13.77.010: Purpose
13.77.020: Applicability
13.77.030: Application Requirements
13.77.040: Property (Non-Parking Lot) Landscaping Standards
13.77.050: Minimum Landscaping Requirements By Zone
13.77.060: Parking Lot/Parking Structure Landscaping
13.77.070: Landscape Buffers
13.77.080: Tree Canopy Sustainability
13.77.090: Street/Community/Waterway Tree Sustainability
13.77.100: Planting Guidelines
13.77.110: Landscape Maintenance
13.77.120: Installation
13.77.130: Administrative Relief
13.77.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The intent of this chapter is to consolidate and clarify the various
sections in this title which previous to adoption of this chapter addressed
landscaping regulations for all zones within the City.
   B.   The regulations of this chapter are intended to set landscaping
standards in the City of Holladay that will improve community livability,
preserve the quality of life, and enhance the aesthetic quality, economic
viability, and environmental sustainability of the City by promoting:
      1.   More efficient use of water resources;
      2.   Preservation and enhancement of the City’s environmental and
aesthetic character;
      3.   Promotion of design continuity between adjacent land uses;
      4.   Preservation, enhancement, and expansion of the city’s tree canopy;
      5.   Improved management of stormwater runoff;
      6.   Reduction in the absorption and re-generation of heat from paved
vehicular parking areas and other impervious surfaces;
      7.   Promotion of screening and buffering between land uses by way of
providing adequate vegetation;
      8.   Reduction of landscape maintenance costs.
   C.   Landscaping can be a significant expense to businesses and residents.
At the same time, landscaping improves the livability of residential
neighborhoods, enhances the appearance and customer attraction of commercial
areas, increases property values, improves the compatibility of adjacent uses,
screens undesirable views, and can reduce heat and air and noise pollution.
   D.   The intent of these regulations is to achieve a balance between the
right of individuals to develop and maintain their property in a manner they
prefer and the rights of City residents to live, work, shop, and recreate in
pleasant, healthy, and attractive surroundings.
   E.   These regulations are intended in part to accommodate Localscapes®,
design aspects encouraging the use of water conserving landscape designs and
low water use plant materials irrigated by drip type water systems and to
discourage landscaping that requires high water use for maintenance while
preserving Holladay’s unique tree canopy, character and inventory.
   F.   The City’s street tree/community tree program and its recognition as a
tree city sets the standard for public and private property management of the
valuable, historic tree coverage that gives Holladay a unique environment not
generally found in other areas of the region. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013; amd.
Ord. 2018-18, 11-8-2018; Ord. 2022-14, 6-16-2022; Ord. 2023-09, 9-7-2023)
13.77.020: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   All land development applications described in this section shall
submit a Landscape Plan, as per
13.03 and
13.08 of this title and a Tree Sustainability Plan, as per
13.77.080 and
13.77.090. Plans shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect.
      1.   New Development. Standards of this title shall be applied to all new
development including surface or at-grade parking areas and the exterior
perimeter of parking structures
      2.   Existing Development. Development in existence at the effective date
of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with these provisions if:
         a.   Commercial, Mixed-use, Multi Household, Manufacturing: The gross
floor area is expanded by more than twenty percent (20%),
         b.   Single household and/or duplex developments: The gross floor area
is expanded by fifty percent (50%).
         c.   An existing off-street parking area is expanded by ten (10)
parking stalls.
      3.   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the
following:
         a.   The interior undercover portions of parking structures;
         b.   The interior undercover portions of carports
      4.   Administrative Relief. If the location of existing buildings or
other structures prevents conformance with the requirement of this section or
if implementation would create nonconformity, the Planning Commission may grant
relief from these standards as per section
13.77.130 of this chapter.
   B.   Demolition, grading or other site modification activities shall submit
a Tree Sustainability Plan. Tree removals require written approvals as required
by sections
13.77.080 and
13.77.090 of this chapter, prior to approval of any site activities.
   C.   Certificate of Occupancy. All required landscaping shall be installed
within one year of issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 2023-09, 9-7-
2023)
13.77.030: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All landscape plans shall comply with the requirement for size, scale,
number of copies and contents that are required by
chapter 13.03 of this title.
   B.   The landscape plans may be on the same site plan used to show parking
layout, setback compliance, etc.
   C.   All landscape plans except those required for single-family homes on
individual lots shall be prepared by a landscape architect, landscape designer,
or qualified arborist or nurseryman. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.77.040: PROPERTY (NON-PARKING LOT) LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
All landscaping as defined by section
13.04.040 of this title shall be highly water efficient and designed to
preserve and generally enhance desirable natural features (i.e., topography,
waterways, existing vegetation, etc.), enhance architectural features of the
building, strengthen vistas and provide shade for the project as well as its
customers and employees. The following general standards apply to all required
landscaping covered under this title, except for single-family homes on
individual lots.
   A.   Perimeter Property Landscaping: The purpose of perimeter landscaping is
to ensure the long term and consistent maintenance of highly water efficient
landscaping along streets, to improve the visual quality of the streetscape,
unify diverse architecture and carry out the long term goals of the City of
Holladay promoting attractive streets and street beautification. Perimeter
landscaping includes both landscaping in all required setback areas and any
required buffer landscaping. Perimeter landscaping requirements are regulated
by section
13.77.050 of this chapter. Further, distinct parking lot periphery and internal
landscaping standards are found hereafter (see section
13.77.060).
   B.   Internal Property Landscaping Requirements/Recommendations: The purpose
of the internal landscaping standards is not to restrict the use of locally
adapted and sustainable landscaping but encourage design implementation to
visually soften the mass of buildings and to visually separate building areas
and development within the City. The following internal landscaping
requirements and recommendations are intended to augment the perimeter
landscaping requirements as required by section
13.77.050 of this chapter:
      1.   A minimum of one tree shall be required for every three hundred
(300) square feet of the required internal landscaping area. Up to five percent
(5%) of the required trees may be substituted by shrubs. Ten (10) shrubs with a
minimum container size of five (5) gallons shall be required for each
substituted tree.
      2.   The location of the internal landscaping area shall abut those
building elevations which form the major public views of the project from
abutting streets and property and to the users of the project, or within a
plaza or courtyard between buildings or portions of buildings, or in a similar
area which substantially conforms to the stated purpose of the required
internal landscaping standards set forth herein and approved by the Planning
Commission.
      3.   Landscaping around the base of a structure is recommended to
visually “soften” the edge between the parking lot and building and to also
discourage graffiti.
      4.   Building entries should be emphasized with special landscaping and/
or paving in combination with lighting.
   C.   Berming: Berming at the edge of the building in conjunction with the
landscaping may be used to soften and screen parking areas, reduce structure
mass and height along street facades, and contain or direct stormwater runoff.
Berms may not encroach into any clear view area of a street or driveway.
   D.   Hardscape Materials: Decorative paving materials such as bricks,
pavers, flagstones, decorative gravels, artificial turf, and textured concrete
may be utilized if they form a useful open space, add color or texture to the
design, and comply with the purpose and intent of this section. Untextured
concrete or lava rocks are not permissible hardscape materials. All impervious
hardscape areas within a landscaped area must be considered as part of the
overall impervious surface coverage allowance as required by other provisions
of this title.
   E.   Landscaping Irrigation: Generally, landscaping emplaced in conjunction
with newly or re-developing construction on site and in parking lot areas shall
be irrigated with an efficiently designed drip sprinkler system which
automatically adjusts to frequency and duration of irrigation events in
response to changing weather conditions, i.e rain delay/shut off capabilities.
Said system will be designed and maintained to limit waste and watershed onto
adjoining public right(s) of way. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013; amd. Ord. 2015-02,
2-5-2015; Ord. 2021-27, 10-14-2021; Ord. 2022-14, 6-16-2022)
13.77.050: MINIMUM LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS BY ZONE:
The following requirements are the minimum landscaped area required by each
zone except where modified by the Planning Commission as an administrative
relief allowed by section
13.77.130 of this chapter. Landscape features shall incorporate Localscapes®
(as defined
13.04.040) design elements meant to reduce, minimize and/or eliminate water use
by activity area:
   A.   Single-Family Residential Zones (FR, R-1): The front yard of all lots
on which buildings are located shall be landscaped prior to the issuance of a
final certificate of occupancy or final inspection, except as provided in
13.77.120 C. of this chapter.
   B.   Multiple-Family Residential Zones (R-M): The minimum landscaping
coverage in percent for all lots in the Multi-Family Zones are as follows:
      1.   A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the total site shall be
landscaped.
      2.   Lawn shall not exceed 20% of the total landscaped area outside of
the active recreation area, as defined the Localscapes design principle.
      3.   No area of lawn shall be less than eight feet (8') in width.
      4.   Lawn shall not be installed in park strips, paths, or on slopes
greater than 25% or 4:1 grade.
      5.   A minimum landscaped buffer averaging five feet (5') wide as
required by section
13.77.070 of this chapter shall be provided along the side and rear property
lines.
   C.   Office, Research Park And Development Zone (O-R-D):
      1.   A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total site shall be
landscaped.
      2.   Lawn shall not exceed 20% of the total landscaped area outside of
the active recreation area, as defined the Localscapes design principle.
      3.   No area of lawn shall be less than eight feet (8') in width.
      4.   Lawn shall not be installed in park strips, paths, or on slopes
greater than 25% or 4:1 grade.
      5.   A minimum landscaped buffer averaging five feet (5') wide as
required by section
13.77.070 of this chapter shall be provided along the side and rear property
lines.
      6.   Where a side or rear yard abuts a residential use or Residential
Zone boundary the entire setback area shall be landscaped.
   D.   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC):
      1.   All front setback areas and the side setback areas which abut a
public street on corner lots shall be landscaped.
      2.   Lawn shall not exceed 20% of the total landscaped area outside of
the active recreation area, as defined the Localscapes design principle.
      3.   No area of lawn shall be less than eight feet (8') in width.
      4.   Lawn shall not be installed in park strips, paths, or on slopes
greater than 25% or 4:1 grade.
      5.   A minimum landscaped buffer averaging five feet (5') wide as
required by section
13.77.070 of this chapter shall be provided along the side and rear property
lines.
   E.   PO, C-1 And C-2 Commercial Zones:
      1.   The front setback area and the side setback area which faces on a
street on corner lots shall be landscaped.
      2.   Lawn shall not exceed 20% of the total landscaped area outside of
the active recreation area, as defined the Localscapes design principle.
      3.   No area of lawn shall be less than eight feet (8') in width.
      4.   Lawn shall not be installed in park strips, paths, or on slopes
greater than 25% or 4:1 grade
      5.   A minimum landscaped buffer averaging five feet (5') wide as
required by section
13.77.070 of this chapter shall be provided along the side and rear property
lines.
   F.   Residential Office Zone (RO):
      1.   The first twenty feet (20') in depth of the front setback and/or
front yard shall be landscaped.
      2.   Lawn shall not exceed 20% of the total landscaped area outside of
the active recreation area, as defined the Localscapes design principle.
      3.   No area of lawn shall be less than eight feet (8') in width.
      4.   Lawn shall not be installed in park strips, paths, or on slopes
greater than 25% or 4:1 grade
      5.   Other setback areas which abut a public street shall be landscaped.
      6.   A minimum landscaped buffer averaging five feet (5') wide as
required by section
13.77.070 of this chapter shall be provided along the side and rear property
lines.
   G.   Holladay Village Zone (HV): Landscaping is not required in the HV Zone
except for the requirements of subsection
13.71.080K, “Buffer Standards For Proposed Development Abutting Residential
Property Not In The HV Zone”, of this title.
   H.   Holladay Crossroads Zone (HCR): General Property Landscaping (Non-
Parking Lot): Landscaping shall only be required in buffer areas where an HCR
zoned property abuts a residentially zoned property, and, in parking lots as
specified above. Notwithstanding, in cases where a use is conditionally
approved by the Planning Commission to be emplaced in the HCR Zone, the
Commission may require emplacement of additional property landscaping. All
landscaping installed in the HCR Zone shall comply with relevant planting and
maintenance regulations that govern landscaping and buffering in section
13.77 of this title -- as well as the Tree Canopy Sustainability Ordinance’s
standards.
   I.   P, R/M-U, and LU Zones:
      1.   All required front and side yard areas that abut a public street
shall be landscaped.
      2.   A minimum landscaped buffer averaging five feet (5') wide as
required by section
13.77.070 of this chapter shall be provided along the side and rear property
lines.(Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-09, 4-8-2021; Ord. 2022-14, 6-
16-2022; Ord. 2023-09, 9-7-2023; Ord. 2023-10, 9-7-2023)
13.77.060: PARKING LOT/PARKING STRUCTURE LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of perimeter and internal parking lot landscaping
is not to restrict the use of locally adapted and sustainable landscaping but
encourage design implementation to soften and mitigate the visual effect of (a)
large expanse(s) of asphalt. Landscaping can also reduce summer heat gain in
parking areas and define pedestrianways.
   B.   Hardscape Parking [Lot] Requirements: Landscaping in hardscape parking
areas, in all non-single and [non] two-family residential zones, shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
      1.   Overall Landscape Coverage Standards:
         a.   In general, any and all parking lots shall be landscaped such
that landscape coverage in an around the periphery of a/the lot complies with
the overall percentage minimums set forth in
Table 13.77.061 below.
TABLE 13.77.061
 
Size Of Parking Area(s)   Percent to be Landscaped
Less than 15,000 sq. ft.  5
15,000 sq. ft. and larger 7.5
 
Furthermore, all open-air parking lots designed for, or containing, six (6) or
more parking spaces shall provide landscaping in accordance with the provisions
of this sub-section. Conversely, parking lots designed for five (5) or fewer
parking spaces shall not be required to provide landscaping other than
providing the percentage of yard area landscaping and landscaped buffering as
specified in
Table 13.77.061 above; however,
         (1)   Only the first ten-feet (10') [width/depth] of landscape(d)
areas located along and around the perimeter of a parking lot (i.e., beyond the
curb or edge of pavement of the parking lot) may count towards satisfying this
requirement; and,
         (2)   Landscaping in and/or around parking lots containing five (5) or
fewer parking spaces shall contain one or more deciduous trees that, when
mature, will expectedly provide approximately 50% shade coverage to that lot -
this connotates that the tree(s) canopy(ies) will extend over one or more
portions of the paved lot to provide [the] 50% coverage (as measured during
summer solstice).
      2.   Parking Lot Landscape Strips and Islands Standards:
         a.   All open-air parking lots designed for, or containing, five (5)
or more parking spaces (whether emplaced with new construction or in
conjunction with substantial (i.e., 50% plus re-construction or expansion of
[a] building[s] on a property) shall provide landscaping in accordance with the
provisions of this sub-section 2 that follow hereafter.
         b.   Interior parking lot landscape design shall meet one (1) of the
following options designed to provide approximately fifty percent (50%) tree
canopy coverage within twenty (20) years:
            (1)   Option One - Landscaped Strips: Landscape strips set
perpendicular to the head-end of parking spaces within a parking bank may be
employed (see Figure 1 hereafter).
Figure 1. Landscaped Strip(s)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5285.png]
When used, such strips shall meet the following minimum requirement(s):
               A.   They shall be a least five-feet (5') wide/deep; and,
Exception: When the strip(s) will serve as vegetated drainage swales, the
minimum width/depth of a/the strip(s) shall be eight-feet (8'); and,
               B.   One Class II deciduous tree (selected from the City's
approved/adopted Tree Selection Guide's picklist) shall be planted at each end
of a parking strip and, for any parking bank [or double bank] at least ninety-
feet (90') feet long, at a centered [45' interval] position in between the "end
trees".
            (2)   Option Two - Landscaped Islands: Landscape [tree] islands
that serve as parking space interrupts and endcaps within a parking bank (or
double bank) may be employed (see Figure 2 hereafter).
Figure 2. Landscaped Islands
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5283.png]
When used, such tree planter islands shall meet the following minimum
requirement(s):
               A.   They shall be set parallel to abutting parking spaces as
illustrated in Figure 2 above at intervals not to exceed seventy-two feet
(72'); and,
               B.   They shall be of the same size/dimension as adjoining
parking stalls. For example, if located in a single row of ninety degree (90°)
oriented parking spaces that are nine feet (9') wide by eighteen feet (18')
deep/long, a landscape planter shall also be, correspondingly, nine feet (9')
wide and eighteen (18') deep). Where two (2) parking rows adjoin each other
"head to head", back to back planters may be used. If placed back to back in,
for example, a pair of ninety degree (90°) oriented parking rows, then the
resulting planters would likely appear to be a single nine foot (9') wide by
thirty-six foot (36') deep/long planter (see Figure 2 above hereafter); and
Figure 3. Parking Lot [Singular] Planter Design Illustration
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5281.png]
               C.   They shall be protected/wrapped by a curb that is at least
a six-inches (6") high.
               D.   Drainage Channel: A one foot (1') shall be provided at the
back end of, or within, a parking planter's abutment against a curb or other
barrier in order to facilitate site drainage (e.g., stormwater flow across a
parking lot into a drain) -- see Figure 3 above:
Exception: Any parking bank/row located immediately fronting/against any
principal commercial or multiple-family residential building on a property and
between the limits/span of its exterior side walls, such placement in front of
the building is, and shall be, optional. In other words, if a parking bank
abuts the front entry area of non-single-family residential building and
extends past the outside walls of that building, then planters shall be
required where any continuous ninety-foot (90') parking space intervals are
found past the end/side walls (see Figure 4 hereafter):
Figure 4. Planters Not to Block Building Storefront Area(s)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5279.png]
      3.   Landscape(d) areas shall be concaved [in slope] to allow storm water
infiltration; and
      4.   Plants used to improve any of the fore-going listed landscape areas
(i.e., parking lot periphery and internal planter strips or islands) shall
comply with the following requirements:
         a.   Primary plant materials used therein shall be deciduous shade
trees; and,
         b.   Shade trees planted in, and around, parking lots shall be limited
those species listed in the City's approved Tree Selection Guide's picklist);
and
         c.   Shade trees planted, in and around, parking lots shall be at
least 2" in caliper; and
         d.   Ornamental trees [e.g., Class I types], shrubbery, hedges, and
other plants may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings in perimeter
planting areas, but shall not be the only plants used in such landscaping.
         e.   When low impact development infiltration is infeasible (according
to the Storm Drainage System Design and Management Manual, Chapter 11), the
area of LID designs with underdrains or impermeable liners may be credited
towards the required numbers of trees at the rate of two hundred (200) square
feet of LID area equal to one (1) tree; up to fifty percent (50%) of the number
of required trees.
         f.   Interior parking lot landscaping areas shall also be planted with
ground cover at a density that will achieve thirty-five percent (35%) coverage
within two (2) years.
      5.   All grade-level parking should be separated from the street and
screened from pedestrian view by landscaping. The landscaping shall include
shrubs and trees, be located on private property, and, be wide enough to
maintain the plant material as well as provide a view screen.
      6.   All parking and landscaped areas shall be separated from the parking
surface by at least a six-inch (6") high concrete, continuous curb.
      7.   All landscaped and pedestrian areas shall be protected from
encroachment by parked cars. Accordingly, eighteen-inch (18") wide concrete
wheel stops shall be emplaced at the head end of parking spaces - save those
stalls that are established for parallel parking (see Figure 5 hereafter).
Figure 5. Parking Wheel Stop/Bumper Overhang
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5277.png]
   C.    Parking Structures: Parking structures shall be screened with live
plant material that is intended to hide or obscure the sides of the structures
from public view.
D.   Re-construction of a Parking Lot: When a parking lot is expanded, or torn
up and then reconstructed (as opposed to being just resealed and/or striped)
only the renovated portion shall be improved to comply with current landscape
development code(s), including [any] engineering, water, wastewater or fire
division/department improvement regulations including, but not limited to,
curbing, gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage facilities, landscaping, light
fixtures, etc. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013; amd. Ord. 2021-09, 4-8-2021; Ord. 2021-
27, 10-14-2021; Ord. 2022-14, 6-16-2022)
13.77.070: LANDSCAPE BUFFERS:
   A.   Purpose: The landscape requirements in this section are intended to
ensure that abutting land uses are adequately protected and are provided an
appropriate amount of land separation to conduct permitted uses without causing
adverse impacts.
   B.   Applicability: The landscape buffer is required for all nonresidential
uses sharing a lot line with an abutting residential zone or residential land
use or by requirement of an approval granted by a land use authority under
provisions of this title.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   The width of the buffer is determined by the requirements of section
13.77.050 of this chapter unless modified by the land use authority as part of
a site plan approval as allowed by other provisions of this title, however, no
landscaped buffer shall be smaller than that required for the health and growth
of the plants and trees contained within the required buffer area.
      2.   The materials within the required buffer between abutting land uses
are regulated as follows:
         a.   All buffer areas shall be comprised of materials such as, a mix
of evergreens and deciduous trees, water efficient shrubs or vegetative ground
cover or up to fifty percent (50%) nonvegetative mulch or other hardscape as
defined by section
13.77.040 of this chapter.
         b.   Fences, walls and berms may also be incorporated in the buffer
areas where they will not create a public safety hazard.
      3.   Where trees are incorporated, the required buffer area shall result
in a barrier where trees touch at the time of the tree maturity.
      4.   Where existing or proposed abutting land uses cannot be adequately
buffered with plant materials, the land use authority may require inclusion of
a wall, fence or other type of screen that mitigates noise, and/or unsightly
uses. All fences, walls, or other screens must comply with the regulations of
section
13.76.710 of this title.
      5.   Chainlink fencing with or without slats does not qualify as
screening material.
      6.   All buffers between different land uses may include any required
perimeter parking lot landscape buffers. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013; amd. Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015; Ord. 2022-14, 6-16-2022)
13.77.080: TREE CANOPY SUSTAINABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect critical tree canopy
resources in Holladay. These resources are important to community identity, the
enhancement of air and water quality, and, the promotion of property values.
Tools to accomplish these values are to:
      1.   Replace trees that are removed due to specified building and
construction activities;
      2.   Strengthen the protection of trees along specified creeks and
canals; and
      3.   Address and regulate the mass clearing of trees on unoccupied
property.
   B.   Application: The regulations contained in this chapter shall only apply
to:
      1.   Protected trees as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title. The regulations contained in this chapter shall not
apply to high risk trees that are solely on private property unless otherwise
regulated in section
13.77.090 of this chapter;
      2.   Demolition, building or development activities requiring a permit
under
chapter 13.08 of this title for commercial, office, single family residential,
multi-family residential, and public, quasi-public or private institutional
development, including all new construction, structural additions or additional
impervious surface coverage that results in a reduction of the existing tree
canopy;
      3.   Activities requiring a grading or filling permit under section
13.76.700 of this title; and
      4.   Clear cutting of trees.
   C.   Permit Requirement: When a permit is required for the expansion of
building footprint, demolition of a structure, for initial construction or
reconstruction, or for grading or clear cutting as required by
chapter 13.08, or section
13.76.700 of this title, the applicant shall provide either:
      1.   A statement of no tree impact with documentation supported by
reliable aerial or other legitimate and acceptable imagery, or
      2.   A tree canopy sustainability plan that provides for the preservation
or replacement of the same minimum square feet of tree canopy coverage
identified on the inventory described in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Tree Canopy Sustainability Plan:
      1.   Compliance: A Tree Canopy Sustainability Plan provided in compliance
with subsection C2 of this section shall include:
         a.   An inventory of the tree canopy including heritage trees,
proposed for removal;
         b.   An inventory of any tree canopy removed within one year prior to
the date of an application which has been submitted to the City pursuant to
either
chapter 13.08 or 13.76 of this title; and
         c.   A list of proposed replacement trees with an estimated canopy
coverage that will, at maturity, achieve tree canopy coverage no less than the
tree canopy coverage to be removed.
      2.   Removal: The Community Development Director or designee shall
approve a tree sustainability canopy plan if the submitted plan demonstrates
that the removal of an existing tree on the lot is required due to one or more
of the following:
         a.   The tree originates within the net buildable area of a given site
as identified on the tree survey and site plan by the applicant;
         b.   A tree is located where it interferes with a proposed right- of-
way, easement or ingress/egress to the site that cannot be reconfigured;
         c.   The tree is located where it interferes with the installation,
delivery, or maintenance of proposed or existing utility services to the site;
         d.   The tree is located where it creates a safety or health hazard or
a nuisance with respect to existing or proposed structures or vehicles or
pedestrian routes and there is no reasonable alternative to relocate or
reconfigure the improvements;
         e.   The trees are determined by the Community Development Director,
designee, or by a certified arborist or other licensed tree care professional
to be high risk as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title; or
         f.   The tree unreasonably prevents development of a lot or parcel or
the physical use and enjoyment thereof.
      3.   Review Fee: A seventy five dollar ($75.00) fee shall be assessed to
review and approve a Tree Canopy Sustainability Plan.
   E.   Tree Removal Permit:
      1.   A no-fee tree removal permit is required for:
         a.   The removal of any heritage tree, as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title;
         b.   The removal of street trees and waterway trees including high
risk trees in those areas;
         c.   Any increase in impervious surface area for which a building
permit is required which results in loss of existing tree canopy.
      2.   Prior to development of a lot or parcel, a portion of the tree
canopy may be removed not to exceed the same square footage of canopy allowed
by the maximum impervious surface coverage restrictions of this title.
   F.   Replacement Of Protected Trees Required: Replacement trees shall comply
with the following schedule and requirements:
      1.   No less than fifty percent (50%) of replacement trees must be
replaced on the property where they were removed. No more than fifty percent
(50%) of replacement trees may be planted off-site as allowed in subsection G,
"Off-Site Replacement", of this section.
      2.   A deciduous tree that is removed shall be replaced by a tree with a
minimum tree size of one and a half inch (11/2") caliper of a variety that has
the potential to reach a mature canopy coverage of that of the removed tree.
      3.   A coniferous tree that is removed shall be replaced by at least one
coniferous tree with a minimum height of eight feet (8') or replaced by a
deciduous equivalent as per subsection F2 of this section.
      4.   Replacement trees shall be planted, relocated, or preserved before
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or similar authorization.
      5.   Replacement trees shall be maintained by the property owner through
an establishment period of at least three (3) years.
   G.   Off-Site Replacement: In lieu of one hundred percent (100%) replacement
of the on-site tree canopy, the developer/applicant may request an off-site
replacement permit for no more than fifty percent (50%) of the lost tree
canopy.
      1.   An application for an off-site replacement permit must be
accompanied by a signed approval from the tree "receiving" property owner and
documentation of the planting prior to occupancy of the tree "sending"
property.
      2.   The Community Development Director, or designee, may approve an
alternative replacement mitigation plan only after first making all of the
following findings:
         a.   The applicant has investigated alternative site designs and
building footprints using existing development standards;
         b.   Placing the required number of replacement trees on site with
proposed final tree canopy is not conducive to a sustainable landscape plan for
the property in question;
         c.   The spacing selection of the proposed replacement trees and the
landscape design contribute to the City's long-term goals of a sustainable
urban forest.
   H.   Tree/Vegetation Protection During Construction And Grading Activities:
In order to protect tree canopy on a property during construction, limits of
disturbance as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, shall be shown on the final tree canopy sustainability
plan and shall be clearly delineated on site with fencing or other materials or
methods prior to the commencement of excavation, grading, or construction
activities on the site to preserve the viability of existing tree resources.
   I.   Appeals: A person adversely affected by a decision of the Community
Development Director regarding issuance or compliance with a tree removal
permit may appeal such decision to the Administrative Appeals Officer.
   J.   Expiration: A tree removal permit shall expire and have no further
force or effect if the tree removal activity or construction is not commenced
within one year of the date of the issuance of the tree removal permit.
   K.   Penalty: Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2018-18, 11-8-2018)
13.77.090: STREET/COMMUNITY/WATERWAY TREE SUSTAINABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect existing street
trees on City-owned property and along certain waterways within the City, to
require replacement of removed trees in those areas, and to require planting of
street trees within new developments. This section is intended to:
      1.   Preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of the City's tree lined
streetscapes and waterways;
      2.   Encourage the preservation and replacement of trees in those areas;
and
      3.   Enhance, stabilize, promote and protect property values throughout
the City of Holladay.
   B.   Application: The provisions of this section shall apply to all real
property located in the City of Holladay, which is in the public right-of-way,
on City owned property or in riparian areas along the natural and manmade
waterways.
   C.   Tree Removal Permit:
      1.   No street, or community tree as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title may be removed without a tree removal permit approved
by the Community Development Director or designee.
      2.   A waterway tree as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title may not be removed within:
         a.   The area between the high water mark and the apex of the bank
without a tree removal permit approved by the Community Development Director
upon recommendation from the City Engineer; or
         b.   The area beyond the apex of the bank as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title without a tree removal permit approved by the Community
Development Director upon recommendation from the City Engineer.
      3.   A permit to remove a protected tree shall be issued if the applicant
demonstrates that:
         a.   Removal is necessary for public safety reasons;
         b.   Removal is essential in order to allow for development of the
property; or
         c.   Good cause exists and removal would be in the best interest of
the City.
   D.   Replacement Of Protected Trees Required: Any permit for the removal of
a protected tree shall be conditioned upon the planting of a replacement tree.
This requirement may be modified or waived to the extent necessary to protect
public safety.
   E.   Requirements For Replacement Trees: Replacement trees shall comply with
the following schedule and requirements:
      1.   A deciduous tree that is removed shall be replaced by a single
deciduous tree with a minimum size of one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper of
a variety that has the potential to reach a mature height of that of the
removed tree.
      2.   A coniferous tree that is removed shall be replaced by at least one
coniferous tree with a minimum height of eight feet (8') or replaced by a
deciduous equivalent as per subsection E1 of this section.
      3.   Replacement trees shall be of a variety listed in the City of
Holladay Street Tree/Community Tree Program brochure.
      4.   Unless otherwise authorized by the City, replacement trees shall be
planted within six (6) months after the removal of the prior tree.
      5.   Replacement trees shall be maintained by the property owner through
an establishment period of at least three (3) years.
   F.   Planting Of Street Trees Required: In connection with any permit issued
for new development or significant redevelopment within the City, the owner/
developer of the abutting property shall be required to plant street trees of
an appropriate variety and number as determined by the Community Development
Director. This requirement may be waived, in whole or in part, if sufficient
street trees already exist and are preserved as part of the development.
   G.   Topping: Topping any street tree required by this title is prohibited.
   H.   Appeals: A person adversely affected by a decision of the Community
Development Director regarding issuance or compliance with a tree removal
permit may appeal such decision to the Administrative Appeals Officer.
   I.   Expiration: A tree removal permit shall expire and have no further
force or effect if the tree removal activity or construction is not commenced
within one year of the date of the issuance of the tree removal permit.
   J.   Penalty: Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2018-18, 11-8-2018)
13.77.100: PLANTING GUIDELINES:
   A.   Minimum Plant Sizes: The following are minimum plant sizes for all
required landscape areas:
TABLE 13.77.101
 
Type Of Tree    Minimum Size
Coniferous tree 6 foot height
Ornamental tree 2 inch caliper
Shade tree      2 inch caliper
Woody shrubs    2 gallon size container
 
   B.   Plant Species: Plant species proven adaptable to the local climate
should be used in all landscaping plans.
   C.   Tree Preservation: Wherever possible, existing significant trees as
defined in section
13.04.040 of this title should be preserved.
      1.   Preliminary plans shall show all significant trees within the
proposed development and the associated limits of disturbance for each
significant tree(s).
      2.   No construction, grading, equipment or material storage or any other
activity shall be allowed within the limits of disturbance established for all
significant trees.
         a.   Within the limits of disturbance, fencing, at a minimum, should
be placed around each significant tree and around stands of twelve (12) or more
smaller trees a distance equal to the size of the individual or outermost
tree's drip zone.
         b.   For purposes of this subsection, the drip zone is calculated by
measuring the diameter of the tree at breast height. Every inch of tree trunk
diameter equates to one foot (1') of drip zone.
         c.   Fencing shall remain in place until all land alteration,
construction, and development activities are completed.
      3.   If it is necessary to fill over the root zone, compacted soils shall
be avoided by sandwiching fabric, rocks and more fabric under the area to be
filled.
      4.   Fill placed directly on the roots shall not exceed a maximum of six
inches (6") in depth.
      5.   If fill creates a tree well or depression around a tree or shrubs,
such area shall be drained so that the vegetation is not drowned by the pooling
of rainfall or irrigation.
      6.   If a tree's roots must be cut, the branches shall be trimmed by an
amount equal to the percent of roots that were lost. Roots shall be pruned
cleanly prior to digging and not ripped off by heavy equipment. Cutting more
than thirty percent (30%) of the roots endangers the health of the tree, and
over forty percent (40%) affects the tree's stability.
      7.   Utility trenches near trees should be avoided. If a line must be
near a tree, tunneling, auguring, or other mitigation measures shall be used.
   D.   Planting Areas: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required
landscaped area shall be planted with live plant materials. The remaining fifty
percent (50%) may consist of permeable hardscape improvements as allowed by
subsection
13.77.040D of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.77.110: LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Purpose: The regulations of this section are intended to ensure that
all required landscaping is maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all
times.
   B.   Applicability: The requirement for landscape maintenance applies in all
zones where landscaping has been required.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   The property owner is responsible for the maintenance of all
landscaping and screening devices required by this chapter.
      2.   Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease, and/
or damage shall be appropriately treated to correct the problem. Dead plant
materials shall be replaced.
      3.   All landscaping required by this section may be subject to periodic
inspections by city officials to determine compliance with the provisions of
this title.
      4.   The lower branches of trees shall be pruned and maintained as
required by sections
14.12.040 and
14.12.050 of this code. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.77.120: INSTALLATION:
   A.   Substitutions: All substitutions of plant material on an approved
landscape plan must be approved by the community development director.
   B.   Inspections: Landscaping shall be installed and completed in compliance
with the approved landscape plan. A certificate of occupancy shall not be
issued until the improvements are inspected and approved by the community
development director, unless an assurance is provided and approved according to
subsection C of this section.
   C.   Assurance: In extenuating circumstances where occupancy or final
inspection is requested prior to completion of landscaping, the owner or
developer shall enter into an enforcement delay agreement with the city
certifying that the required landscaping will be completed within the next
planting season at a date specified by the community development director but
not to exceed one year. Violation of this agreement is subject to zoning
enforcement. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 9-7-2023)
13.77.130: ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF:
The city recognizes that the specific landscape requirements set forth herein
cannot and do not anticipate all possible landscape situations. A certain
amount of flexibility in the application of such requirements is necessary in
cases where the requirements are inapplicable or inappropriate to a specific
use, design or site proposal. A written request for relief may be submitted to
the land use authority in conjunction with the applicable development proposal,
including an explanation of the findings and justification necessary to grant
administrative relief.
   A.   The land use authority as part of a site plan approval may reduce the
minimum needed landscaping up to ten percent (10%) after taking into
consideration:
      1.   The location and size of parking lots and/or structures, the layout
of the buildings, the topography and geometry of the site and other
environmental factors;
      2.   The exclusion of natural areas for reasons of preservation;
      3.   A commensurate or additional percent of landscaping is being
provided in an abutting right of way by permission of the owner of the right of
way.
      4.   An increase of the impervious surface coverage has been accomplished
by the methods shown in section
13.14.080,
table 13.14.080C of this title;
   B.   The land use authority shall document in writing any such findings
granting administrative relief. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
CHAPTER 13.78
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
13.78.010: Scope Of Approval
13.78.020: Purpose
13.78.030: Planned Unit Development Defined
13.78.040: Submission, Review And Approval; Site Plan And Conditional Use
Permit
13.78.050: Minimum Area
13.78.060: Rezone Required When
13.78.070: Development Ownership
13.78.080: Effect On Adjacent Properties
13.78.090: Preservation Of Open Space
13.78.100: Landscaping, Fencing And Screening Requirements
13.78.110: Signs And Lighting
13.78.120: Construction Limitations
13.78.130: Scope Of Planning Commission Action
13.78.010: SCOPE OF APPROVAL:
Provision of a planned unit development by this chapter in no way guarantees a
property owner the right to exercise the provisions of the planned unit
development. Planned unit developments may be approved by the planning
commission as a conditional use only if, in its judgment, the proposed planned
unit development fully meets the intent and purpose, and requirements of the
land use ordinance and the general plan. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.020: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of planned unit development is to permit flexibility in
land use, allow diversification in the interrelationships of various uses and
structures with their sites and thus offer an alternative to conventional
development. The application of planned unit development concepts is intended
to encourage unique neighborhoods, high quality housing, exceptional design,
additional open space, and facilities compatible with the present living
environment in the city. Ensuring compliance with the purpose of this section
protects the health, safety and public welfare of the future inhabitants of, or
visitors to, the planned unit development. At the same time, securing the
advantages of imaginative site planning for residential, commercial development
or combinations thereof, as well as maximizing the energy utilization
efficiency of the project. The objective is to preserve existing greenery and
significant trees on site. The planned unit development process must create
unique benefits for both the property owner and the city even though it does
not allow additional density. Applicants must justify to the planning
commission why the project would be better for the community than a project
developed as the underlying zoning would normally allow. Development under the
planned unit development process is a privilege that must be earned by the
developer, not a right that must be granted by the planning commission.
   B.   Through the flexibility of the planned unit development regulations,
the city seeks to achieve the following specific objectives:
      1.   The stabilization and preservation of the existing or planned land
uses in abutting areas and surrounding residential neighborhoods;
      2.   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such
as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features, and the prevention of
soil erosion;
      3.   Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically
significant or contribute to the character of the city;
      4.   Maximizing and preserving vegetation and open space and/or other
special development amenities to provide light, air and privacy, to buffer
abutting properties and to provide active and passive recreation opportunities
for residents of the planned development and/or the community;
      5.   Minimize significant through traffic impacts on adjacent residential
neighborhoods;
      6.   Provide an appropriate transition or buffering between uses of
differing intensities both on site and off site; and
      7.   Provide safe and convenient vehicle and pedestrian connections
between adjacent uses. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.030: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DEFINED:
MIXED USE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: For the purpose of this chapter means an
integrated design for a planned unit development which includes a combination
of residential and nonresidential uses.
NONRESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: For the purpose of this chapter, means
an integrated design for development of commercial uses which does not include
any residential component.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: For the purpose of this chapter, means a coordinated,
integrated design for development of residential, nonresidential, commercial,
or a combination of such uses.
RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: For the purpose of this chapter, means an
integrated design for a planned unit development which includes only
residential uses. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.040: SUBMISSION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL; SITE PLAN AND CONDITIONAL USE
PERMIT:
   A.   Allowed By Zone: Planned unit developments are allowed as per
chapter 13.100, "Appendix A - Allowed Uses", of this title.
   B.   Three Step Review Of Site Plan: A planned unit development site plan
shall be considered in three (3) steps as required by section
13.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
   C.   Review And Approval Of A Conditional Use: The planning commission shall
consider the conditional use application at a public hearing. The City shall
provide notice as per "Conditional Use Permit" noticing procedures as required
in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13.
      1.   A copy of the planning commission's agenda shall be posted as
required in Appendix C: "Noticing Requirements" of Title 13. (Ord. 2016-27, 11-
3-2016)
   D.   Submission Requirements:
      1.   The applicant shall submit a standard subdivision design, using the
minimum lot size, width, and setback dimensions required by the zone, to
calculate the maximum allowable number of dwellings ("maximum density") for the
development.
      2.   The applicant shall submit a planned unit development site plan for
the total area within the proposed development as required by
chapter 13.03 of this title.
         a.   The site plan shall show, where pertinent:
            (1)   The use or uses, dimensions, sketch elevations and locations
of proposed structures;
            (2)   Dimensions and locations of areas to be reserved and
developed for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, public uses such
as schools and playgrounds, landscaping, and other open spaces;
            (3)   Architectural drawings and sketches outlining the general
design and character of the proposed uses and the physical relationships of the
uses; and
            (4)   Such other pertinent information such as, residential
density, coverage and open space characteristics as may be necessary to make a
determination that the proposed arrangement of buildings and uses makes it
desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily
applicable under this title.
         b.   An explanation of how the proposed planned unit development
satisfies the purposes set forth in section
13.78.020 of this chapter.
         c.   If the planned unit development is to be developed on a phase
basis, each phase shall be of such size, composition and arrangement that its
construction, marketing and operation is feasible as a unit independent of any
subsequent phases.
   E.   Waiver Of Zone District Regulations: To allow flexibility and
initiative in site and building design, the planning commission may waive or
vary one or more of the land use regulations as required by the zone in which
the planned unit development is proposed, other than:
      1.   Use regulations;
      2.   Overall building height regulations, including graduated height
restrictions; and
      3.   Density.
   F.   Limitations: A conditional use permit shall not be granted unless the
planned unit development meets the use limitations of the zoning district in
which it is to be located and meets the density and other limitations of such
districts.
   G.   Compliance With The Subdivision Regulations: Compliance with the
regulations of this chapter does not excuse the developer from the applicable
requirements of the subdivision regulations, as required by
chapter 13.10 of this title, except as modifications thereof are specifically
authorized in the approval of the application for the planned unit development.
   H.   Planning Commission: The planning commission may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a planned unit development based upon written findings of
fact according to each of the following standards. It is the responsibility of
the applicant to provide written and graphic evidence demonstrating compliance
with the following standards:
      1.   Planned Unit Development Objectives: The planned unit development
shall meet the purpose statement for a planned unit development (section
13.78.020 of this chapter);
      2.   Master Plan And Zoning Ordinance Compliance: The proposed planned
unit development shall be:
         a.   Consistent with any adopted policy set forth in the future land
use map applicable to the site where the planned unit development will be
located, and
         b.   Allowed by the zone where the planned unit development will be
located.
      3.   Compatibility: The proposed planned unit development shall be
compatible with the character of the site, adjacent properties, and existing
development within the vicinity of the site where the use will be located. In
determining compatibility, the planning commission shall consider:
         a.   Whether the street or other means of access to the site provide
the necessary ingress/egress without materially degrading the service level on
such street/access or any adjacent street/access;
         b.   Whether the planned unit development and its location will create
unusual pedestrian or vehicle traffic patterns or volumes that would not be
expected, based on:
            (1)   Orientation of driveways and whether they direct traffic to
major or local streets, and, if directed to local streets, the impact on the
safety, purpose, and character of these streets;
            (2)   Parking area locations and size, and whether parking plans
are likely to encourage street side parking for the planned unit development
which will adversely impact the reasonable use of adjacent property;
            (3)   Hours of peak traffic to the proposed planned unit
development and whether such traffic will unreasonably impair the use and
enjoyment of adjacent property.
         c.   Whether the internal circulation system of the proposed planned
unit development will be designed to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent
property from motorized, nonmotorized, and pedestrian traffic;
         d.   Whether existing or proposed utility and public services will be
adequate to support the proposed planned unit development at normal service
levels and will be designed in a manner to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent
land uses, public services, and utility resources;
         e.   Whether appropriate buffering or other mitigation measures, such
as, but not limited to, landscaping, setbacks, building location, sound
attenuation, odor control, will be provided to protect adjacent land uses from
excessive light, noise, odor and visual impacts and other unusual disturbances
from trash collection, deliveries, and mechanical equipment resulting from the
proposed planned unit development; and
         f.   Whether the mass and scale of the intended buildings/structures,
the intended uses within the planned unit development, and the intensity, size,
and scale of the entire planned unit development are compatible with
surrounding properties. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016;
Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021)
13.78.050: MINIMUM AREA:
A planned unit development proposed for any parcel or tract of land under
single ownership or control in certain zoning districts shall have a minimum
net lot area as set forth in
table 13.78.050.1 of this section.
TABLE 13.78.050.1
Zone Type Designation Minimum Area
Zone Type                      Designation Minimum Area
Forestry and recreation zone   FR-0.5      1.5 acres
Forestry and recreation zone   FR-1        3 acres
Forestry and recreation zone   FR-2.5      7.5 acres
Forestry and recreation zone   FR-5        15 acres
Forestry and recreation zone   FR-10       30 acres
Forestry and recreation zone   FR-20       60 acres
Single-family residential zone R-1-4       12,000 sq. ft.
Single-family residential zone R-1-8       24,000 sq. ft.
Single-family residential zone R-1-10      30,000 sq. ft.
Single-family residential zone R-1-15      45,000 sq. ft.
Single-family residential zone R-1-21      1.5 acres
Single-family residential zone R-1-43      3 acres
Single-family residential zone R-1-87      6 acres
Multi-family residential zone  R-2-8       24,000 sq. ft.
Multi-family residential zone  R-2-10      30,000 sq. ft.
Multi-family residential zone  R-M         12,000 sq. ft.
Commercial zone                C-1         No minimum
Commercial zone                C-2         No minimum
 
(Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.060: REZONE REQUIRED WHEN:
A planned unit development which will contain uses not permitted in the zoning
district in which it is to be located will require a change of zoning district
and shall be accompanied by an application for the land use amendment. (Ord.
2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.070: DEVELOPMENT OWNERSHIP:
The development shall be in single, partnership, or corporate ownership, or
under option to purchase by an individual or a corporate entity at the time of
application, or the application shall be filed jointly by all owners of the
property. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.080: EFFECT ON ADJACENT PROPERTIES:
The planning commission shall require such arrangement of structures and open
spaces within the site development plan, as necessary, to assure that adjacent
properties will not be adversely affected. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   A.   Height And Intensity: Height and intensity of buildings and uses shall
be arranged around the boundaries of the planned unit development to be
compatible with existing adjacent developments or zones. However, unless
conditions of the site so warrant, buildings located on the periphery of the
development shall be limited to a maximum height of two (2) stories. All
structures in the planned unit development shall comply with the graduated
height restrictions of the underlying zone.
   B.   Area, Width, Yard And Coverage: Lot area, lot width, yard and coverage
regulations shall be determined by approval of the site plan and shall meet the
requirements of the underlying zone wherever possible. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
   C.   Density: Residential planned unit developments shall not exceed the
density limitation of the zoning district where the planned unit development is
proposed. The density for any residential planned unit development may not
exceed the maximum density calculation as defined in subsection
13.78.040D1 of this chapter. The calculation of planned unit development
density may include open space that is provided as an amenity to the planned
unit development. Public or private roadways located within or abutting a
planned unit development shall not be included in the planned unit development
area for the purpose of calculating density except as allowed by section
15.28.020 of this code. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.78.090: PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Preservation and maintenance of required open spaces within the
development shall be the responsibility of the planned unit development
ownership and shall be maintained in perpetuity as open space. (Ord. 2014-06,
5-1-2014)
13.78.100: LANDSCAPING, FENCING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS:
Landscaping, fencing and screening related to the uses within the site and as a
means of integrating the proposed development into its surroundings shall be
planned and presented to the planning commission for approval, together with
other required plans for the development. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.110: SIGNS AND LIGHTING:
The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the intensity and
direction of area lighting shall be detailed in the application. (Ord. 2014-06,
5-1-2014)
13.78.120: CONSTRUCTION LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Plan: Upon approval of a planned unit development,
construction shall proceed only in accordance with the site plan, subdivision,
conditional use permit, and all specifications approved by the planning
commission, and in conformity with any conditions attached by the commission to
its approval.
   B.   Amendments: Amendments to approved plans and specifications for a
planned unit development shall be approved by the planning commission and shown
on the approved plans. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
13.78.130: SCOPE OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
In carrying out the intent of this chapter, the planning commission shall
consider the following principles:
   A.   Qualified Design Team: It is the intent of this chapter that site and
building plans for a planned unit development shall be prepared by a designer
or team of designers having professional competence in urban planning as
proposed in the application. The planning commission shall require the
applicant to engage such a qualified designer or design team.
   B.   Minimum Control Intended: It is not the intent of this chapter that
control of the design of a planned unit development by the planning commission
be so rigidly exercised that individual initiative be stifled and substantial
additional expense incurred; rather, it is the intent of this section that the
control exercised be the minimum necessary to achieve the purpose of this
chapter.
   C.   Recording: A notice of any planned unit development approved by the
city, including the designation and preservation of any open space, shall be
recorded in the county recorder's office, and shall thereafter run with the
land and be binding upon all successors and assigns.
   D.   Amendments: Any planned unit development approved by the planning
commission may not be changed or modified in any material way unless an amended
planned unit development has been reviewed and approved by the planning
commission.
   E.   Decision Of Planning Commission; Appeal: In approving an application,
the commission may attach such conditions as it may deem necessary to secure
compliance with the purposes set forth in this title. The action of the
planning commission may be appealed to the city council as allowed by
subsection
13.08.040I of this title. (Ord. 2014-06, 5-1-2014)
CHAPTER 13.79
UTILITY AND FACILITY SYSTEM PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.79.010: Purpose
13.79.020: Definitions
13.79.030: Systems Required To Be Underground
13.79.040: Exemptions
13.79.050: Notification Of Affected Property Owners
13.79.060: Excavation Permit Required
13.79.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the utility and facility system placement regulations codified
in this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to preserve and protect existing aesthetics, property
values, and quality of life within residential and other areas of the city. It
is the intent of this chapter to require that utility and facility systems be
placed underground when new systems are installed or existing transmission
systems are upgraded. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.79.020: DEFINITIONS:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.79.030: SYSTEMS REQUIRED TO BE UNDERGROUND:
Except as provided in section
13.79.040 of this chapter, the following systems shall be installed
underground:
   A.   New Systems: All new systems installed after the effective date hereof.
   B.   Upgraded Systems: All upgraded transmission systems which would
increase the height of poles to more than sixty feet (60') above existing
grade. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.79.040: EXEMPTIONS:
The following systems are exempt from the provisions of section
13.79.030 of this chapter:
   A.   Existing Systems: Except as provided in subsection
13.79.030B of this chapter, this chapter does not require the burial of any
existing aboveground systems, nor does it prohibit or restrict the repair,
relocation, maintenance, or replacement of any existing systems.
   B.   Aboveground Installation Permitted: Aboveground installation of the
following systems is permitted, subject to compliance with all other applicable
statutes, ordinances, and regulations:
      1.   New service drops and/or distribution lines where service is
available from existing aboveground systems;
      2.   Temporary systems required for construction projects not to exceed a
period of twelve (12) months;
      3.   Streetlight poles, light rail overhead catenary, wireless
telecommunications towers, and accessory equipment;
      4.   Transmission systems installed in the two (2) main north- south
transmission corridors, as identified on the map entitled "main north-south
electrical transmission corridors" on file with the planning division.
   C.   Variations And Exceptions: In cases where unusual topographical,
aesthetic, or other exceptional conditions or circumstances exist such that the
installation of a system would have minimal visual, health, or safety impact on
the public, variations or exceptions to the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the city council or its designee; provided, that the variations and
exceptions are consistent with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.79.050: NOTIFICATION OF AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNERS:
Prior to beginning a project involving the installation or upgrading of four
(4) or more poles, a utility/facility company providing electrical power for
general consumption shall send written notification of the project to all
abutting property owners and the director of public works. The purpose of such
notification is to allow potentially affected property owners an opportunity to
discuss with the company possible methods of providing and paying for
undergrounding of proposed systems and provide the city the opportunity to meet
with the company to discuss the project. Such notification shall be sent during
the company's planning process to allow reasonable and sufficient time for such
discussion to occur, but in no event less than sixty (60) days prior to the
scheduled installation. Such notification shall include a full description of
the project, including, but not limited to: a) the need for the project; b)
location of the project; c) height, width, type and general location of poles;
and d) amount of voltage. Failure of property owners to receive notice of the
project shall in no way affect the validity of action taken. Failure to reach
an agreement within the sixty (60) day period shall not be grounds for the
delay of the project. Notification is not required for emergency projects.
(Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.79.060: EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
All underground systems to be installed in the right of way of any city road
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 14.16, "Excavations", of this code. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.80
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13.80.010: Purpose
13.80.020: Off Street Parking Required
13.80.030: Parking Design Standards
13.80.040: Number Of Spaces Required
13.80.050: Shared Parking
13.80.060: Maintenance And Development Generally
13.80.070: Surfacing
13.80.080: Screening
13.80.090: Landscaping
13.80.100: Lighting
13.80.110: Signs
13.80.120: Off Street Loading Requirements
13.80.130: Gasoline Pump Requirements
13.80.140: Drive-Up/Drive-Thru Service (Food And Non-Food Uses)
13.80.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce street congestion and traffic hazards
in the City by incorporating adequate, attractively designed facilities for off
street parking and loading as an integral part of every use of land in the
City. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.020: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIRED:
   A.   Parking Required: There shall be provided at the time any building or
structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, or any use is
established, off street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the
requirements in this chapter.
   B.   Plans Required To Obtain Building Permit: All applications for a
building permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the required
parking spaces, with ingress and egress. The plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the Community and Economic Development Department.
   C.   Alternatives To On Site Parking: The required off street parking for
any new use, structure or building which, due to the size or location of the
parcel, cannot be provided on the premises may be provided on other property
not more than a three hundred foot (300') distance from the building site
measured along the shortest available pedestrian route of access upon a finding
by the Planning Commission that the off site parking is conveniently located
for such use and will not create a traffic or safety problem. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012; amd. Ord. 2022-22, 11-17-2022)
13.80.030: PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Size: Required parking stalls shall be rectangular with a minimum width
of nine feet (9') and a minimum length of eighteen feet (18'), in accordance
with table 1 of this section. If the stall is perpendicular to a curb, the
length shall be measured from the curb face. Each parking stall shall have
independent access from a driving aisle. A parking stall may contain less than
eighteen feet (18') of pavement in length if all of the following conditions
are met:
      1.   The stall has a standard six inch (6") curb face that will allow
vehicles to extend over a landscaped area of no less than six feet (6') in
total width;
      2.   Each stall contains no less than sixteen feet (16') of pavement in
length measured from curb face;
      3.   No pedestrian pathway or landscaping that prevents a standard
vehicle from overhanging the curb is within two feet (2') of any curb face; and
      4.   All other requirements of this Code are met.
   B.   Location: Required parking stalls shall not be located in delivery
areas, service driveways, driving aisles, drive-in stacking lanes, shopping
cart storage areas, or areas in front of overhead service doors. Designated
loading space shall not encroach into any fire lane or pedestrian pathway.
   C.   Separation From Rights-Of-Way: Except as provided above, wheel or
bumper guards shall be placed in parking stalls where necessary to prevent any
part of a standard sized vehicle from extending beyond a parking stall boundary
line, intruding on a pedestrianway, or contacting any wall, fence, or planting.
A physical separation or barrier, such as vertical curbs, may be required in
order to separate parking stalls from access to a second travel lane.
   D.   Layout: All off street parking stalls shall be designed in accordance
with the dimensions and specifications set forth in tables 1 and 2 of this
section.
   E.   Accessibility Requirements: All parking facilities shall comply with
accessibility requirements of the City's then current Building Code. The number
of accessible spaces required by the City's Building Code as of the enactment
of this section is shown in table 3 of this section.
   F.   Markings: All required parking stalls shall be marked and maintained to
be permanently visible.
   G.   Surface: Required parking stalls, loading spaces, maneuvering areas,
and driving aisles shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, paving stone or
masonry to a sufficient thickness to withstand repeated vehicular traffic, and
shall be constructed according to the City's street standards and
specifications.
   H.   Tables:
TABLE 1
 
A       B                 C                  D
(Angle) (Width Of Stalls) (Length Of Stalls) (Width Of Aisle)
0°     10'               22'                20' (12'*)
30°    9'                18'                20' (15'*)
45°    9'                18'                20' (15'*)
60°    9'                18'                24'*
90°    9'                18'                24'*
 
* One-way traffic only.
TABLE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4984.gif]
TABLE 3
Total Parking Stalls Required Minimum Number
Provided On Property Of Accessible Spaces
Total Parking Stalls Required Minimum Number
Provided On Property Of Accessible Spaces
1   to 25         1
26   to 50        2
51   to 75        3
76   to 100       4
101   to 150      5
151   to 200      6
201   to 300      7
301   to 400      8
401   to 500      9
501   to 1,000    2 percent of total
1,001   and over  20 plus 1/100 stalls over 1,000
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.040: NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED:
Except as provided herein, under no circumstances shall there be less parking
spaces provided than actually required by the use.
   A.   Number Specified: The minimum number of off street parking spaces
required in all zones except the HV and R-M/U Zone, shall be as follows:
Amusement center (arcade)  1 space per 100 square feet of floor area
Apartments for elderly     1 space for each dwelling unit
persons
Automobile or machinery    2 spaces plus 1 space for each 400 square feet of
sales and service garages  net floor area
Banks and business or      2 spaces plus 1 space for each 200 square feet of
professional offices       net usable floor area
                           1 space for each person employed on the highest
Bed and breakfast          employment shift, plus 1 space for every guestroom,
                           plus parking for all accessory uses defined in this
                           title
Bowling alleys             5 for each alley
                           1 space for each 6 1/2 feet of linear pew or 3 1/
                           2 seats in the auditorium; provided, however, that
Churches                   where a church building is designed or intended to
                           be used by 2 congregations or special meetings, an
                           additional 50% of the minimum spaces required shall
                           be provided.
Dance halls and assembly
halls without fixed seats,
exhibition halls, except   3 spaces for each 100 square feet of floor area used
church assembly rooms in   by assembly or dancing
conjunction with
auditorium
Daycare center for         4 spaces plus 1 space per 500 square feet of floor
children                   area
Dormitory building         1 space for each tenant
                           2 spaces for each 3 bedroom unit,
Dwellings, multiple        1.5 for each 2 bedroom unit,
                           1 space for each 1 bedroom unit
Dwellings, single-family   2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Dwellings, internal        1 space for each dwelling unit
accessory dwelling unit
Funeral homes, mortuaries  1 space for each 40 square feet of floor area in
                           assembly room
Furniture and appliance
stores, household          1 space for each 600 square feet of gross leasable
equipment or furniture     area
repair shop
Hospitals and convalescent 2 spaces per bed for the total capacity of building
hospitals
                           1 space for each living or sleeping unit, plus
Hotels and motels          parking for all accessory uses as defined in this
                           title
Indoor firearms and/or     2 spaces per shooting point
archery range
Manufacturing plants,
research or testing        1 space for each person employed on the highest
laboratories, bottling     employment shift
plants
Medical or dental clinics  6 spaces for each doctor’s office plus 1 space per
                           employee
Nursing homes              4 spaces plus 1 space per each 5 beds
                           4 spaces per court for tennis courts, 3 spaces per
Recreation                 court for racquetball courts, 2 spaces per court for
                           squash courts
Residential facility for   2 spaces for the dwelling unit, plus 2 spaces for
elderly persons            visitors, the parking spaces may be arranged 1
                           behind the other
Residential healthcare     4 spaces for facilities with 5 or less residents,
facility                   the parking spaces may be arranged 1 behind the
                           other; and 4 spaces plus 1 space per each 5 beds
                           1 space per 100 square feet of dining area or 1
Restaurant, coffee/juice   space for each 4 seats (whichever is greater) plus 1
bar - full service         stall per each shift employee. Required parking
                           shall not include minimum spaces required in drive-
                           thru lanes (section 13.80.140 of this chapter)
Restaurant, drive-up/      1 space per 100 square feet of dining area or 1
drive-thru (fast food      space for each 4 seats (whichever is greater) plus 1
outlet with large portion  stall per each shift employee. Required parking
of take-out and/or drive-  shall not include minimum spaces required in drive-
thru service)              thru lanes (section 13.80.140 of this chapter)
Restaurants or private     1 space for each 21/2 seats or 3 spaces per 100
nonprofit clubs            square feet of floor area, whichever is greater
Retail stores, shops,      1 space for each 200 square feet of retail floor
etc., except as provided   space
in this subsection
Rooming/boarding house     1 space per bedroom
Schools                    1 space for each 31/2 seats in an auditorium, plus 1
                           space for each administrator and faculty
Shopping centers           5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
                           leasable area
                           2 spaces per dwelling unit plus 1 additional space
                           for each bedroom exceeding 2 bedrooms. For buildings
Short term rental          with 2 dwelling units or less, the third and fourth
                           spaces, when required, can be in tandem with the
                           first 2 spaces required
Sports arenas,
auditoriums, theaters,     1 space for each 3 seats of maximum seating capacity
assembly halls and meeting
rooms
                           5 spaces minimum, or 5 percent of the total site
Trailer sales              area excluding the landscaped areas, whichever is
                           greater
Wholesale establishments,
warehouses, service and    1 space for each person employed during the highest
maintenance centers and    employment shift
communication equipment
buildings
 
   B.   Adjustments to Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required:
      1.   The following percentages of the minimum stalls required may be
designed, designated and maintained to accommodate “Compact” cars or
motorcycles, scooters.
         a.   A maximum of 25% of minimum stalls required may be compact stalls
         b.   A maximum of 15% of minimum stalls required may be motorcycle/
scooter stalls.
      2.   Adjustments to minimum parking requirements may be allowed to
account for local factors and proposed development strategies which reduce
traffic demand generated by the land use.
Upon application to the Planning Commission, as per section
13.08 of this Title, a property owner may petition to adjust the required
minimum parking by selecting from the following table of allowable strategies.
Reductions selected shall not exceed 30% of the minimums required.
Strategy Description Reduction Traffic Reduction
Strategy                 Description                Reduction Traffic Reduction
                         Have each parking space
Shared Parking           serve multiple users and   10-30%
                         destinations.
                         Regulations that favor
                         reserved areas for higher-
                         value uses such as service
Parking Restrictions     vehicles, deliveries,      10-30%
                         customers, quick errands,
                         and people with special
                         needs.
                         Via a targeted parking
More Accurate and        study, adjustment of
Flexible Standards       parking standards to more  10-30%
                         accurately reflect demand
                         in a particular situation.
                         Proposal of a compact,
                         mixed, multi-modal
                         development designed to
Smart Growth/Transit     shared parking lots and    10-30%    X
Oriented Development     effectively use
                         alternative modes of
                         transportation within .25
                         mile radius.
                         Install or improve walking
                         and cycling conditions
Walking and cycling      within .25 miles of the    5-15%     X
Improvements             project, to expand the
                         service by a parking
                         facility.
                         Increase parking supply by
                         using otherwise wasted
Increase Capacity of     space, smaller stalls, car
Existing Facilities      stackers and valet         5-15%
                         parking, without impacting
                         existing or reducing
                         required landscaping.
                         Mandated efficient travel
                         patterns, including
Mobility Management      changes in mode, timing,   10-30%    X
                         destination and vehicle
                         trip frequency of staff,
                         employees.
                         Charge motorists directly
Parking Pricing          and efficiently for using  10-30%    X
                         parking facilities.
                         Provide financial
Financial Incentives     incentives to staff,       10-30%    X
                         employees to shift mode.
Bicycle Facilities       Provide bicycle storage    5-15%     X
                         and changing facilities.
                         Provide convenient and
                         accurate information on
Improve User Information parking availability and   5-15%     X
and Marketing            price, using maps, signs,
                         brochures and electronic
                         communication.
 
   C.   Development In the R-M/U zone;
      1.   Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces: All developments within the R-M/
U Zone shall provide the minimum number of parking standards as adopted in the
Site Development Master Plan, as per
13.65.060.
   D.   Developments In The HV Zone:
      1.   Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces: All developments within the HV
Zone shall provide a minimum number of off street parking spaces in the amount
specified on
chart 13.80.1 in this section. In no case shall the parking provided be less
than that required by the use(s) allowed within the structure except as
specifically allowed by the Planning Commission upon request per subsection B4
of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when shared parking is
furnished as provided in section
13.80.050 of this chapter, the total number of required parking spaces may be
reduced as authorized in that section.
CHART 13.80.1
Use Required Spaces
CHART 13.80.1
Use          Required Spaces
Bed and      1 space per bedroom plus 1 space
breakfast
Daycare/     3 spaces plus 1 space for each employee on the premises at the same time
preschool
General
business and
professional
office       2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net leasable area
(except
medical and
dental
office)
General      2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net leasable area
retail
Medical and  6 spaces for each doctor’s office plus 1 for each employee working at the same
dental       time
office
Neighborhood 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net leasable area
market
Personal     2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net leasable area
services
Public and
quasi-public As provided in this section for most similar use
use
             1 space for each 1 bedroom unit
Residential1 1.5 spaces for each 2 bedroom unit
             2 spaces for each 3 bedroom unit
Restaurant   1 space for each 4 seats
 
   Note:
      1.    When a dwelling unit has over 4 bedrooms, the Community Development
Director shall designate the number of required spaces.
      2.   Existing Surface Parking Lots: The use of existing surface parking
lots within the HV Zone may be continued so long as upon expansion or
remodeling of the associated structures (see section
13.71.060 of this title), the parking lot is improved, where reasonably
possible, to meet the requirements of this section. Exceptions may be granted
by the Community Development Director using alternative parking located within
two hundred feet (200') from the project site.
      3.   Maximum Number Of Spaces: In the HV Zone, the maximum number of
surface lot parking spaces shall be no more than one hundred twenty five
percent (125%) of the required minimum number of spaces as required in
chart 13.80.1 of this section.
      4.   Abutting Public Parking: The Planning Commission may allow for fifty
percent (50%) of immediately abutting parking stalls in the public right-of-
way to be counted toward the minimum required number of stalls for a use in the
HV Zone as per
chart 13.80.1 of this section, if:
         a.   The use can demonstrate that the abutting parking stalls will be
used by the customers of that use as the primary parking location within the
village, and
         b.   The use can demonstrate that the reduced number of on site
parking stalls in conjunction with the abutting stalls in the right of way will
be adequate to accommodate the general business activity on the site, and
         c.   The approval of abutting stalls in the public right of way will
not detrimentally impact overall parking capacity of the Holladay Village area
and does not represent a violation of the spirit and intent of this title, and
         d.   The abutting on street stalls will not be marked, signed or
implied by the use that any stall is reserved for exclusive use by the
business.
   E.   Number Of Parking Spaces For Uses Not Specified: For any use of
building not specified in this section, the off street parking requirement
shall be determined by the community development director being guided, where
appropriate, by the requirements set forth in this section for uses or
buildings which, in the opinion of the community development director, are
similar to the use or building under consideration.
   F.   Gross Floor Area Defined: “Gross floor area” means the total floor area
designed for public access, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors.
(Ord. 2013-26, 10-10-2013; amd. Ord. 2016-25, 11-3-2016; Ord. 2018-13, 6-21-
2018; Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021; Ord. 2022-22, 11-17-2022)
13.80.050: SHARED PARKING:
   A.   Permitted: Notwithstanding any other parking requirements provided in
this chapter, when nonresidential land uses occupy the same or abutting lots in
the R-M, C-1, C-2, HV, or the O-R-D zone, the total number of off street
parking spaces required for each use (section
13.80.040 of this chapter) may be combined and shared upon approval as provided
herein. A proposal for sharing of off street parking shall be presented to the
planning commission for site plan review and conditional use approval. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   Application Information: An application for shared parking shall
contain the following:
      1.   The location and type of each use that will share the parking
facility;
      2.   The total parking requirements for each use as provided in section
13.80.040 of this chapter or other applicable provision of this title;
      3.   The proposed hours of operation of each use;
      4.   Documentation that shows the uses sharing a parking lot are unlikely
to produce a substantial demand for parking at the same time;
      5.   The number and size of proposed parking spaces. All spaces shall
meet the size requirements in subsection
13.80.030A of this chapter, size of spaces;
      6.   A site plan that demonstrates that the proposed shared parking
facility will comply with all the standards required by this code for parking
lot development;
      7.   Proof of ownership of shared parking facility; and
      8.   A landscaping plan meeting the requirements in subsection
13.80.090.
   C.   Approval Conditions: Shared parking shall only be approved if:
      1.   The shared parking facility is located on land in the same ownership
as the use, which ownership is established by deed, easement or lease;
      2.   Ownership as established in subsection C1 of this section is
maintained for the duration of the shared parking permit;
      3.   A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the maximum
parking demand of the participating uses;
      4.   Satisfactory evidence establishes that the participating uses are
unlikely to produce a substantial demand for parking at the same time;
      5.   A disclosure statement is recorded with the city recorder’s office
stating that the use on the property is contingent on the existence of a shared
parking approval;
      6.   Additional landscaping is provided, as required by the planning
commission; and
      7.   There is a finding by the planning commission that the shared
parking facility is conveniently located for such use, readily used, and will
not create a traffic or safety problem.
   D.   Changes: Any subsequent change in use, occupancy, hours of operation,
or to a structure shall require review by the community development director to
ensure that any such change complies with the provisions of this chapter.
Failure to comply may result in the revocation of the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2022-22, 11-17-2022)
13.80.060: MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT GENERALLY:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including commercial parking lots and automobile, farm equipment, or other open
air sales lots shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the
requirements set out in sections
13.80.070 through
13.80.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.070: SURFACING:
Any off street parking area, except on a farm or ranch, shall be surfaced with
an asphaltic or portland cement, or other binder pavement so as to provide a
durable and dustless surface, shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of
all surface water accumulated within the area, as required by the community
development director and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide the
orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.080: SCREENING:
   A.   The periphery of all surface parking areas shall be designed to hide
the major portions (i.e., heights) of automobiles from view from the street.
Screening may be accomplished by using walls and/or hedges of shrubs that
create three foot (3') height screens (at maturity) along the street periphery.
Minimum size of shrubs shall be five (5) gallons and placed at a spacing not to
exceed five feet (5') apart.
   B.   Surface parking lots located in the HV zone should be located at the
side or rear of buildings. In no case shall an unscreened surface parking lot
front on Murray Holladay Road, Holladay Boulevard or 2300 East Street.
   C.   The sides and rear of any off street parking area for more than five
(5) vehicles which adjoins or faces an institutional use or residential
building situated in any R district shall be effectively screened by a masonry
wall or solid visual barrier fence unless otherwise provided for more
specifically by the requirements of the zoning district in which such parking
area is located. Such wall or fence shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in
height and shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising
thereon.
   D.   The location of off street parking spaces should be reviewed by the
city of Holladay traffic engineer to assure that the location or design does
not:
      1.   Create hazards;
      2.   Interfere with access for pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
      3.   Create unsafe traffic congestion;
      4.   Interfere with access to other parking spaces. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
   E.   Restricting vehicular and pedestrian access between abutting parking
lots in the HV zone at the same grade is prohibited, but shall be designed not
to promote cut through traffic. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.80.090: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscaping in on-grade parking areas shall meet the requirements of
section
13.77.060 of this title. (Ord. 2013-22, 9-5-2013)
13.80.100: LIGHTING:
Lighting used to illuminate any off street parking area or gasoline pump island
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in
any residential district and street traffic. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.110: SIGNS:
Signs within parking lots should be limited to those necessary for safety and
identification. Any required signs for individual stalls should be marked on
the pavement. Freestanding or wall mounted signs shall not be permitted, with
the exception of handicapped parking signs. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.120: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
For every building or part thereof, not provided with docking facilities and
having a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which
is to be occupied by a commercial or industrial use, to or from which delivery
of materials or merchandise is regularly made by motor vehicle, there shall be
provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least one off
street loading space plus one additional space for each additional twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or major fraction thereof. Each loading space
shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, twenty five feet (25') in
length, and fourteen feet (14') in height. Such space may occupy any required
yard or court except that if it shall be enclosed by a brick or stone wall not
less than six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.130: GASOLINE PUMP REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Setback: Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than eighteen feet
(18') from any street line to which the pump island is perpendicular and twelve
feet (12') from any street line to which the pump island is parallel, and not
less than ten feet (10') from any residential zone boundary line. If the pump
island is set at an angle on the property, it shall be so located that
automobiles stopped for service will not extend over the property line.
   B.   Canopies Setback: Canopies constructed to provide a weather shield over
gasoline pump islands shall be set back not less than six feet (6') from any
street line and not less than ten feet (10') from any residential zone
boundary. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.80.140: DRIVE-UP/DRIVE-THRU SERVICE (FOOD AND NON-FOOD USES):
The following regulations shall apply to all drive-up/drive- thru services
(including food service, service retail, general retail and financial
services).
   A.   Adjacent To Residentially Zoned Property: Drive-up/drive- thru windows
shall not be located directly adjacent to residentially zoned property. Drive-
up/drive-thru windows and their stacking lanes shall be separated from
residentially zoned properties by an intervening building (when located on the
same side of the street as the drive-thru use) or separated by a major arterial
road.
   B.   Stacking (Queuing) Spaces: Stacking lanes shall be provided for all
drive-up/drive-thru service windows.
      1.   Minimum Queuing Spaces Required: The following number of queuing
spaces shall be provided per lane (these are in addition to the required
parking space for each use):
         a.   Drive-thru restaurants: A minimum of nine (9) spaces (5 spaces
before the order board, 3 spaces before the pick-up window and 1 dedicated
space beyond the pick-up window for customers waiting for food pick up).
         b.   Drive-up coffee kiosks: A minimum of three (3) spaces for each
service window.
         c.   Drive-thru coffee/juice full service: A minimum of five (5)
spaces before order board.
         d.   Financial institutions: A minimum of three (3) spaces in each
teller lane.
         e.   Pharmacy: A minimum of two (2) spaces in each lane.
         f.   Dry cleaners: A minimum of two (2) spaces.
         g.   Thrift shop drop off: A minimum of five (5) spaces for each drop
off lane.
      2.   Queuing Design Standards:
         a.   Queuing lanes shall not be allowed to wrap around in front of the
main building entrance doors nor block required back out areas for adjacent
drive aisles and parking spaces unless there is no other alternative for
location of the building and drive thru lane(s) on the site.
         b.   Queuing lanes are strongly discouraged between the building and
the street unless there is no other alternative for location of the building
and drive thru lane(s) on the site.
         c.   All drive-thru queuing lanes providing greater than nine (9)
spaces shall also provide a separate escape lane.
      3.   Maximum Queuing Lanes: Queuing lanes shall be limited to a maximum
of the following number of lanes per land use:
         a.   Drive thru restaurants: Two (2) lanes.
         b.   Financial institutions: Three (3) lanes.
         c.   Pharmacy: Two (2) lanes.
         d.   Dry cleaners: One lane.
         e.   Coffee kiosks: Two (2) lanes (1 on each side of the building).
(Ord. 2018-13, 6-21-2018)
CHAPTER 13.81
HIGHWAY NOISE ABATEMENT MEASURES
SECTION:
13.81.010: Findings
13.81.020: Purpose Of Provisions
13.81.030: Development Of Property Abutting Certain State Highways
13.81.040: Responsibility Of Owner Or Developer
13.81.010: FINDINGS:
   A.   The federal highway administration (FHWA) regulation entitled
"procedures for abatement of highway traffic noise and construction noise" (23
CFR 772) provides procedures for noise studies and noise abatement measures to
help protect the public health and welfare, supplies noise abatement criteria,
and establishes requirements for information to be given to local officials for
use in the planning and design of federal aid highways. The Utah department of
transportation (UDOT) policy entitled "noise abatement" (policy 08-111),
adopted pursuant to 23 CFR 772, addresses highway noise impacts and sets forth
conditions under which noise abatement projects may be approved and constructed
in the state with the use of federal aid highway participation funds.
   B.   In order for UDOT to obtain participation funds from FHWA for proposed
federal aid highway projects for noise abatement measures on existing highways
(known as "type II projects"), local authorities are required to take measures
"...to exercise land use control over the remaining undeveloped lands adjacent
to highways in the local jurisdiction to prevent further development of
incompatible activities", 23 CFR 772.13(b).
   C.   In an effort to prevent future traffic noise impacts on currently
undeveloped lands, section 23 CFR 772.15 requires that highway agencies shall
inform local officials within whose jurisdiction the highway project is located
of the following:
      1.   The best estimation of future noise levels (for various distances
from the highway improvement) for both developed and undeveloped lands or
properties in the immediate vicinity of the project;
      2.   Information that may be useful to local communities to protect
future land development from becoming incompatible with anticipated highway
noise levels; and
      3.   Eligibility for federal aid participation for type II projects as
described in section 23 CFR 772.13(b).
   D.   In order for city residents to benefit from the development and
implementation of type II projects for noise abatement along eligible highways
within its boundaries, it is found to be in the city's best interests to comply
with federal regulation and state policy by adopting this land use ordinance.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.81.020: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by
minimizing the potential adverse effects of highway traffic noise and by
complying with state and federal requirements for highway traffic noise
abatement projects. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.81.030: DEVELOPMENT OF PROPERTY ABUTTING CERTAIN STATE HIGHWAYS:
Consistent with the requirements of 23 CFR 772 and UDOT's noise abatement
policy 08-111, no remaining undeveloped lands located in the city abutting type
II projects (freeways and expressways) shall be developed for any use or
activity which is incompatible with highway traffic noise levels, unless the
development of such lands shall include appropriate noise abatement measures
determined necessary and appropriate by the city and UDOT. A use or activity
shall be deemed incompatible with highway traffic noise levels when a "traffic
noise impact" occurs, as determined under the formula set forth as follows:
(Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
NOISE ABATEMENT CRITERIA
HOURLY A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL - DECIBELS (dB)
Leq shows are maximum levels allowed
 
Activity Category Leq(H)     Description Of Activity Category
                             Lands on which serenity and quiet are of
                  57         extraordinary significance and serve an important
A                 (Exterior) public need and where the preservation of those
                             qualities is essential if the area is to continue
                             to serve its intended purpose
                  67         Picnic areas, fixed recreation areas, playgrounds,
B                 (Exterior) active sports areas, parks, residences, motels,
                             hotels, schools, churches, libraries and hospitals
                             Cemeteries, commercial areas, industrial areas,
C                 72         office buildings, and other developed lands,
                  (Exterior) properties or activities not included in category
                             A or B above
D                 -          Undeveloped lands (including roadside facilities
                             and dispersed recreation)
                  52         Residences, motels, hotels, public meeting rooms,
E                 (Interior) schools, churches, libraries, hospitals and
                             auditoriums
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.81.040: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR DEVELOPER:
The owner or developer of land to be subdivided, improved or developed abutting
type II projects shall be responsible to comply with any and all requirements
for noise abatement measures imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Failure to so comply shall constitute a violation of city ordinance
and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
CHAPTER 13.82
SIGNS
SECTION:
13.82.010: Purpose
13.82.020: Definitions
13.82.030: Interpretation
13.82.040: Conformity Required
13.82.050: Nonconforming Signs
13.82.060: Comprehensive Sign Plan
13.82.070: Building Permit Exceptions
13.82.080: Size And Area Computation
13.82.090: Height Of Ground Signs
13.82.100: Imprint Of Ownership Required
13.82.110: Visibility At Intersections (Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016)
13.82.120: Signs On Public Property
13.82.125: Street Banners On Utility Poles In The Public Way
13.82.130: Lighted Signs
13.82.140: Electronic Message Boards
13.82.150: Temporary Sign
13.82.160: Traffic Hazard Prohibited
13.82.170: Maintenance And Removal Of Signs
13.82.180: Prohibited Signs
13.82.190: Action To Remove Or Abate Violation
13.82.200: Holladay Village Sign Regulations
13.82.210: Signs Allowed
13.82.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to allow only signage that provides a
responsible communication system by setting requirements for the location,
size, height and lighting of signs that will be compatible with adjacent land
uses, architecture and landscape, and that will preserve and improve the
aesthetic values and visual qualities of the City. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.82.020: DEFINITIONS:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.030: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   The sign requirements contained in this chapter are declared to be the
maximum allowable.
   B.   Sign types not specifically allowed as set forth within this chapter
are expressly prohibited.
   C.   Where other ordinances are in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, the most restrictive ordinance shall apply. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.82.040: CONFORMITY REQUIRED:
Except as provided in this title, a sign shall not be erected, raised, moved,
placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, unless in conformity with
the regulations specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.050: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Legal nonconforming signs may continue to be used.
   B.   A legal nonconforming sign shall not be materially altered, modified,
reconstructed, raised, moved, placed, extended, or enlarged unless the sign is
modified to conform with all of the provisions of this chapter. Alterations
shall not be interpreted to include changing the text or copy of off premises
advertising signs, signs for theaters, or other similar signs which are
designed to accommodate changeable copy or the replacement of a permanent sign
face with a sign face designed to accommodate changeable copy when the sign
otherwise conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Minor repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming sign;
however, in the event such sign has deteriorated or is hereafter damaged by
whatever means, including an act of God, and such damage exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the reproduction value of the sign, according to appraisal thereof by
competent appraisers, the sign shall be restored, reconstructed, altered or
repaired only to conform with this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.060: COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN:
When a plan for development, redevelopment, or modification of a parcel of land
five (5) acres or larger, the applicant shall submit to the Planning
Commission, for approval, a complete comprehensive sign plan for all existing,
proposed or future signs. This plan shall be part of the conditional use permit
for the development. The commission may approve a sign proposal that is less
restrictive than the regulations set forth in this chapter providing there is a
determination that the proposed sign exceptions are:
   A.   Not in conflict with the purpose of this chapter; and
   B.   In architectural harmony with the development and other buildings and
uses adjacent to the development. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.070: BUILDING PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
Building permits are required for all signs except for temporary signs and
nameplate signs conforming to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.82.080: SIZE AND AREA COMPUTATION:
The following shall be used when calculating sign sizes and area:
   A.   When more than one use occupies a lot, the frontage may be used to
calculate the sign size for one total ground or projecting sign, not for each
use. The total may then be divided between the uses. There may be any number of
flat or wall signs, provided their total does not exceed the percentage of wall
area coverage allowed.
   B.   A property line that abuts a nonaccess freeway, road, street or right-
of-way may only be used in computing sign area when the property has no other
frontage or access on a dedicated street.
   C.   The area of a sign that is used for display purposes, excluding the
minimum frame and supports. In computing sign area, only one side of a back to
back or double faced sign shall be computed when signs are parallel or diverge
from a common edge by an angle of not more than forty five degrees (45°). In
relation to signs that do not have a frame or a separate background, sign area
shall be computed on the basis of the least rectilinear line with a maximum of
eight (8) sides, triangle or circle large enough to frame the display. Sign
areas in the shape of a sphere, prism, cylinder, cone, pyramid, square or other
such shapes shall be computed as one-half (1/2) of the total surface area.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.090: HEIGHT OF GROUND SIGNS:
The height of ground signs, except as otherwise specified in this chapter,
shall be measured from the grade at the property line of the yard in which the
sign is located, but shall not exceed the height allowed in the zone. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.100: IMPRINT OF OWNERSHIP REQUIRED:
The imprint of the sign owner and sign erector of all signs shall be in plain
and public view. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.110: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016)
13.82.120: SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No sign shall be located on publicly owned land or inside street rights-of-way
except signs required and erected by permission of an authorized public agency.
Signs shall include, but not be limited to, handbills, posters, advertisements
or notices that are fastened, placed, posted, painted or attached in any way
upon any curbstone, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, rock,
sidewalk or street. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.125: STREET BANNERS ON UTILITY POLES IN THE PUBLIC WAY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to designate the use of certain
utility poles for the display of street banners to benefit local neighborhoods
and the City as a whole by allowing street banners for the limited purpose of
encouraging and promoting community identity, community organizations, and
community events. This limited signage on utility poles, in certain designated
locations is intended to create a limited or nonpublic forum for the purposes
set forth herein.
   B.   Definitions:
   APPLICANT: Any person or organization that makes application for a street
banner permit as described herein.
   COMMUNITY EVENT: A significant occurrence, happening, or activity in a given
local neighborhood at a given place and time of specific and limited duration.
   COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION: A City recognized, community based organization
which is a local, nonprofit 501(c)(3) tax exempt status organization.
   COORDINATED STREET BANNER PROGRAM: A program described in subsection G of
this section.
   LOGO: A business trademark or symbol.
   SIGN: A "sign" as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title.
   STREET BANNER: A temporary secured banner to be located along designated
arterial or collector streets, and displayed on a utility pole located in the
public right-of-way or on City property. Street banner shall not include
banners located or suspended over public streets. Banners overhanging public
streets shall not be permitted.
   C.   Authority To Display: In order to encourage and promote community
identity, community organizations, and community events, an eligible
participant, as defined herein, may apply for a permit to have street banners
owned by the applicant placed on existing utility poles in the public way, or
on City-owned property.
   D.   Eligible Participants: The City will accept applications for a permit
to display street banners only from community organizations, City and County
government, the State of Utah, or from governmentally owned educational
institutions. Applications for political and for profit promotional street
banners will not be accepted. Street banners may be placed on existing utility
poles in the public way or on City-owned property only for the limited purpose
of promoting and encouraging community identity, community organizations, or
community events.
   E.   Approved Display Areas:
      1.   Approved Areas: Street banners may be placed on any existing utility
poles that are located along designated arterial or collector streets.
      2.   Location: Placement of street banners must be reviewed in
relationship to proximity and use of other existing or proposed street banners.
In certain locations, such banner uses may have the potential for adverse
impacts if located without careful planning. Such impacts may interfere with
the enjoyment of adjacent property and uses.
   F.   Display Content And Design:
      1.   Allowable Displays: The following displays are permitted on street
banners:
         a.   Advertisements or promotions of community organizations;
         b.   Advertisements or promotions of community events;
         c.   Advertisements or promotions of activities sponsored by the City,
Salt Lake County, the State of Utah, or a governmentally owned educational
institution;
         d.   Advertisements or promotions of community events that are
commercially sponsored;
         e.   Welcome messages, such as those for class reunions, conventions,
conferences, athletic tournaments, or local winners of major events;
         f.   Advertisements or promotions of sales and fundraising events for
youth organizations, community organizations, and community service
organizations for their program support; or
         g.   Nonpartisan and no candidate voting information.
      2.   Nonallowable Displays: The following displays are not permitted on
street banners:
         a.   Personal messages;
         b.   Promotion of a commercial for profit enterprise, activity, or
event;
         c.   Advertisements for clubs, churches or for profit organizations
promoting an event with an admission charge;
         d.   Advertisements for religious organizations with a message not
described in subsection F1 of this section;
         e.   Messages of political parties or political groups that are not
described in subsection F1 of this section; or
         f.   Advertisements of clubs or organizations for events that are
primarily open only to members of those clubs or organizations.
   G.   Management Of Coordinated Street Banner Programs: The City may enter
into agreements with community, government, or educational organizations to
manage a coordinated street banner program within a specified geographic area.
Coordinated street banner programs shall be subject to requirements as set
forth herein. Such agreements must be approved by the City Manager. The City
may establish regulations governing the application, approval, and placement of
street banners within a geographic area specified by an approved permit.
   H.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Street Banners To Be Located Within The Boundaries Of A Coordinated
Street Banner Program: Any person or entity who desires to display street
banners within the City shall submit an application to the Community
Development Director with a copy to the City Recorder not more than six (6)
months or less than sixty (60) days before the date the banners are proposed to
be displayed. The application shall also include:
         a.   The name, addresses, and telephone number of the applicant, or if
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of a contact person;
         b.   A photograph, drawing, or other visual representation of the
proposed street banners;
         c.   The proposed number of street banners and the proposed locations
where the street banners will be placed;
         d.   The proposed dates for placement and removal of the street
banners;
   I.   Standards For Granting Of The Permit: A street banner permit
application shall be reviewed and a permit issued by the City upon a
determination that the application has been properly completed, and that:
      1.   The location and placement of the street banners shall be a minimum
of thirteen and one-half feet (131/2') above the asphalt travel lane and ten
feet (10') over sidewalks and shall not endanger public safety, including
motorists and pedestrians, by interfering with street lighting, obstructing
traffic signs or other control devices, or otherwise creating dangerous
distractions; and
      2.   The street banners would comply with all other requirements of this
section.
   J.   Time For Approval Or Disapproval Of Application: Within thirty (30)
days after receiving the application for a permit, the City Community
Development Department shall grant, modify, or deny the permit request.
   K.   Street Banner And Hardware Standards:
      1.   Materials: Street banners must be constructed of a material that can
withstand the normal and reasonably expected forces of nature for the period of
time they are displayed. Torn or damaged street banners shall not be hung and
shall be promptly replaced if they are torn or damaged after being hung.
   L.   Duration Of Display: The street banners may be in place for a period of
at least seven (7) days but not more than thirty (30) days. As long as no other
applicant has applied for permission to place street banners in the same
location, that initial thirty (30) day maximum display period may be extended
for additional periods of thirty (30) days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
City may order that street banners be removed prior to the expiration of any
permit period, if such street banners are determined to constitute a safety
hazard, blight, or otherwise not meet the requirements of this section.
   M.   Local Street Banners: Nothing in this section shall apply to: 1)
holiday decorations (such as lights, wreaths, garlands, or similar decorations)
attached to utility poles, or 2) banners on utility poles located on local
streets that provide information about localized community events such as block
parties, street fairs, or neighborhood celebrations and that contain no
commercial content.
   N.   Effect Of Invalidity: If any portion of this section is determined to
be illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or superseded, in whole or in part, this
entire section shall forthwith be voided and terminated, subject to the
following provisions: 1) in the event of a judicial, regulatory, or
administrative determination that all or some part of this section is illegal,
invalid, unconstitutional, or superseded, such action shall be effective as of
the date of a final appealable court order; and 2) in the event of any State or
Federal legislative action that renders any portion of this section illegal,
invalid, unconstitutional, or superseded, such action shall be effective as of
the effective date of such legislative action. (Ord. 2018-07, 5-17-2018)
13.82.130: LIGHTED SIGNS:
   A.   Illumination may be built into or attached to a sign as allowed in the
district.
   B.   A lighted sign shall not be installed in such a manner as to annoy or
interfere with the use of nearby properties.
   C.   Such lights alleged to violate subsection B of this section by the
nearby property owners or Community Development Director shall be subject to a
hearing before the City of Holladay administrative enforcement hearing examiner
as to the validity of the alleged violation. If such light is determined to be
in violation, the owner of the light shall take appropriate, corrective action
as directed. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.140: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARDS:
Electronic message boards are not permitted in the city of Holladay. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.150: TEMPORARY SIGN:
No temporary signs are allowed except those specifically noted and regulated
for real estate purposes or otherwise noted in this section.
   A.   Temporary Signs: One temporary sign may be used for each use as allowed
on the chart in section
13.82.210 of this chapter.
   B.   Illumination: Temporary signs may not employ illumination, animation,
flashing lights or intermittent lights.
   C.   Vehicle Signs: Temporary signs do not include signs painted on vehicles
unless the community development director determines such a vehicle is being
utilized for advertising purposes beyond that approved for signage on a site.
In such case the director may require a business to remove or relocate such
vehicle. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.160: TRAFFIC HAZARD PROHIBITED:
Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected at any location
where by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal
device, or make use of the words "Stop", "Danger", or any other words, phrases,
symbols or characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
vehicle operators. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.170: MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
   A.   All signs and advertising structures shall be maintained in good
condition.
   B.   Signs including the poles or other supporting structure relating to a
product no longer available for purchase, or to a business which has closed or
moved, shall be removed within thirty (30) days of such unavailability, closure
or relocation.
   C.   Owners of signs or advertising copy not removed within the required
thirty (30) days shall be given written notice sent by certified mail. If not
removed by the owner within the thirty (30) day period, the sign or copy will
be removed by the city at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.180: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   All signs, including billboards, except as provided herein, are
prohibited unless specifically allowed by this chapter.
   B.   The relocation of an existing, nonconforming billboard may be permitted
under the following conditions:
      1.   The sign is an existing billboard being relocated to a C-2 zone
within the city limits more than one-half (1/2) mile but less than one mile
from its previous location.
      2.   The necessity of its relocation results from a cause of action for
public purpose(s) by the city of Holladay upon the billboard's previous site.
      3.   The billboard must be situated where the volume of vehicular traffic
is not less than its previous location.
      4.   At time of permit, the billboard must be situated on publicly owned
property within one hundred fifty feet (150') of principal or minor arterial
right of way.
      5.   The relocation of the billboard is subject to the approval of the
city council. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.190: ACTION TO REMOVE OR ABATE VIOLATION:
   A.   The mayor, city attorney, or administrative hearing examiner shall be
empowered to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any case where
any sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted
or maintained, or in any case where any sign is used in violation of any city
ordinance, to accomplish the following purposes:
      1.   To prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
      2.   To restrain, to correct or abate such violation; and
      3.   To abate and remove unsafe or dangerous signs. If an unsafe or
dangerous sign is not repaired or made safe within ten (10) working days after
giving notice as provided in subsection B of this section, the community
development director may at once abate and remove the sign, and the person
having charge, control or benefit of any such sign shall pay to the city costs
incurred in such removal within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice
of the costs is mailed to such person.
   B.   "Notice by the city" shall mean written notice sent by certified mail
to persons having charge or control or benefit of any sign found by the city to
be unsafe. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.82.200: HOLLADAY VILLAGE SIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The city council of Holladay finds and declares that by
controlling and standardizing signs in the Holladay Village, the regulations
set forth in this chapter will: create a unique environment to attract business
to the Holladay Village; allow each individual business to clearly identify
itself and the goods and services which it offers in a clear and distinctive
manner; safeguard and enhance property values; protect public and private
investment in buildings and open space; prevent confusing sign displays; and
promote the public health, safety and welfare of all of the citizens of
Holladay.
   B.   New Signs: It is intended that new signs in the village follow the
historic patterns compatible with small scale buildings and pedestrian
activity. Signs should be generally discreet. Flat mounted plaques, painted
signboards and hanging fin signs are encouraged. Signs should be designed to
fit the scale of the building. Sign text should be clear and minimal.
Illumination should be accomplished by the use of external fixtures and subtle
lighting colors. Internally illuminated or backlit plastic signs do not belong
in a unique pedestrian oriented context (see illustrations in section
13.71.100 of this title).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4986.gif]
   C.   Intent: The following regulations are intended to encourage signs,
which by their good design, are integrated with and are harmonious to the
character of the buildings and sites that they occupy and are a valuable
contribution to the overall ambience of the village (HV) business district.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Signs Allowed In The Holladay Village (HV) District: For all signs in
the HV zone the following regulations apply:
      1.   Total Sign Area Requirements: For signs either attached parallel to
a building facade or freestanding monument signs, the following regulations
apply:
         a.   Sign Area: The total sign area, per building facade, may not
exceed the following:
CHART 13.82.200.01
 
Floor Area Of Business Sign Area Total; Wall     Sign Area Total;
                                                 Freestanding
1,000 sq. ft. or less  12 sq. ft.                24 sq. ft.
1,001 to 3,000 sq. ft. 15 sq. ft.                32 sq. ft.
                                                 32 sq. ft. plus 6 sq. ft.
                       5% of the exterior wall   per each additional
3,001 or more sq. ft.  area not to exceed 32 sq. enterprise in a multi-tenant
                       ft.                       structure up to 64 sq. ft.
                                                 maximum
 
         b.   Blade Or Fin Signs:
            (1)   The total sign area of any blade or fin sign, per building
facade, shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet; and
            (2)   May be externally illuminated only as allowed by subsection
D8a of this section. (Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016)
      2.   Area Of Individual Signs:
         a.   The area of a sign shall include the entire area within any type
of perimeter or border that may enclose the outer limits of any writing,
representation, emblem, figure, or character, exclusive of the supporting
framework.
         b.   When the sign faces of a backed sign, i.e., projecting, hanging,
or freestanding signs are parallel or within thirty degrees (30°) of parallel,
only one sign face is counted into the total sign area. If the sign faces are
not parallel or within thirty degrees (30°) of parallel, each sign face is
counted into the total sign area.
      3.   Location On Building: The location of a sign on a structure or
building has a major impact on the overall architecture of the building. To
ensure that signs enhance this architecture, the following criteria must be
met:
         a.   Wall signs may not extend above the building parapet, soffit, the
eave line or the roof of the building, or the windowsill of the second story.
         b.   A sign, including its supporting structure and components, shall
be designed as an integral design element of a building's architecture and
shall be architecturally compatible, including color, with the building to
which it is attached.
         c.   Signs must not significantly obscure architectural details of the
building, nor cover doors, windows, or other integral elements of the facade.
         d.   Signs should complement the visual continuity of adjacent
building facades and relate directly to the entrance.
         e.   Signs shall not obstruct views of nearby intersections and
driveways.
         f.   Signs shall not obstruct views of other signs. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
      4.   Projections And Clearance:
         a.   No portion of a sign may project more than forty two inches (42")
from the face of a building or pole unless the sign is part of a permanent
marquee or awning over the sidewalk.
         b.   Projecting signs, awnings or canopies must maintain at least
eight feet (8') of clearance from ground level.
         c.   Signs may extend over city property only after review by the city
engineer and with the written approval of the community development director
and lease agreement acceptable to the city attorney.
         d.   Awning, or canopy signs must comply with the following
regulations:
            (1)   No canopy or awning sign may be erected, reerected, located
or relocated or enlarged or modified structurally without approval of the city.
            (2)   Awning or canopy signs must be located in a traditional
manner above doors, windows or walkways, provided said walkway leads to a bona
fide entrance, if they are compatible with the architecture of the building and
follow relevant design guideline criteria. All other locations are prohibited.
            (3)   Only fire resistant fabrics will be permitted. Material
should be high quality, colorfast and sun fade resistant. The planning
commission must approve vinyl or plastic materials.
            (4)   Freestanding awnings and canopy signs are prohibited.
            (5)   An awning or canopy attached to a building may extend over
the public right of way and project a maximum of thirty six inches (36") from
the face of a building unless the awning or canopy is designed to extend over
the sidewalk.
            (6)   A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the drop face of the
awning or canopy sign may be used for sign area regardless of the size of the
building facade to which the sign applies, but not to exceed the area of a sign
which would be allowed otherwise. Awning and canopy signs are calculated as
part of the total sign area for a building.
            (7)   Awning or canopy signs must have a minimum clearance of eight
feet (8') above the sidewalk.
            (8)   If the awning or canopy becomes a hazard, with reasonable
notice, the city may require that an awning or canopy be removed from over city
right of way without compensating the building owner. (Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016)
      5.   Freestanding Monument Signs:
         a.   Permanent, freestanding monument signs must be located a minimum
of three feet (3') behind the right of way line.
         b.   A building or complex may not display more than one monument sign
on each street frontage.
         c.   The sign shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building. The sign content should be
integrated into a single design.
         d.   The maximum height for any freestanding monument sign within ten
feet (10') of the right of way is four feet (4'). Signs set back beyond ten
feet (10') the maximum height is six feet (6').
      6.   Sign Materials: Exposed surfaces of signs may be constructed of
metal, glass, stone, concrete, high density foam board, brick, solid wood, or
reinforced fabrics. All sign materials should be compatible with the face of
the building and should be colorfast and resistant to corrosion. Other
materials may be approved by the planning commission if the material meets the
intent of this subsection D6, but are otherwise prohibited.
      7.   Color: Bright and glossy fluorescent colors and reflective surfaces
are prohibited. Reflective colored materials that give the appearance of
changing color are also prohibited. Colors should complement the color scheme
of the building. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      8.   Illumination: The purpose of regulating sign illumination is to
prevent light trespass and provide clear illumination of signs without causing
potential hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. It is the intent of this section
to encourage externally lit, appropriate signage.
         a.   Externally Illuminated Signs:
            (1)   Externally lit signs shall be illuminated only with steady,
stationary, shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign without
causing glare. Light sources and fixtures used for illuminating a sign shall be
simple in form and should not clutter the building or structure. Light bulbs or
lighting tubes should be shielded so as to not be physically visible from
abutting public rights of way or residential properties.
            (2)   The intensity of sign lighting shall not exceed that
necessary to illuminate and make legible a sign from the abutting travelway or
closest right of way.
            (3)   All light fixtures, conduit, and shielding shall be painted
to match either the building or the supporting structure that serves as the
background of the sign. (Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016)
         b.   Internally Illuminated Signs:
            (1)   Internally illuminated signs, which include any sign face lit
or outlined by a light source located within the sign, shall be prohibited,
except the following:
               (A)   Individual cutout letters (i.e., letters routed out of the
face of an opaque sign) can be backlit.
               (B)   Reversed pan channel letters with an internal light source
reflecting off of the building face may also be used for "halo" or "silhouette"
lighting.
            (2)   Strings of lights that outline buildings, building
architectural features, and surrounding trees, shall not flash, blink or
simulate motion. Colored lights shall be allowed from October 1 through January
15.
         c.   Prohibited Lighting: Lights which flash, rotate, blink or chase
in any manner, are prohibited.
         d.   Luminous Tube Signs: (Neon) luminous tubes (LT) used to draw
attention to a business or building in any manner, including, but not limited
to, neon text or logos are considered signs and shall be regulated according to
the provisions of this code as follows:
            (1)   All LT signs are limited to two (2) square feet.
            (2)   All LT signs shall be limited to application on the ground
floor of a building.
            (3)   LT signs must be located within a building and displayed
through a window rather than being attached to the exterior of the building.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      9.   Window Signs:
         a.   Window signs are limited to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of
the transparent window area. Every effort should be made to integrate window
signs with the window display. Colors should be compatible with the building
facade.
         b.   Artistic, seasonal or historic displays or displays of goods
available inside the use are encouraged and are not considered signage.
      10.   Simulated Or Faux Window Signs: Where they are allowed by
subsection
13.71.090E of this title, simulated or faux windows may have up to one hundred
percent (100%) of the area covered in semipermanent or static graphics if:
         a.   The graphic is not a temporary sign as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title;
         b.   The graphic reflects the use within the building; and
         c.   The graphic is approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2017-
01, 1-26-2017)
      11.   Umbrella Signs:
         a.   Signs on umbrellas are limited to a height of no more than five
inch (5") letters and graphics. Only the area of the umbrella containing the
signs, as opposed to the entire area of the umbrella, shall be considered for
purposes of calculating total sign area.
         b.   Materials should be of high quality vinyl, nylon, canvas or other
similar materials in order to withstand the weather and climate changes.
         c.   Umbrella colors are generally limited to single field color with
a single contrasting color for lettering and logos. However, if the umbrella is
striped, two (2) colors may be used. Corporate colors may be used, only if the
overall umbrella color scheme meets the general color standards of the HV Zone.
      12.   Master Sign Plan: When multiple signs for individual businesses are
contemplated for a major construction project, a master sign plan stipulating
the location and size of future signs will be required. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012; amd. Ord. 2017-01, 1-26-2017)
      13.   Temporary Signs:
         a.   Temporary signs have a place in the community for specialized
purposes such as, but not limited to, announcing properties for sale or lease,
construction activities, temporary sales or for making political or ideological
statements. It is the intent of this section, however, to restrict the use of
temporary signs. Temporary signs are often poorly constructed, poorly
maintained and located in a manner that obscures traffic signs, views of
intersections of public and private streets and driveways and tends to
depreciate the beauty and quality of life in the community by creating visual
clutter.
         b.   Temporary signs are permitted in the HV but must be counted
toward the total sign area allowed in chart 13.82.200.01 of this section and
are permitted for thirty (30) days in each calendar year.
         c.   Temporary signs attached to or between telephone poles, fences,
fence poles, utility poles, public or private light poles, trees, vehicles, or
any other apparatus other than a building wall are prohibited, except those
public event signs erected by permission of Holladay City.
         d.   Only one (1) temporary wall sign is permitted on any one (1)
parcel of property. Additional window signs may also be used but may not exceed
the total sign area allowed per building face.
         e.   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any
development of greater than two (2) acres which has received Final Site Plan
approval from the City may display a sign advertising and indicating the
development coming to the site. The sign shall be set back at least three feet
(3') from the property line and shall be no greater than sixty four (64) square
feet in size and shall be no more than twelve feet (12') off the ground at its
highest point. No sign shall be displayed until a building permit for the site
has been granted and the sign may only be displayed on one (1) street frontage.
Signs to be displayed under this section shall be approved by the City
Community Development Director and shall be permitted to be displayed for no
longer than nine (9) months. (Ord. 2017-08, 4-6-2017)
      14.   Prohibited Signs: All signs prohibited by this chapter are
prohibited in the HV Zone. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2017-01, 1-26-
2017)
13.82.210: SIGNS ALLOWED:
Signs allowed, by zone, shall be as set out in the following chart:
 
Signs Allowed In All Zones
Sign         Size              Height       Location          Other
             16 sq. ft. on a                                  Only 1 sign
             lot/parcel with                                  allowed per
             less than 1/                                     parcel or lot
             2 acre in area                 On private         
Construction                  6' maximum   property          Signs must be
             24 sq. ft. on a                                  removed within 7
             lot/parcel with                                  days of
             1/2 acre or                                      completion of
             larger in area                                   project
Political    16 sq. ft.        6' when      On private
             maximum per use   freestanding property
                                            Attached to and
Property     3 sq. ft. maximum              parallel with the Home occupation
             per use                        front wall of the signs not allowed
                                            main structure
                                                              Only 1 sign
                                                              allowed per
                                                              parcel or lot.
                               3' when      On private        Signs must be
Real estate  6 sq. ft. maximum freestanding property          removed within 7
                                                              days of the sale
                                                              or lease of the
                                                              property in
                                                              question
                                                              Sign may be used
                               24" when     On private        up to 30 days in
Temporary    6 sq. ft. maximum freestanding property          any 1 calendar
                                                              year. Requires
                                                              permit and fee
 
Signs Allowed In C-1, C-2 Zones
Sign Size Height Location Other
Signs Allowed In C-1, C-2 Zones
Sign            Size            Height        Location         Other
                20% of a wall
                area may be                                    Attached to
                covered with an 8' minimum    Subject to the   building.
                awning or       above ground; City of Holladay Primary graphics
Awning/canopy   canopy, and 50% 0' above      Encroachment     on face or
                of an awning or building wall Policy           street side of
                canopy may be                                  structure
                covered with
                graphics
                                                               Permitted for 30
                                                               days in each
                                                               calendar year
                May not exceed                Must be attached except for
Banners         10% of any wall               to the wall of   extended periods
                area, 2 walls                 the building     during
                maximum allowed                                construction and
                                                               renovation.
                                                               Requires permit
                                                               and fee
                                                               No portion of a
                                                               sign may project
                                                               more than 42"
                                8' minimum    Subject to the   from the face of
                                above ground; City of Holladay a building or
Blade/fin       12 sq. ft.      0' above      Encroachment     pole unless the
                                building wall Policy           sign is part of
                                                               a permanent
                                                               marquee or
                                                               awning over the
                                                               sidewalk
                                              Must be          Logo/name of
                                              incorporated     business must be
Changeable copy                               into a wall or   attached to
                                              monument sign    changeable copy
                                                               area
                                                               Only signs
                                              Only 1 per City  indicating
Directional     3 sq. ft.       2'            approved drive   emergency
                                              approach         services may be
                                                               illuminated
                                              3' minimum
                                              setback and
                                              located in a
                1 per lot, 32                 landscaped area
                sq. ft. plus 1                a minimum of 9
                sq. ft. for                   sq. ft. On
Monument        every 10' of    8' maximum    corner lots, 1   May be
                frontage over                 sign per street  illuminated
                50' to a                      frontage is
                maximum of 64                 allowed if the
                sq. ft.                       total street
                                              frontage for all
                                              streets exceeds
                                              500 linear feet
                                                               Only 1 sign
                                                               allowed per
                                                               parcel or lot.
                6 sq. ft.       3' when       On private       Signs must be
Real estate     maximum         freestanding  property         removed within 7
                                                               days of the sale
                                                               or lease of the
                                                               property in
                                                               question
                                              Attached to a    Signs not
                                              building. May    allowed on
                                              not extend above elevations
Wall            10% of a wall                 the building     exposed to
                area                          parapet, soffit, residential
                                              eave line or     properties. May
                                              roof of the      be illuminated
                                              building
Window          20% of glass
                area
 
 
Signs Allowed In The PO Zones
Sign     Size               Height     Location            Other
                                                           Allowed only for
                                                           commercial/office
                                                           uses east of
                                                           Interstate 215. May
                                                           only face major
                                                           (arterial) roadways.
         Maximum of 15% of                                 May not face
         the wall space                                    immediately abutting
         measured from the             Along the crown     residential area(s).
Crown    floor of the                  (top) of buildings  1 sign per building
         uppermost story to            that are 3 stories  face only. May not
         the top of that               or higher only      extend above facade.
         story's facade                                    Brushed metal
                                                           letters, reverse pan
                                                           channel or pan
                                                           channel letters
                                                           only. Sign letters
                                                           may be illuminated
                                                           with LED (back)
                                                           lighting only
                                       3' minimum setback
                                       and located in a
                                       landscaped area a
                                       minimum of 9 sq.
                                       ft.
                                        
         1 per lot, 32 sq.             On corner lots, 1
         ft. (except as                sign per street
Monument allowed for corner 6' maximum frontage is allowed
         lots)                         if the total street
                                       frontage of all
                                       streets is no less
                                       than 800 linear
                                       feet. Sign area for
                                       each sign may not
                                       exceed 32 sq. ft.
                                       on any frontage
 
Signs Allowed In The O-R-D Zones
Sign Size Height Location Other
Signs Allowed In The O-R-D Zones
Sign            Size            Height          Location        Other
                                                                Attached to
                                                                building. May
                                                                not extend
                20% of a wall                                   above top of
                area may be                                     facade. Primary
                covered with an                 Subject to the  graphics on
                awning or       8' minimum      City of         face or street
Awning/canopy   canopy, and 50% above ground;   Holladay        side of
                of an awning or 0' above        encroachment    structure
                canopy may be   building wall   policy          The area of any
                covered with                                    awning/canopy
                graphics                                        sign counts
                                                                toward the
                                                                calculation of
                                                                wall sign
                                                                allowance
                                                                Permitted for
                                                                30 days in each
                                                                calendar year
                May not exceed                  Must be         except for
Banner          10% of any wall                 attached to the extended
                area, 2 walls                   wall of the     periods during
                maximum allowed                 building        construction
                                                                and renovation.
                                                                Requires permit
                                                                and fee
                                                Must be         Logo/name of
                                                incorporated    business must
Changeable copy                                 into a wall or  be attached to
                                                monument sign   changeable copy
                                                                area
                                                                1 sign per
                                                                building face.
                Maximum of 15%                                  Signs may not
                of the wall                                     extend above
                space measured                  Along the crown facade and may
                from the floor                  (top) of        be illuminated.
Crown           of the                          buildings 3     Brushed metal
                uppermost story                 stories or      letters,
                to the top of                   higher only     reverse pan
                the story's                                     channel or pan
                facade                                          channel letters
                                                                only. LED
                                                                illumination
                                                                required
                                                                Only signs
                                                Only 1 per City indicating
Directional     3 sq. ft.       2'              approved drive  emergency
                                                approach        services may be
                                                                illuminated
                                                Must be
                                                entirely
                                                located in a    May be
                                                landscaped area internally or
                                                and may not     externally
                                                encroach into   illuminated
                                8' maximum as   the public      (LED only)
                1 per lot,      measured from   right-of- way.   
Monument        maximum of 64   the top of curb On corner lots, Base/pedestal
                sq. ft.         to the property 1 sign per      of sign must be
                                line            street frontage a minimum of
                                                is allowed if   50%
                                                the total       (continuous) of
                                                street frontage the width of
                                                for all streets the sign
                                                exceeds 500
                                                linear feet
                                                                May be
                                                                illuminated
                                                Must be         either
                                                entirely        externally or
Project                                         located in a    internally (LED
identification  55 sq. ft. per                  landscaped area only) and must
(minimum of 2   acre to a       20'                            be
acres required  maximum of 220                  1 sign per      architecturally
for project ID  sq. ft.                         frontage on     integrated into
sign)                                           each principal  the development
                                                or minor         
                                                arterial street The project
                                                                name must be
                                                                prominent
                                                                Only 1 sign
                                                                allowed per
                                                                lot. Signs must
                6 sq. ft.       3' when         On private      be removed
Real estate     maximum         freestanding    property        within 7 days
                                                                of the sale or
                                                                lease of the
                                                                property in
                                                                question
                                                                Signs not
                                                                allowed on
                                                                elevations
                                                                exposed to
                                                                residential
                                                                properties
                                                                 
                                                                Wall signs
                                                                allowed only on
                                                                mixed use
                                                                buildings with
                                                                retail or
                                                                restaurant on
                15% of 1 wall                   Attached to a   the main floor.
                area visible to                 building. May   All main floor
                a principal or                  not extend      area uses
                minor arterial                  above the       whether retail/
Wall            street                          building        restaurant or
                                               parapet,        office may
                Any other wall:                 soffit, eave    qualify for a
                10% of that                     line or roof of wall sign not
                wall area                       the building    to exceed
                                                                combined area
                                                                allowance for
                                                                any/all signs
                                                                 
                                                                May be
                                                                illuminated
                                                                (LED only)
                                                                 
                                                                Signs may be
                                                                located on a
                                                                maximum of 4
                                                                faces of a
                                                                building
                20% of glass                                    First floor
Window          area                                            retail uses
                                                                only
 
 
Signs Allowed In The RO Zone
Sign        Size            Height          Location          Other
                                                              May be externally
                                            Must be located   illuminated but
                                            in a landscaped   must comply with
Monument    1 per lot, 28   5' maximum      area no less than lighting
            sq. ft. maximum                 twice the area of requirements of
                                            the sign allowed  section
                                                              13.50.110 of this
                                                              title
                                                              Only 1 sign
                                                              allowed per lot.
                                                              Signs must be
Real estate 6 sq. ft.       3' maximum when On private        removed within 7
            maximum         freestanding    property          days of the sale
                                                              or lease of the
                                                              property in
                                                              question
                                                              Signs not allowed
                                                              on elevations
                                                              exposed to
                                                              residential
                                                              properties.
            Maximum 5% of 1                 Attached to a     Brushed metal
            wall area                       building. May not letters, reverse
            visible to a                    extend above the  pan channel or
Wall        principal or                    building parapet, pan channel
            minor arterial                  soffit, eave line letters only. May
            street                          or roof of the    be illuminated
                                            building          but must comply
                                                              with lighting
                                                              requirements of
                                                              section
                                                              13.50.110 of this
                                                              title
 
 
Signs Allowed In The P Zone
Sign     Size               Height     Location             Other
                                       3' minimum setback   1 sign per lot/
                                       and located in a     parcel only.
Monument 24 sq. ft. maximum 6' maximum landscaped area a     
                                       minimum of 9 sq. ft. May be externally
                                                            illuminated
 
 
Signs Allowed In The HV Zone
All signs allowed in the Holladay Village Zone and are subject to the
regulations in section
13.82.200 of this chapter
 
 
Signs Allowed In The R/M-U Zone District
All signs allowed in the Regional/Mixed-Use Zone District are subject to
the regulations as adopted in the site development master plan as approved
under
chapter 13.65 of this title
 
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2012-24, 11-1-2012; Ord. 2014-05, 4-17-
2014; Ord. 2015-01, 2-5-2015; Ord. 2016-23, 9-22-2016; Ord. 2016-26, 11-3-2016;
Ord. 2018-08, 5-17-2018; Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
CHAPTER 13.83
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
13.83.010: Purpose
13.83.020: Definitions
13.83.030: Applicability
13.83.040: Overall Plan Required
13.83.050: Allowable Uses
13.83.060: Facility Types And Standards
13.83.070: Color
13.83.080: Sites In The Foothills And Canyons
13.83.090: Additional Requirements
13.83.100: Accessory Buildings
13.83.110: Nonmaintained Or Abandoned Facilities
13.83.120: Building Permit Required
13.83.130: Illustrations
13.83.140: Antennas Located On Utility Poles
13.83.150: Collocations
13.83.160: Permitted Amateur Radio Facility Regulations
13.83.170: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities In The Forestry And
Recreation (FR) Zones
13.83.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general requirements for the siting
of wireless telecommunications facilities. The intent of this chapter is to:
   A.   Encourage the location of facilities in nonresidential areas;
   B.   Minimize the total number of monopole facilities throughout the
community;
   C.   Encourage the joint use of new and existing communication sites;
   D.   Encourage providers of facilities to locate them where the adverse
impact on the community is minimal;
   E.   Encourage providers of facilities to use innovative design to minimize
adverse visual impact;
   F.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
   G.   Accommodate, in a reasonable manner as established by Federal law (PRB-
1) the allowance of amateur radio operations within the residential
neighborhoods throughout the City. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.020: DEFINITIONS:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.030: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter apply to both commercial and private wireless
telecommunications services such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal
communications services) communications and paging systems. All facilities
shall comply with the following regulations and all other ordinances of the
City and any pertinent regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and
the Federal Aviation Administration. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.040: OVERALL PLAN REQUIRED:
An overall site location plan shall be submitted by each company desiring
placement of wireless telecommunication facilities. The plan shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission and Community Development Department prior to
processing any permits for permitted or conditional use locations. The plan
shall include inventory of existing and anticipated sites for the City and
within one mile of the City boundary. The plan shall indicate area coverage, if
known, location, antenna height above existing grade, and antenna type for each
site and be updated upon request from the Planning Commission. Every overall
plan shall be considered proprietary information and classified as "protected"
under the provisions of the Governmental Records Access and Management Act.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.050: ALLOWABLE USES:
The uses specified in the following chart are allowed provided that they comply
with all requirements of this chapter:
 
P - Permitted use C - Conditional use N - Not allowed
Zones Wall Mount Roof Mount Monopole Lattice Tower
Zones      Wall Mount Roof Mount Monopole Lattice Tower
All FRs    P1, C2     P1, C2     C        N
All R-1s   P3, CS     P3, CS     C3, CS   N
All R-2s   P3, CS     P3, CS     C3, CS   N
R-M        P          P          C        N
O-R-D      P          P          C        N
C-1, C-2   P          P          C        N
PO         P          N          N        N
Public use P          P          CS1      N
 
Notes:
1.    Permitted use only on nonresidential buildings.
2.    Conditional use on residential buildings.
3.    Allowed only in conjunction with public or quasi-public uses (see section
13.04.040 of this title).
S    Stealth facilities are conditional uses and not required to be located
with public or quasi-public uses.
S1    Stealth facilities only.
(Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019)
13.83.060: FACILITY TYPES AND STANDARDS:
Wireless telecommunications facilities are characterized by the type and
location of the antenna structure. There are four (4) general types of antenna
structures: wall mounted; roof mounted; monopoles; and lattice towers.
Standards for the installation of each type of antenna are as follows:
   A.   Wall Mounted Antenna: The following provisions apply to wall mounted
antennas:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4988.gif]
      1.   Wall mounted antennas shall not extend above the wall line of the
building or structure or extend more than four feet (4') horizontally from the
face of the building or structure.
      2.   Antennas, equipment and the supporting structure shall be painted to
match the color of the building or structure or the background against which
they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the supporting structures on
buildings should be architecturally compatible with the building.
      3.   Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or
mechanical equipment rooms, with no portion of the antenna extending above the
roofline of such structures, shall be considered a wall mounted antenna.
      4.   Stealth wall mounted antennas are encouraged and shall be allowed to
vary from the provisions of this section as determined by community development
for permitted uses and the Planning Commission for conditional uses. Stealth
wall mounted antennas are not required to be located with public or quasi-
public uses in all R-1 and R-2 Zones. (See section
13.83.050 of this chapter.)
   B.   Roof Mounted Antenna: The following provisions apply to roof mounted
antennas: (see figures in this subsection B)
      1.   Roof mounted antennas shall be allowed on top of existing penthouses
or mechanical equipment rooms, provided the antennas and antenna mounting
structures shall not extend more than eight feet (8') above the existing
roofline of the penthouse or mechanical equipment room.
      2.   For antennas not mounted on a penthouse or mechanical equipment room
and on a flat roof:
         a.   Setback: The antennas shall be mounted at least five feet (5')
from the exterior wall or parapet wall of a building or structure.
         b.   Height: The height shall be measured from the top of the antenna
to the roofline of the building or structure, or to the top of the parapet wall
if a parapet wall exists. For antennas mounted between five feet (5') and
fourteen feet (14') from the exterior wall or parapet wall, the maximum height
of the antenna is equal to the distance the antenna is set back from the
exterior wall or parapet wall. For antennas set back more than fourteen feet
(14'), the maximum height shall be fourteen feet (14'). Antennas extending more
than nineteen feet (19') above the roofline require conditional use approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4990.gif]
         c.   Extending Above Roofline: Roof mounted antennas extending above
the roofline of any penthouse or mechanical equipment require conditional use
approval.
      3.   Roof mounted antennas on a pitched roof shall be allowed provided
the antennas and antenna support structures do not extend higher than the peak
of the roof measured by a horizontal line from the peak extending over the
roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4992.gif]
      4.   Roof mounted antennas shall be constructed and/or colored to match
the surroundings in which they are located.
      5.   Stealth roof mounted antennas are encouraged and shall be allowed to
vary from the provisions of this section as determined by community development
department for permitted uses and the planning commission for conditional uses.
Stealth roof mounted antennas are not required to be located with public or
quasi-public uses in all R-1 and R-2 zones. (See section
13.83.050 of this chapter.)
   C.   Monopole: The following provisions apply to monopoles:
      1.   Approval of more than one monopole on a single site and/or the
distribution of multiple antenna(s) on existing or relocated elevated support
structures may be allowed under conditional use in nonresidential zones if the
planning commission finds such an arrangement complies with section
13.83.010, "Purpose", of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      2.   The height limit for monopoles is sixty feet (60') in all
residential zones and the C-1 zone. The planning commission may allow a
monopole up to eighty feet (80') in the C-2 zone if it finds: a) that the
monopole will blend in with the surrounding structures, poles, or trees and is
compatible with surrounding uses; b) the monopole will be available for
collocation with other companies; and c) the monopole will be set back at least
three hundred feet (300') from any residential zone boundary. The height shall
be measured from the top of the structure, including antennas, to the original
grade directly abutting the monopole. A facility for the erection of a monopole
as a stealth facility for the distribution of antenna in the public or "P" zone
may be allowed to exceed eighty feet (80'), but not more than one hundred feet
(100') if the planning commission finds: (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
         a.   That the monopole(s) and/or antenna(s) will, as per the
definition of "wireless telecommunications, stealth" in section
13.04.040 of this title, be proposed, to the greatest extent possible, to blend
in with the surrounding structures, poles, or trees and is compatible with
surrounding uses;
         b.   The monopole(s) where feasible, shall be available for
collocation with other companies to encourage joint use of new and existing
facilities;
         c.   Monopoles shall be set back from any residential structure a
distance equal to its height.
      3.   In all R-1 and R-2 zones, monopoles will only be allowed in
conjunction with an existing public or quasi-public use. "Public" and "quasi-
public uses", as defined in section
13.04.040 of this title, include, but are not limited to, churches, schools,
utilities, and parks.
      4.   No monopoles shall be allowed in the front yard setback of any lot.
      5.   Monopoles shall be set back from any residential structure a
distance equal to its height.
      6.   Stealth monopole facilities are encouraged and shall be allowed to
vary from the provisions of this section as determined by community development
department for permitted uses and the planning commission for conditional uses.
Stealth monopoles are not required to be located with public or quasi-public
uses in all R-1 and R-2 zones. (See section
13.83.050 of this chapter.)
   D.   Lattice Tower: Lattice towers are not allowed. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.83.070: COLOR:
Monopoles, antennas, and any associated buildings or equipment shall be painted
to blend with the surroundings which they are most commonly seen. The color
shall be determined on a case by case basis by the planning commission for
conditional uses and community development department for permitted uses.
Within six (6) months after the facility has been constructed, the planning
commission or the community development department may require the color be
changed if it is determined that the original color does not blend with the
surroundings. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.080: SITES IN THE FOOTHILLS AND CANYONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the foothills and canyons are defined as the
areas shown on the zoning map as foothills and canyons overlay zone.
   A.   Grading; Zone Requirements: Any grading for telecommunication
facilities, including access roads and trenching for utilities, shall comply
with the international building code. Telecommunication facilities in the
foothills and canyons shall comply with the FR zone requirements for grading
(section
13.12.090 of this title), natural vegetation (section
13.12.100 of this title), utilities (section
13.12.110 of this title) and the foothills and canyons site development and
design standards (
chapter 13.73 of this title). Everything possible should be done to minimize
disturbance of the natural environment.
   B.   Visual Simulation: A computer generated visual simulation of the
proposed structures is required for all sites in the foothills and canyons. The
simulation shall show all structures, including, but not limited to, monopoles,
antennas, and equipment buildings.
   C.   Disturbances: Everything possible should be done to minimize
disturbance of the visual environment. Site placement and color should be
carefully considered to blend in with the surroundings.
   D.   Outside Lighting: Continuous outside lighting is prohibited unless
required by the FAA for the monopole. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.090: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall be considered by the planning commission for conditional
uses:
   A.   Compatibility: Compatibility of the proposed structure with the height
and mass of existing buildings and utility structures.
   B.   Existing Structures: Location of the antenna on other existing
structures in the same vicinity such as other monopoles, buildings, water
towers, utility poles, athletic field lights, parking lot lights, etc., where
possible without significantly impacting antenna transmission or reception.
   C.   Existing Vegetation: Location of the antenna in relation to existing
vegetation, topography including ridgelines, and buildings to obtain the best
visual screening. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   Spacing: Spacing between monopoles which creates detrimental impacts to
abutting properties. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   E.   Installation Of Curb, Gutter, Etc.: Installation of, but not limited
to, curb, gutter, sidewalk, landscaping, and fencing as per sections
13.76.210 and
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.100: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings to antenna structures must comply with the required
setback, height and landscaping requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located. All utility lines on the lot leading to the accessory
building and antenna structure shall be underground. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.110: NONMAINTAINED OR ABANDONED FACILITIES:
The community development director may require each nonmaintained or abandoned
telecommunications facility to be removed from the building or premises when
such a facility has not been repaired or put into use by the owner or agent
within ninety (90) calendar days after notice of nonmaintenance or abandonment
is given to the owner or agent.(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 9-
7-2023)
13.83.120: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit from the community development department is required for all
wireless telecommunications facilities, including, but not limited to,
monopoles, and roof and wall mounted antennas. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.130: ILLUSTRATIONS:
The illustrations, in section
13.83.060, figures 1, 2-A, and 3 of this chapter, are intended to demonstrate
graphically the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.140: ANTENNAS LOCATED ON UTILITY POLES:
Antennas on utility poles and associated electrical equipment shall be allowed
subject to the following standards:
   A.   Antennas:
      1.   The antennas shall be located either on an existing utility pole or
on a replacement pole in the public right of way or in a rear yard utility
easement.
      2.   On an existing pole, the antennas shall not extend more than ten
feet (10') above the top of the pole.
      3.   If the utility pole is replaced to accommodate the antennas, the
replacement pole shall not be more than ten feet (10') higher than the existing
pole. If the replacement pole exceeds the height of the existing pole, the
antennas shall be mounted to the sides of the pole and shall not extend above
the top of the pole.
      4.   The antennas, including the mounting structure, shall not exceed two
feet (2') in diameter.
      5.   Where technically possible, stealth shielding of the antennas shall
be used to make the antennas appear as a vertical extension of the pole.
      6.   Antennas located in the public right of way shall be a permitted use
and shall comply with the standards listed above.
      7.   Conditional use approval is required for antennas located in a rear
yard utility easement in all zoning districts.
   B.   Electrical Equipment:
      1.   Electrical Equipment Located In The Public Right Of Way, Front Yard
Or Side Yard:
         a.   Electrical equipment in the public right of way shall either be
attached directly to the utility pole or placed underground.
         b.   If the electrical equipment is attached to the pole, the boxes
shall not be larger than thirty six inches (36") in height, twelve inches (12")
deep and no wider than twenty inches (20"). No more than five (5) such boxes
shall be mounted on the utility pole to which it is attached (excluding the
power meter and network interface box). The boxes shall be stacked vertically,
one above the other, and shall be at least ten feet (10') above the ground. The
power meter and network interface box may be installed below the ten foot (10')
level.
         c.   Electrical equipment in the required front or side yard shall be
placed underground.
         d.   Electrical equipment placed underground or on a utility pole in
the public right of way shall comply with the requirements of the city.
      2.   Electrical Equipment In The Rear Yard:
         a.   Electrical equipment located in the rear yard area of a lot in a
residential or FR zone shall not exceed a width of four feet (4'), a depth of
three feet (3'), or a height of four feet (4') to be considered a permitted
use.
         b.   Electrical equipment exceeding the dimensions listed above shall
be reviewed as a conditional use pursuant to the requirements of section
13.08.040 of this title.
         c.   The electrical equipment located in a rear yard shall conform to
the lot area, coverage and location requirements for an accessory structure in
the underlying zoning district.
      3.   Electrical Equipment In Rear Of Other Districts: Electrical
equipment located in the rear yard area of all zoning districts other than
those listed in subsection B2 of this section shall be allowed where a
principal or accessory structure is allowed, and shall be subject to the
applicable land use standards for such a structure.
   C.   General Provisions:
      1.   The application shall include the signature of the authorized agent
of the owner of the utility pole.
      2.   Antennas and equipment boxes on utility poles shall be painted to
match the pole to which it is attached to minimize visual impacts.
      3.   Generators or noise producing venting systems shall not be used.
      4.   Lighting for aircraft is prohibited except where required by federal
law.
      5.   Electrical and utility cables between the utility pole and
electrical boxes shall be placed underground. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.150: COLLOCATIONS:
Collocation of wireless telecommunications equipment and antenna arrays on
existing monopoles are permitted uses under the following conditions:
   A.   Height Limit: The height limit for equipment and antenna arrays
collocated on an existing monopole does not exceed sixty feet (60') except that
the planning commission may allow a monopole up to eighty feet (80') in the C-
2 zone and up to one hundred feet (100') in the public use zone.
   B.   Equipment Increasing Height: No equipment or antenna array shall
increase the height of an existing monopole more than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Scale; Color: The scale and color of equipment and antenna arrays
collocated on the monopole is compatible with the scale and color of the
existing structure.
   D.   Less Than Sixty Feet: Wireless telecommunications facilities which
collocate on existing monopoles and do not exceed sixty feet (60') in height
may be approved by the community development director under the guidelines
outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.160: PERMITTED AMATEUR RADIO FACILITY REGULATIONS:
Amateur radio facilities as defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title are primarily governed by restrictions provided by
the FCC and this section shall defer to federal provisions for amateur radio
operations. For application in a residential zone the following regulations
must be followed:
   A.   The tower and antenna are located on a residential property.
   B.   The maximum height of any amateur radio tower and its associated
antenna does not exceed sixty four feet (64').
   C.   No tower, antenna or its support structure, equipment or any
accompanying structure for equipment shall be placed in the front yard of any
lot.
   D.   No more than one amateur radio tower facility may be located on any
lot.
   E.   The tower, antenna and its support structure shall not be attached to
or mounted upon the front or corner side of any principal building facing a
public street, including any portion of the building roof facing any public
street.
   F.   The tower, antenna and its support structure shall satisfy the
requirements of international building code section 3108: Radio and television
towers including the issuance of a building permit and required inspections.
   G.   The owner of the amateur radio facility shall procure and maintain
general liability insurance in the aggregate amount of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) insuring the tower, antenna, and related
structures.
   H.   No wire, antenna, array or any other part of the structure may overhang
onto an adjacent property. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.83.170: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE FORESTRY AND
RECREATION (FR) ZONES:
Wireless telecommunication facilities, as that term and all related terms are
defined in
chapter 13.04 of this title, may be allowed in the FR zones provided:
   A.   The wireless telecommunication facility is either a wall mounted, roof
mounted, or monopole facility. Facilities located on lattice towers are
prohibited; and
   B.   Grading for the facility, including access roads and trenching for
utilities, shall comply with the international building code; and
   C.   The facility complies with the requirements for development set forth
in
chapter 13.72, "Foothills And Canyons Overlay Zone", of this title, including
development standards for grading, wildlife habitat protection, tree and
vegetation protection, natural hazards, and utilities, and standards for
establishing limits of disturbance; and
   D.   Site placement and facility color shall be carefully considered to
blend in with the natural surroundings; and
   E.   Continuous outside lighting is prohibited unless required by the FAA
for monopole facilities; and
   F.   The maximum height for monopole facilities shall be sixty feet (60');
and
   G.   A computer generated visual simulation of the proposed structure is
submitted as part of the required site plan and shall show all structures,
including, but not limited to, monopoles, antennas, and equipment buildings;
and all other applicable requirements set forth in this chapter, are satisfied.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.84
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
SECTION:
13.84.010: Purpose
13.84.020: Applicability
13.84.030: Definitions
13.84.040: General Standards
13.84.050: Lighting Standards: R-1, R-2 Zones
13.84.060: Lighting Standards: Other Zones
13.84.070: Prohibited Lighting
13.84.080: Site Plan Submittal Requirements
13.84.090: Review Procedures
13.84.100: Approval Procedures
13.84.110: Administrative Relief
13.84.120: Appeal Procedure
13.84.130: Administration And Enforcement
13.84.140: Effective Date
13.84.150: Figures
13.84.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The intent of this chapter is to consolidate and clarify the various
lighting sections in this title which previous to adoption of this chapter
primarily addressed lighting regulations for commercial zones within the City.
   B.   The regulations of this chapter are intended to set outdoor lighting
standards in the City of Holladay that enhance the community character and
identity by mitigating adverse impacts of misdirected and/or excessive outdoor
lighting in residential and commercial areas by promoting:
      1.   Lighting design and use continuity between adjacent and abutting
land uses;
      2.   Energy conservation through efficient use of outdoor lighting
      3.   Safety and security for persons and property;
      4.   Flexibility in implementing lighting technologies as the industry
provides.
      5.   Existing regulations established by The Illuminating Engineering
Society (IES), the ANSI accredited standards writing body for lighting
definitions and recommended practices. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.020: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   All land development described in this section shall provide an outdoor
lighting plan in accordance with site plan submittal provisions stated in
chapter 13.03 and 13.08 of this title.
      1.   New Development. All new primary and accessory buildings,
structures, additions to buildings or structures, or areas of new or expanded
land uses, i.e. sport courts, swimming pools or parking lots, shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Existing Development. Development in existence at the effective date
of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with these provisions if:
         a.   Redevelopment resulting in demolition or expansion is proposed
         b.   Installation of any new outdoor lighting which requires a
building inspection for compliance with ICC building or electrical codes
   B.   Routine maintenance of existing outdoor lighting.
      1.   Repairing any component of a light fixture, except the lamp, is
permitted for all existing outdoor lighting fixtures; and
      2.   Lamps shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, if no lamp exists which complies with this chapter,
then the fixture shall be replaced.
   C.   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the
following:
      1.   Indoor lighting;
      2.   Seasonal holiday lighting ;
      3.   Signs as regulated by
Chapter 13.82 of this title;
      4.   Temporary lighting, used for a period not to exceed ten (10) days
for festivals, celebrations, or other public special events or activities;
      5.   Temporary right of way construction repair lighting used for a
period not to exceed fifteen (15) days;
   6.   Traffic control, warning signals and devices.
   D.   Administrative Relief. This section effectively regulates outdoor
lighting, it is not the intent of this section to limit creative lighting
solutions. The community and economic development director, upon written
recommendation of the TRC, may grant relief from these standards. Determination
shall be based upon the following findings,
      1.   A complete Administrative Relief application shall be submitted on a
form created and maintained by the CED department
      2.   Viable, substitute alternatives are demonstrated to meet the intent
of this chapter and do not otherwise violate this chapter.
   E.   Certificate of Occupancy. All outdoor lighting required according to
applicable provision of this chapter shall be installed and inspected to
compliance within one year of issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 2025-
15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.030: DEFINITIONS:
CORRELATED COLOR TEMPERATURE (CCT): A measure of light source color appearance,
expressed in kelvins (K), ranging from one thousand degrees kelvin (1,000°K) to
ten thousand degrees kelvin (10,000°K). The following table provides examples
to help in understanding the approximation of these colors.
 
Temperature      Example
1,700°K         Match flame, low pressure sodium lamps.
1,850°K         Candle flame, sunset/sunrise
2,200°K         High Pressure Sodium lamps, (Standard Streetlight Color)
2,400° - 2,700°Standard incandescent lamps
 
2,700° - 3,000°“Soft white” or “warm white” LED lamps
4,000° K        Clear metal halide lamps, “Cool white” LED lamps
4,500° - 5,500°“Daylight” LED lamps
5,000° K        Direct sunlight
6,000° K        Cloudy Sky
10,0'00° K      Blue Sky
 
CANDELA, CANDLEPOWER: (abbreviated as cp or CP) is a unit of measurement for
luminous intensity. It expresses levels of light intensity relative to the
light emitted by a candle of specific size and constituents
GLARE: The sensation produced by luminance’s within the visual field that are
sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, which
causes nuisance due to discomfort, or loss in visual performance and
visibility. The magnitude of the sensation of glare depends on such factors as
the size, position, and luminance of a source, the number of sources, and the
luminance to which the eyes are adapted.
LIGHT TRESPASS: The encroachment of excessive light, typically across a
property line or into a public or private right of way, causing annoyance, loss
of privacy, or other nuisance. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.040: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Type of lighting. Light sources shall be LED or other lighting
technologies, current or future, that have similar or better color temperature
control (CCT) and energy efficiencies
   B.   Light Trespass. All light fixtures and their intended use, including
security lighting, shall be aimed to confine lighting to the area within the
property boundaries. Exposed light sources shall be shielded to prevent glare
across property lines, or into a public or private street or right of way.
Refer to Figure 13.84.1
   C.   Fixtures. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall feature full cut-off
hoods or shields installed and aimed in such a way so that no direct light is
emitted so as not to cause a violation of
13.84.040.B of this section. Shielding may be accomplished by: shielding,
visors, louvers, or other devices or methods. Fencing used as a shielding
feature must be solid and conform to all City of Holladay fencing ordinances.
See examples of shielded wall lighting in Figures 89-2 and 89-3.
   D.   Light Curfew: Recreational lighting used to illuminate sport and
outside activity areas shall be shut off by 10:00 pm. Except at the conclusion
of a permitted special event that is underway.
   E.   Lighting of Flag Poles:
      1.   According and to accommodate for U.S. Code, stating: “It is the
universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings
and flagstaffs in the open. However, when a patriotic effect is desired, the
flag may be displayed twenty-four hours a day if properly illuminated during
the hours of darkness.”( U.S. Code Title 4.1.6(a))
         a.   The lighting of Federal or State flags shall be permitted,
provided that the light is a narrow beam spotlight rather than a floodlight,
carefully aimed and shielded to avoid creating a source of glare
   F.   Streetlights:
      1.   Height.
         a.   Streetlights illuminating Major, Minor Collectors and Arterials
shall not exceed 40 feet (40') in height.
         b.   Streetlights illuminating public and private Residential roads
and lanes shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height.
      2.   Color and Intensity.
         a.   LED in the 4000 kelvin - 4500 kelvin range provides a balance of
brightness while maintaining the driver’s attention.
         b.   The maximum light intensity in the 90 ° angle direction,
regardless of the light source’s light flux, must not exceed 1000 candela
(candlepower).
      3.   Location.
         a.   At intersections and crosswalks on major collector streets and
arterials unless within one hundred and twenty-five feet (125') of an adjacent
streetlight.
         b.   At intersections and crosswalks on minor collector or residential
collector streets unless within two hundred and fifty feet (250') of an
adjacent streetlight.
      4.   Exceptions.
         a.   Upon review of conditions, the City Engineer may make
modifications based upon the following:
            (1)   Height and intensity can be installed at a location to
provide adequate safety and lighting efficiency for both pedestrian and
vehicular use. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.050: LIGHTING STANDARDS: R-1, R-2 ZONES:
   A.   The following regulations shall also apply to all properties in the
single-family (R-1) and two-family (duplex) (R-2) zones that are:
      1.   Constructed or proposed to be constructed after the enactment of
this chapter; and
      2.   Abut or are adjacent to a residential use; and
      3.   Covered by Section 13.84.020.
   B.   All lighting provisions of this section shall not violate
13.84.040 of this chapter.
   C.   All outdoor light fixtures shall; Provide a lamp in the Color spectrum,
or Correlated Color Temperature (CCT), at four thousand (4,000°K) or less,
i.e., warmer temperature. Feature a full cut-off design, in compliance with
13.84.040.C of this chapter, when the lamp within the fixture radiates more
than 300 lumens or equivalent wattage. Fixture Heights. The maximum allowable
heights of light fixtures shall be as follows. Height measured to the lighting
element above the existing grade shall be:
      1.   15 feet when mounted to a vertical wall or parapet
      2.   15 feet for pole or standard mounted
      3.   20 feet when mounted within a soffit or overhang
      4.   Fence-mounted fixtures shall be at the maximum height of the city’s
fencing regulations §
13.14.120 and light shall be directed so as to comply with §
13.84.040.B.
   D.   Accent and architectural lighting: Light fixtures used to accent a
structure’s vertical surface shall be designed and installed not to cause
violation of
13.84.040.C. of this chapter.
      1.   Soffit lighting. Lighting mounted to the underside of soffits,
overhangs or porches shall be:
         a.   Installed at a height as described in
13.84.050.D. of this chapter.
         b.   A recessed, down-lit fixture
   E.   Security Lighting. Appropriate security lighting is allowed in
compliance with provisions of
13.84.040.C. and shall also feature:
      1.   Motion sensors set on a five (5) minute timer.
      2.   Lighting shall not be triggered by activity off the property.
   F.   Sport Court Lighting. Private sport court lighting shall be installed
and maintained according to the following:
      1.   Comply with
13.84.040.C.;
      2.   Pole-mounted fixtures shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') above the
surface of the court when measured from existing grade(s) to the lighting
element;
      3.   Installed completely within a rear yard and setback off property
lines a distance equal to the height of the pole.;
      4.   Use of the lights after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. is prohibited;
      5.   Lighting shall be aimed, directing light onto the sport court and
away from abutting properties.
   G.   Landscape Lighting. lighting designed to provide illumination of
vegetation, pathways, steps, and entrances to buildings shall be low-voltage
systems installed and maintained in accordance with
13.84.040.C. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.060: LIGHTING STANDARDS: OTHER ZONES:
   A.   Regulations of this section shall apply to all zones not listed in
13.84.050 and that are:
      1.   Constructed or proposed to be constructed after the enactment of
this chapter; and
      2.   Covered by Section
13.84.020.
   B.   Refer to §
13.65 for lighting regulations in the Regional, Mixed/Use (R-M/U) zone
   C.   Refer to §
13.71 for lighting regulations in the Holladay Village (HV) zone
   D.   Implementation of all lighting provisions set forth in this section
shall not violate §
13.84.040 of this chapter
   E.   Security.
      1.   Appropriate security lighting is allowed in compliance with the
general provisions of this chapter, including shielding, direction, color, and
measurement.
         a.   Security lighting is permitted within forty feet (40') of a
building, in outside display areas, or other areas requiring such lighting.
Security lighting may remain on after the close of business for security
purposes, reduced to defined illuminance levels
   F.   Parking lots.
      1.   All lighting shall be shielded and even modified, if necessary, such
that lighting does not light trespass into adjacent properties or into the
adjacent streets. A properly shielded fixture would not have visible glare
spots until a person or vehicle enters the property of the parking lot.
      2.   Appropriate location. Entrances, exits, and barriers should be
emphasized.
      3.   Integrate with landscaping. All parking lot lighting should be
integrated into landscape areas wherever possible.
      4.   Height. The height of parking area light poles should be in
proportion to the building mass and height, and shall be no more than fifteen
(25) feet above the parking lot surface.
      5.   Setback. Light poles abutting residential use shall be set off the
property line at a distance that is equal to the height of the pole.
      6.   Maximum. A maximum of two (2) initial lumens per square foot of
parking lot surface
      7.   Spot or floodlighting of parking lots from a building or other
structure is not permitted.
   G.   Landscaping, Walkways.
      1.   Walkways. The intent of walkway lights are to provide pools of light
to help direct pedestrians along the path, not to fully illuminate the path.
Steps and path intersections should be illuminated for safety.
         a.   The maximum average foot-candle permitted on the ground is an
average of one (1) horizontal foot-candle or less.
            (1)   Two (2) types of lights may be selected:
               (A)   Three and one-half (3'6") foot bollards with louvers; or
               (B)   Ten (10) foot pole-mounted down-directed luminaires.
Lights must be shielded.
      2.   Landscaping. The lighting of vegetation and other landscape features
shall comply with the regulations established in this chapter.
      3.   Poles shall be black, dark gray, dark brown, dark green, or earth
tone. The height of the pole-mounted light shall not exceed twenty-five feet
(15') above grade. Any fixtures located within any required setback or buffer
area shall not exceed twelve feet (12') above grade
   H.   Building.
      1.   Light Source (Lamp): Only LED, incandescent, fluorescent, metal
halide, or color corrected high pressure sodium may be used. LED is the
preferred light source. The same type shall be used for the same or similar
types of lighting on any one site. No colors other than white or off white
(light yellow tones in the kelvin scale of 5,000k or lower, i.e., warmer) may
be used for any light source for the lighting of structures. Non-color-
corrected low-pressure sodium and mercury vapor light sources are prohibited.
      2.   Mounting: Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone
of light does not cross any property line of the site. Wall-mounted fixtures
intended to illuminate walkways or paths or parking lots shall not exceed
thirteen feet (13') above the pedestrian pathway. For purposes of these
regulations, the mounting height of a lighting fixture shall be defined as the
vertical distance from the grade elevation of the surface being illuminated to
the bottom of the lighting fixture (i.e., luminaire).
      3.   Architectural Feature Lighting: Architectural feature lighting,
including wall washer spotlights, are permitted.
   I.   Sports Facility, Outdoor recreation Lighting.
      1.   All sports lighting shall be turned off within thirty (30) minutes
of the completion of the last game, practice, or event. In no case shall
recreational lighting occur after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. except to conclude a
specific sporting event that is underway
      2.   All new sports lighting fixtures shall not exceed the minimum
standard illumination levels for sports lighting as established by the
Illuminating Engineering Society (IES). All new sports lighting shall require
site-specific computer calculations and a printout demonstrating that such
lighting meets IES standards and does not otherwise violate this chapter. (Ord.
2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.070: PROHIBITED LIGHTING:
The following lighting shall be prohibited:
   A..   Unshielded lighting exceeding 300 lumens, for any purpose is
prohibited.
   B.   Flashing, chasing, blinking, intermittent lights or other lights that
move or give the impression of movement are prohibited.
      1.   Exceptions:
         a.   Holiday lighting.
   C.   Laser lighting. All laser lighting is prohibited.
   D.   Searchlights. All searchlights are prohibited.
   E.   Exposed Neon and fluorescent tubes. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.080: SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A site Lighting plan shall include the following:
      1.   Commercial and Multi-Family site plans: (3 or more units)
         a.   The location of all light fixtures, both proposed and any already
existing on the site.
         b.   A photometric plan, designed and stamped by a lighting
professional, illustrating lighting intensities at a minimum of two by two feet
in spacing and at five feet beyond the property line. The photometric plan
shall be submitted on a “maintained” basis at one-year after burn-in and state
the light loss factors used in the calculation.
         c.   A description of each light fixture, lamp, support and shield,
both proposed and existing. The description shall include, but is not limited
to, manufacturer’s catalog cuts and illustrations; lighting fixture lamp types,
wattages and initial lumen outputs.
         d.   At the city’s discretion, the city’s public safety departments or
providers may review and provide feedback on lighting plans as part of the
development review process. This review shall be administered by the city’s
development review committee (TRC).
      2.   Single-Family, Two-Family and Accessory Dwelling Unit site plans:
         a.   The location of all light fixtures, both proposed and any already
existing on the site.
         b.   A description of each: light fixture, lamp, support and shield,
both proposed and existing. The description shall include, but is not limited
to, manufacturer’s catalog details and illustrations which feature: lighting
fixture lamp types, wattages initial lumen outputs, motion or timer details and
shielding features/method.
   B.   Alterations Allowed. Should any lamp or light fixture be altered after
a permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the TRC for
approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this
chapter, which must be received prior to alteration.
   C.   Certification of installation. For all commercial and multi-family
projects, certification by a certified lighting professional shall be provided
to the Community and Economic Development department, verifying that the
installed lighting conforms to the approved plans. Certification shall be
verified by the Building Official before any certificate of occupancy or
business license is issued. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.090: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Single-Family Residential, Two-Family and Accessory Dwelling units.
shall comply with this chapter.
   B.   Multi-Family Residential and Commercial. Lighting plans are required.
All building plans, commercial sign permit applications, conditional use
permits, and subdivision applications shall include a detailed lighting plan
that shows evidence that the proposed lighting fixtures and light sources
comply with this chapter
   C.   Evidence of Compliance with Codes. Commercial lighting plans shall
include certification by a licensed electrical engineer that the lighting
fixtures proposed conform to the requirements of this chapter, Building and
Electrical Codes. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.100: APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Approval procedures for new commercial and multi-family developments
shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission in accordance with
Chapter 13.08 and
13.10
   B.   New residential site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with this
title and shall be approved by the Community and Economic Development
Department Director. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.110: ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF:
   A.   It is important to note that the intent of this chapter is as stated in
13.84.010, and it is not the intent of this section to limit creative lighting
solutions. Creative approaches to lighting are encouraged as viable
alternatives to these standards and guidelines are proposed. The CED Director
may approve substituted alternatives if the alternatives are found to meet the
intent of this chapter and do not otherwise violate this chapter. (Ord. 2025-
15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.120: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   The applicant, property owner or any person aggrieved by a final
decision, determination, or requirement imposed regarding this chapter may
appeal according to the provisions set forth in 13.09. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-
2025)
13.84.130: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall only apply as effective from the
date they were adopted and not retroactively.
   B.   Outdoor lighting that conformed with City of Holladay ordinances prior
to the adoption of a provision of this chapter shall be treated similarly to a
legal nonconforming use that can be maintained or replaced in like-for-like
features but not expanded.
   C.   Violations deemed public nuisances. Where applicable, enforcement of
all the provisions of this chapter is authorized by the community and economic
development director. Violations shall be enforced as public nuisances.
   D.   Nothing in these regulations shall prevent filing an action for relief
from light trespass or glare as a nuisance, or from other relief under any laws
which may currently exist.
   E.   Suspension, Revocation, or Modifications to the Lighting Plan. The
community and economic development director may suspend, revoke, or require
modification of any lighting plan that is found to be not in compliance with
this chapter or that is causing nuisance conditions.
   F.   Failure to enforce shall not legalize any violations of these
provisions within this chapter. (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.140: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   A.   To be determined (codification date). (Ord. 2025-15, 8-28-2025)
13.84.150: FIGURES:
Figure 89.1 Preventing Light Trespass:
   example site layout of a single-family home
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10012.jpg]
 
Figure 89.2
   Area Flood/Security lighting - Acceptable and Non-Acceptable
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10014.jpg]
 
Figure 89.3
   Examples of wall lighting - Acceptable and Non-Acceptable
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10016.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2025- 15, 8-28- 2025)
CHAPTER 13.85
CONVERSION TO CONDOMINIUMS
SECTION:
13.85.010: Purpose
13.85.020: Submission Of Application With Site Plan
13.85.030: Property Condition Report
13.85.040: Report To The Building Official
13.85.050: Minimum Requirements For A Condominium Project
13.85.060: Declaration Of Covenants, Conditions, Restrictions And Project
13.85.070: Tenant Notification
13.85.080: Concept Approval
13.85.090: Preliminary Approval
13.85.100: Final Plat Approval
13.85.010: PURPOSE:
The owner or developer who desires to convert two (2) or more units within
existing residential apartments, commercial or manufacturing buildings to a
condominium project shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
Planning commission approval is required to assure the project meets all
current applicable ordinances and regulations related to condominium projects.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.85.020: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION WITH SITE PLAN:
   A.   The owner or developer of a proposed condominium conversion project
desiring approval shall file a development review application with the
community development director. The following shall be submitted with the
development review application:
      1.   Two (2) copies of the record of survey map accurately drawn to scale
in conformance with the provisions of section 57-8-13, Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended), which shall be prepared and stamped by an engineer or land
surveyor registered in the state of Utah. The scale of the map shall be no
smaller than one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40').
      2.   Three (3) copies of a site plan, one of which shall be reduced to
eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), prepared to the same scale as
the record of survey map designating the location of buildings, the intended
use of common areas, and the location and extent of storage, recreational
facilities, parking, driveways, pedestrianways, curbs, walls, fences, a
landscaping and irrigation plan, and unit floor plans.
      3.   One copy signed in the original of the proposed condominium
declarations and bylaws. The declarations shall comply in all respects with the
Utah condominium ownership act 1  as well as all applicable federal, state and
local laws and ordinances and that when the condominium declaration and survey
map have been recorded in the office of the Salt Lake County recorder the
proposed project will be a validly existing and lawful condominium project in
all respects.
      4.   A property report containing the information specified in section
13.85.030 of this chapter shall be submitted as part of the application,
together with a plan for all proposed improvements and repairs prepared by a
civil or structural engineer or a general engineering contractor licensed by
the state of Utah.
      5.   Proof of notice to tenants.
      6.   A filing fee in an amount determined by city council resolution or
ordinance establishing fees and charges.
   B.   An application will not be scheduled for planning commission review
until the information required herein has been submitted. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 57-8-1 et seq.
13.85.030: PROPERTY CONDITION REPORT:
   A.   As an element of any application for a condominium which includes the
conversion of existing structures, a property condition report shall be ordered
by the city from an independent building inspector licensed by the state of
Utah. The property condition report is intended to ensure that the standards of
the declaration appropriately address existing and future conditions relating
to maintenance, upkeep, and operation as referenced by section 57-8-13, Utah
Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
   B.   The property report shall contain the following information:
      1.   Age of the building or buildings.
      2.   Condition of the structural elements, including the roof,
foundation, mechanical system, electrical system, plumbing system, and boiler
or furnace.
      3.   Size of the water service line from the meter to each individual
unit.
      4.   Size of the sewer lateral and sewer line(s) from each unit.
      5.   Capacity of the electrical service for each unit (amps).
      6.   Condition of the paving material on private streets (if any).
      7.   Condition of the paving or surfacing material on driveways, parking
areas, sidewalks, curbs, etc.
      8.   Condition of the paint and/or exterior surfaces of all buildings and
structures.
      9.   All known conditions constituting deficiencies.
      10.   All known conditions which may require repair or replacement within
the next succeeding five (5) year period.
      11.   A statement of disclosure containing all information pertinent to
any failure of the building(s) to meet the requirements of the current building
codes. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.85.040: REPORT TO THE BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   The city shall order a property condition report of the proposed
condominium conversion project prepared by an independent building inspector
licensed by the state of Utah to determine compliance with the international
building code as adopted and with the standards listed above. The report shall
be paid for by the applicant as part of the application fee.
   B.   The chief building official shall review the submitted information,
especially as it pertains to a chapter 34 audit, and report to the TRC
specifying where the building(s) is/are deficient with respect to the standards
of the international building code.
   C.   The report of the chief building official shall be submitted to the
planning commission as an element of the "property condition report". (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.85.050: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR A CONDOMINIUM PROJECT:
   A.   Each condominium conversion project shall comply either with the
current land use codes, or with a finding of nonconformance acceptable to the
city as per section
13.88.040 of this title.
   B.   Each condominium conversion project shall meet the following for
minimum utility requirements:
      1.   All condominium units within a development shall be separately
metered for gas, electricity, and water. Meter(s) shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of this code and utility provider's standards.
      2.   Each unit shall be provided with readily accessible individual
shutoff valves or switches for water, gas, and electrical services.
      3.   Each condominium unit shall be equipped with its own heating and
cooling system.
   C.   Prior to final approval, the city shall cause final inspections of all
buildings and structures and work therein to be made upon request of the
developer to determine conformance with the current applicable building codes.
   D.   In the event the city, upon preliminary examination, finds violations
of such building codes these violations must be corrected prior to final
approval with all repairs or renovations proposed by the developer.
   E.   The property condition report shall be recorded with the subdivision
plat as a method of disclosure to any potential owner within the project.
   F.   As a condition of final approval, the developer shall be required to
sign an agreement with the city of Holladay that indemnifies and holds the city
harmless in the authorization of the condominium conversion. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.85.060: DECLARATION OF COVENANTS, CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS AND PROJECT:
   A.   In addition to the contents of the declaration required by section 57-
8-13, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), the following shall also be
included:
      1.   Proof of provisions for periodic assessments to the owners adequate
to fund the costs of maintenance, common utility bills, and special assessments
for capital improvements.
      2.   The enforcement techniques to be used in securing compliance with
the duties and provisions of the covenants, conditions and restrictions.
   B.   Prior to recording a final plat, the developer must fund the
homeowners' association account for anticipated costs of maintenance, common
utility bills, and special assessments for capital improvements for the first
year based on the proposed budget as submitted pursuant to section
13.85.030 of this chapter.
   C.   The developer shall retain responsibility for maintenance of the common
areas of the facilities until all of the units have been sold and the city has
determined that the homeowners' association has been established by the receipt
of a copy of the recorded documents. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   D.   If the condominium project contains private streets, or roadways,
provision shall be made for public utility easements over the entire private
street, or roadway system. The city may also require public utility easements
abutting public streets or over other portions of the project to accommodate
fire hydrants, water meters, street, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water and
gas mains, electrical lines and similar public improvements and utilities. The
city may also require access routes necessary to assure that firefighting
equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   E.   Each owner and the association may have an easement for entry upon any
privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction,
maintenance or repair for the benefit of the common area. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.85.070: TENANT NOTIFICATION:
   A.   Written notices shall be mailed by certified mail to all tenants in the
proposed condominium conversion project not less than ten (10) days prior to
the planning commission meeting on the proposed conversion. Such notice shall
provide, at least, the following:
      1.   The date, time, place, and purpose of the meeting;
      2.   A statement that should the condominium conversion project be
approved, tenants may be required to vacate premises.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided by contract or law, all tenants of the
proposed condominium conversion project shall be given the right of first
refusal to purchase the dwelling unit in which they reside. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.85.080: CONCEPT APPROVAL:
   A.   Concept Approval: If the community development director finds that the
project as proposed is in compliance, or plans have been presented which will
bring the structures into compliance with applicable codes and policies, or a
waiver is requested pursuant to subsection
13.85.050A of this chapter, the community development director shall forward,
with recommendations from the TRC and the chief building official, the request
to the planning commission for concept approval as per section
13.08.040 of this title.
   B.   Recommendation: If the community development director finds
circumstances which would constitute a substantially increased hazard to the
health, safety, welfare, or convenience of the general public or of prospective
buyers or guests in the condominium project, he or she may recommend denial of
the project to the planning commission. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-14-2016)
13.85.090: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL:
   A.   The planning commission shall consider preliminary approval of the
condominium project if the requirements of concept approval have been met by
the applicant.
   B.   The planning commission shall grant preliminary approval of the project
if:
      1.   The commission finds that the project is in compliance with, or the
applicant has presented plans that will bring the structure(s) into compliance
with applicable building codes;
      2.   The submitted plans conform to the approved site plan; and other
appropriate ordinances and policies, or in the case of condominium conversion
requests, a waiver pursuant to subsection
13.85.050A of this chapter; and
      3.   The project will not be detrimental to residents of the city, the
neighborhood, or prospective condominium owners.
   C.   The planning commission may require modifications deemed appropriate to
ensure an attractive and safe project.
   D.   If the planning commission finds circumstances which would constitute a
material hazard to the health, safety, welfare, or convenience of the general
public or of prospective buyers or guests in the condominium project, the
planning commission may deny preliminary approval with an appropriate finding
of fact.
   E.   The effect of preliminary approval by the planning commission shall be
to entitle the owner or developer to proceed with obtaining building permits,
giving notification to tenants, preparing documents for final plat approval,
and otherwise proceeding with the project in all aspects which are in
conformance with the conditions of preliminary approval and subject to final
approval. The sale of condominium units, the recording of records of survey,
and the recording of declarations, however, shall not be accomplished prior to
granting a final approval in accordance with the provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.85.100: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
   A.   The condominium development, with all documentation, shall be granted
final approval by the city, upon recommendation by the technical review
committee (TRC) and the chief building official (CBO) that:
      1.   All requirements of the planning commission preliminary approval
have been completed;
      2.   The final plat and all required documentation have been submitted
and approved; and
      3.   Any bonds, letters of credit or other agreements required to be
filed have been accepted by the city.
   B.   Within one year of the city's final approval, a final plat shall be
recorded with the Salt Lake County recorder's office or the approval shall
expire.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days after the city has disapproved any project, the
applicant may file with the community development director appropriate
materials altered to meet the requirements of the preliminary approval. Upon
said filing, the matter shall be reconsidered by the TRC without an additional
fee. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.86
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
13.86.010: Purpose
13.86.020: Historic Sites Register
13.86.030: Historic Site Modification Permit Conditional Use Permit Required
13.86.040: Noncomplying Conditional Uses
13.86.045: Protective Maintenance Required
13.86.050: Site Modification
13.86.060: Additional Uses For Historic Sites
13.86.065: Modification Defined
13.86.070: Interpretation Of Chapter
13.86.010: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of this chapter the term preservation shall refer to the act or
process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity,
and materials of an historic property.
This chapter is enacted to establish a historic site register and to provide a
sustainable means by which a property owner may maintain a historic site
designated by the city council. Provisions within this chapter intend to
preserve sites, structures, landmarks or buildings with special historical,
architectural or aesthetic value which are unique and irreplaceable assets. To
accomplish this purpose, planning commission may approve conditional permits
for additional land uses approval is required and all modifications to
historical sites. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-21, 11-21-2024)
13.86.020: HISTORIC SITES DESIGNATED:
   A.   Existing Sites: Each of the following structures and sites in the city
is designated a historic site and are subject to the provisions and standards
of this chapter:
      1.   David Branson Brinton home, 1981 East Murray-Holladay Road,
Holladay.
      2.   Santa Anna Casto home, 2731 Casto Lane, Holladay (relocated to City
Hall Park, 2009).
      3.   William J. Bowthorpe home, 4910 Holladay Boulevard, Holladay.
      4.   George Boyes home, 4766 Holladay Boulevard, Holladay.
   5.   David McDonald home, 4659 Highland Drive, Holladay.
   6.   Dinwoodey Home, 2052 E Arbor Lane.
   B.   Amendments: The city council may amend the above list of historic sites
and structures, including removing or designating of additional historic sites,
subject to the amendment procedures in section
13.07.050 of this code. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-21, 11-21-
2024; Ord. 2025-19, 10-2-2025)
13.86.030: HISTORIC SITE MODIFICATION REQUIREMENTS CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
REQUIRED:
   A.   Modifications: A conditional use permit is required for any
modifications to a historic site or structure, including modifications to the
landscaping, fencing or appearance of any lot, construction, alteration,
relocation, improvement or conversion of a historic site.
   B.   Demolitions: A site listed on the Historic Site Register proposed to be
demolished or extensively altered is subject to the following:
      1.   Upon verification of a complete permit, the city will delay issuing
the modification permit for a maximum of thirty (30) days to document the
property. The property owner shall work with the city staff in the
collaboration with other entities, where needed, in providing access to the
site for documentation process.
      2.   Documentation shall include, at minimum, exterior photographs of all
elevations of the structure. When possible, both exterior and interior
measurements of the structure will be made in order to provide an accurate
floor-plan drawing of the structure.
      3.   The demolition permit will be issued after thirty (30) days of the
initial application whether or not the city has completed documenting the
building. The permit may be issued earlier if documentation is completed before
the thirty (30) day deadline.
      4.   The documentation will be kept on file with the Community and
Economic Development Department, which shall be open to the public.
   C.   Application: Applications for a conditional use permit on a historic
site shall be made by the property owner in the manner and subject to the
procedures and requirements set forth in section
13.08.040 of this title. To the extent that the requirements of this chapter
and section
13.08.040 of this title are inconsistent, the requirements of this chapter
shall prevail. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-21, 11-21-2024)
13.86.040: NONCOMPLYING CONDITIONAL USES:
The planning commission shall not approve a conditional use for a historic site
which would be contrary to the purposes of this chapter by adversely affecting
the architectural significance, the historical appearance, or the educational
and historical value of the site unless all the following conditions have been
met:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit Requirements: The application meets the
requirements for a conditional use permit set forth in section
13.08.040 of this title;
   B.   Zone Requirements: The application meets all the requirements of the
base zone in which the property is located;
   C.   Length Of Term Before Planning Commission: The application has been
pending before the planning commission for a period of at least one year. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.86.045: PROTECTIVE MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Maintenance Required: In addition to the requirements of the applicable
building code, the owner of any historic site shall maintain and repair the
historic site in accordance with this section. A historic site shall not be
destroyed by neglect of any structure that has or is incurring permanent
damage, by weather, or by vandalism.
   B.   Extent Of Maintenance: The owner shall maintain and repair the historic
site to the extent that in the opinion of the city is sufficient to prevent
damage to the structural components or the exterior of the structure, or to
prevent the collapse of the structure, or to prevent the structure from
becoming so deteriorated as to render impossible its repair and preservation.
   C.   Investigation: The city can investigate the condition of any historic
site. Upon finding that the historic site is dilapidated or deteriorating, the
city shall notify the property owner by certified letter of the failure of
meeting city codes and standards. The city shall identify specific repairs and
any work necessary to comply with the conditions and requirements approved by
the city. The owner shall have one hundred twenty (120) days from written
notification to complete necessary repairs and improvements that were approved
by the city. All effort to work with the property owner will be expended before
written notification is mailed to the property owner. Failure to complete the
necessary repairs and work within one hundred twenty (120) days shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.86.050: SITE MODIFICATION:
Upon application by the property owner and according to the procedures and
requirements set forth in section
13.08.040 of this title, the planning commission may modify all yard, parking,
landscaping, height and other requirements of the zone in which the historic
site is located, as necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. In so
doing, the nature and character of adjacent properties shall be considered to
ensure that the health, safety, convenience and general welfare will not be
impaired. The planning commission may establish development criteria to control
impacts associated with the heaviest permitted use in the base zone, including,
but not limited to, noise, Dark Sky compliant lighting, dust or odor. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-21, 11-21-2024)
13.86.060: ADDITIONAL USES FOR HISTORIC SITES:
   A.   Residential And Forestry Zones: The planning commission may approve any
of the following uses for a historic site in addition to the permitted and
conditional uses allowed in the forestry or residential zone in which the site
is located:
      Antique shop.
      Art shop.
      Boarding house.
      Child nursery.
      Dental office or clinic.
      Dwelling, single-, two-, three-, four- or multiple-family (in addition to
a maximum of sixteen (16) units per acre).
      Nursing home.
      Office.
      Private educational institution.
      Reception centers.
      Restaurant.
      Other uses of similar intensity to the above.
   B.   Commercial Zone: The planning commission may approve any use listed in
a commercial zone of this title for a historic site located in a commercial
zone including residential dwellings, ancillary to the primary commercial use.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-21, 11-21-2024)
13.86.065: MODIFICATION DEFINED:
For purposes of this chapter, "modification" means demolition or construction
where a demolition or building permit is required. "Modification" also includes
substantial changes to landscape, fencing or appearance of a historic site.
"Modification" does not include minor changes to landscape, fencing or
appearance of a historic site such as painting the historic site substantially
the same color, changes to flowerbeds or trimming. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.86.070: INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter does not guarantee the right of any person, firm or corporation to
any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.88
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
13.88.010: Continuation Of Use
13.88.020: Occupation Within Six Months
13.88.030: Maintenance Permitted
13.88.040: Repairs And Alterations Permitted
13.88.050: Addition Of Parking Space
13.88.060: Expansion Of Use Permitted
13.88.080: Nonconforming Use Of Land
13.88.110: Restoration Of Damaged Building
13.88.120: Six Month Vacancy
13.88.130: Abandonment
13.88.140: Application To Have A Use Violation Declared A Nonconforming Use
13.88.010: CONTINUATION OF USE:
The occupancy of a building or structure by a nonconforming use, existing at
the time this title became effective, may be continued. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.88.020: OCCUPATION WITHIN SIX MONTHS:
A vacant building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the building
or structure was designed or intended if so occupied within a period of six (6)
months after the use became nonconforming. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.88.030: MAINTENANCE PERMITTED:
A nonconforming building or structure must be maintained. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.88.040: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS PERMITTED:
Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or
to a building housing a nonconforming use. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.88.050: ADDITION OF PARKING SPACE:
A building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space in
connection therewith as required by this title may be altered or enlarged
provided additional automobile parking space is supplied to meet the
requirements of this title for such alteration or enlargement, provided the
additional parking space is approved by the planning commission as a
conditional use pursuant to the requirements of section
13.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.88.060: EXPANSION OF USE PERMITTED:
A nonconforming use may be extended to include the entire floor area of the
existing building in which it is conducted at the time the use became
nonconforming. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.88.080: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land, existing at the time this title became
effective, may be continued; provided, that no such nonconforming use of land
shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or abutting
property; and provided, that if such nonconforming use of land, or any portion
thereof, is abandoned or changed for a period of six (6) months or more, any
future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provision of this
title. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
13.88.110: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDING:
A nonconforming building or structure or a building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind,
earthquake or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy, may be restored
and the occupancy or use of such building, structure or part thereof, which
existed at the time of such damage or destruction may be continued or resumed;
provided, that such restoration is started within a period of six (6) months
and is diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.88.120: SIX MONTH VACANCY:
A building or structure or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use,
which is, or hereafter becomes, vacant and remains unoccupied by a
nonconforming use for a continuous period of six (6) months, except for
dwellings, shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to
the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.88.130: ABANDONMENT:
A nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned if the use has not applied to the
premises for a consecutive period of at least six (6) months. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.88.140: APPLICATION TO HAVE A USE VIOLATION DECLARED A NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   Application; Conditions For Approval: Whenever land or a structure is
used in violation of this title, the owner may file an application with the
planning commission to have the use declared nonconforming. The planning
commission may approve such an application only when the evidence establishes
all of the following:
      1.   The use exists on the property at the time of the application and
has been in continuous violation of the land use ordinance for a period
exceeding five (5) years;
      2.   No complaint has been made to the community development department
concerning the violation for a period exceeding five (5) consecutive years
during which the violation existed;
      3.   Continuation of the use will not have a detrimental effect on the
health, safety or welfare of persons or property in the vicinity;
   B.   Conditions May Be Set: In approving an application hereunder, the
planning commission may set any conditions it deems necessary for protection of
adjacent properties or the public welfare, including provisions limiting the
period of time the use may continue. This section shall in no way be
interpreted to permit the continuation of any violation which exists on the
effective date hereof. Any person shall have the right to appeal to the city
council a decision rendered by the planning commission pursuant to this
section. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.90
AMENDMENTS AND REZONING 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  chapter 13.07 of this title.
CHAPTER 13.90
AMENDMENTS AND REZONING 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  chapter 13.07 of this title.
CHAPTER 13.91
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
13.91.010: Title For Citation
13.91.020: Purpose Of Provisions
13.91.030: Definitions
13.91.040: Businesses Permitted; Restrictions
13.91.050: Sign Restrictions
13.91.060: Severability
13.91.010: TITLE FOR CITATION:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.91.020: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
It is the purpose and objective of this chapter that the city establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually
oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the city; to
regulate the signage of such businesses; to control the adverse effects of such
signage; and to prevent inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the
community. This chapter is to be construed as a regulation of time, place and
manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the limitations
provided by provisions of the constitutions of the United States and the state.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.91.030: DEFINITIONS:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.91.040: BUSINESSES PERMITTED; RESTRICTIONS:
Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in areas zoned O-R-
D pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 13.45 of this title, subject to the following additional restrictions:
   A.   Conditional Use Requirements: Sexually oriented businesses shall be
subject to conditional use requirements.
   B.   Prohibited Locations: No sexually oriented business shall be located:
      1.   Within six hundred feet (600') from any school, public park,
religious institution, or another sexually oriented business, except an outcall
service or a nude and seminude dancing agency may be located on the same
premises as another sexually oriented business; or
      2.   Within six hundred feet (600') from a residential boundary; or
      3.   Within six hundred feet (600') of a business licensed for the
consumption of alcohol or liquor.
   C.   Measuring Distance Requirements: The distance requirements for this
section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the nearest property line of the school, public park,
religious institution, or another sexually oriented business and to the front
or main entrance of the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.91.050: SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in
chapter 13.82 of this title, signs for sexually oriented businesses shall be
limited as follows:
   A.   No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed;
   B.   No sign shall be allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet;
   C.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign, or on the
exterior walls or roof of such premises;
   D.   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to, or
inferring, the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs
shall contain alphanumeric copy only;
   E.   Only flat signs shall be permitted;
   F.   Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed;
   G.   Other than the signs specifically allowed by this chapter, the sexually
oriented business shall not construct or allow to be constructed any temporary
sign, banner, light or other device designed to draw attention to the business
location. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.91.060: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other
sections, provisions, clauses or applications hereof which can be implemented
without the invalid provision, clause or application hereof, and to this end
the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord.
2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.92
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 13.94
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
13.94.010: Enforcement Authority
13.94.020: Powers And Duties
13.94.030: Types Of Violations
13.94.040: Penalties And Remedies
13.94.050: Violation; Persons Liable
13.94.060: Violation; Notice And Order
13.94.070: Civil Penalties
13.94.080: Short Term Rental Violations
13.94.010: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The community development director or his authorized agent is designated as the
officer charged with the enforcement of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.94.020: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Inspection: The community development director is authorized to inspect
or cause to be inspected all buildings and structures in the course of
construction, modification or repair and to inspect land uses to determine
compliance with the provisions of this title; provided, however that no such
inspection shall be required as a condition precedent to commencement or
continuation of any construction, modification or repair of building or
structure.
   B.   Enforcement: The community development director shall enforce all of
the provisions of this title, employing all legal means available to do so. In
the enforcement of this title, the community development director or any
employee of that department authorized to represent the community development
director shall have the right to enter any building for the purpose of
determining the use thereof or to enter the premises for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this title; provided, that such
right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that in no case
shall entry be made to any occupied building in the absence of the owner or
tenant thereof without the written order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.94.030: TYPES OF VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this title,
cause the violation of any provision of this title, or fail or refuse to do
some act required under this title, including any of the following acts:
   A.   Development Or Use Without Permit: To engage in any development, use,
construction, remodeling, or other activity of any nature upon the land and
improvements thereon subject to the jurisdiction of the city without all of the
required permits, approvals, certificates, and other forms of authorization
required by this title or other city ordinance in order to conduct or engage in
such activity.
   B.   Development Or Use Inconsistent With Permit: To engage in any
development, use, construction, remodeling, or other activity which is contrary
to the terms and conditions of any permit, approval, certificate, or other form
of authorization required to engage in such activity.
   C.   Development Or Use Inconsistent With Terms Of Approval: To violate, by
act or omission, any lawful term, condition, or qualification placed by the
city council, planning commission, appeal authority, or officer of the city, as
applicable, upon a required permit, certificate, or other form of authorization
granted by the city council, planning commission, appeal authority, or other
city officer allowing the use, development, or other activity upon land or
improvements thereon.
   D.   Development Or Use Inconsistent With This Title: To erect, construct,
reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain, move, or use any building or structure,
or to use any land in violation of this title.
   E.   Increasing Intensity Of Use: To increase the intensity of use of any
land or structure, except in accordance with the procedural and substantive
requirements of this title.
   F.   Removing, Defacing, Or Obscuring Notice: To remove, deface, obscure, or
otherwise interfere with any notice required by this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-
20-2012)
13.94.040: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this title shall be subject to the
enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this chapter and by Utah law,
including any of the following:
   A.   Withhold Permits: The city may deny or withhold any permit,
certificate, or other form of authorization pertaining to any land or
improvements when an uncorrected violation exists on such land pursuant to this
title or to a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or
other authorization previously granted by the city council, planning
commission, appeal authority, or other city officer. The city may, instead of
withholding or denying an authorization, grant such authorization subject to
the condition that the violation be corrected. The provisions of this
subsection shall apply regardless of whether the original applicant or current
owner is responsible for the violation in question.
   B.   Revoke Permits: A permit issued under the authority of this title may
be revoked when the community development director determines that actions
taken thereunder do not conform to plans, specifications, or conditions of the
permit; that the same was procured by false representation or was issued by
mistake; or that any provision of this title is being violated.
      1.   Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the owner,
the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed at the site of the
building or structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a
prominent location, and thereafter no such construction shall proceed.
      2.   When plans are in conflict with an ordinance, resolution,
regulation, or other applicable requirement, and when construction has not
progressed to a stage where modification of the plans would require substantial
alteration of the structures in place, the plans shall be modified to conform
with applicable requirements.
      3.   When a mistake has been made calculating the fee for any permit, the
proper fee shall be charged and thereafter paid by the applicant.
   C.   Stop Work: In accordance with its power to stop work under the building
code, the city may stop work, with or without revoking permits, on any building
or structure on any land on which exists an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this title or permit or other form of authorization issued
hereunder.
   D.   Revoke Plan Or Other Approvals: Where a violation of this title
involves failure to comply with approved plans or a condition upon which plan
approval was subject, the city may, after notice to the applicant and other
known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits affected)
and after a hearing as provided in subsection
13.94.070C of this chapter:
      1.   Revoke the plan or other approval, or
      2.   Condition its continuance on strict compliance, the provision of
security, or such other conditions as the city may reasonably impose.
   E.   Remove Signs: When a sign is illegally located within a public right of
way, on any city owned property, or in the case of an emergency or an
identified hazard, the community development director may, without notice,
cause the immediate removal of such sign.
   F.   Injunctive Relief: The city may seek an injunction or other equitable
relief in the district court to stop any violation of this title, or a permit,
certificate, or other form of authorization granted hereunder. The city need
only to establish a violation of this title to obtain an injunction.
   G.   Abatement: The city may seek a court order from the district court in
the nature of mandamus, abatement, or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition which existed prior to the violation.
   H.   Penalty: Each day that any violation continues after notification by
the community development director that such violation exists shall be
considered a separate offense for purposes of penalties and remedies set forth
in this title. Violation of any of the provisions of this title shall upon
conviction be punishable as a class C misdemeanor. Accumulation of penalties
for continuing violations, but not the obligation for payment of penalties
already accrued, shall stop upon correction of the violation.
   I.   Other Remedies: The city shall have such other remedies as are and as
may be from time to time provided by Utah law or city ordinance for the
violation of any provision of this title.
   J.   Remedies Cumulative: These remedies shall be cumulative. Any one, all,
or any combination of the penalties and remedies set forth in this chapter may
be used to enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.94.050: VIOLATION; PERSONS LIABLE:
Any person, corporation or other entity, whether as owner, occupant, agent or
employee, who causes, permits or otherwise participates in any violation of the
provisions of this title may be held responsible for the violation, suffer the
penalties, and be subject to the remedies provided by law. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
13.94.060: VIOLATION; NOTICE AND ORDER:
   A.   Written Notice: Upon inspection and discovery that any provision of
this title is being violated, the director shall provide a written notice of
violation and order to the property owner and to any other party who may be
responsible for the violation.
   B.   Content: The written notice and order shall: 1) indicate the nature of
the violation; 2) order the action necessary to correct the violation; 3) give
information regarding the established warning period for the violation; and 4)
state the action the director intends to take if the violation is not corrected
within the warning period.
   C.   Service: The written notice shall be delivered personally or mailed to
the property owner, as shown on the records of the county recorder, and to any
other person who may be responsible for the violation. Receipt of notice shall
mean three (3) days after the date written notice is delivered or mailed as
provided herein.
   D.   Commencement Of Warning Period: The written notice shall serve to start
any warning periods provided in this chapter, commencing upon receipt of
notice. If the violation remains uncured within five (5) days after the
expiration of the warning period, a second notice of violation and order shall
be delivered in the same manner as the first notice. The second notice shall
serve to start the civil penalties.
   E.   Immediate Enforcement: In cases where the community development
director determines that a delay of enforcement would pose a danger to the
public health, safety or welfare, or would otherwise compromise the effective
enforcement of this title, the community development director may seek
immediate enforcement without prior written notice by instituting any
appropriate remedies, other than civil penalties, authorized by section
13.94.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
13.94.070: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   Schedule: Violations of the provisions of this title shall result in
civil penalties pursuant to the adopted Consolidated Fee Schedule
   B.   Daily Violations: Each day a violation is continued or maintained after
receipt of notice shall give rise to a separate civil penalty for each day of
violation.
   C.   Violation Appeal Procedure:
      1.   The city council shall appoint such hearing officers as the board
deems appropriate to consider matters relating to the violation of this title.
      2.   Any person having received notice of such violation, or the owner of
any affected property, may appear before a hearing officer and present and
contest such alleged violation of this title.
      3.   The burden to prove any defense specified in subsection C4 of this
section shall be upon the person raising such defense.
      4.   If the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred and/or a
violation occurred but one or more of the defenses set forth in this section is
applicable, the hearing officer may dismiss the written notice of violation.
Such defenses are:
         a.   At the time of the receipt of the written notice of violation,
compliance would have violated the criminal laws of the state.
         b.   Compliance with the subject ordinances would have presented an
imminent and irreparable injury to persons or property.
      5.   If the hearing officer finds that a violation of this title occurred
and no applicable defense exists, the hearing officer may, in the interest of
justice and on behalf of the city, enter into an agreement for the timely or
periodic payment of the applicable penalty by the violator.
      6.   No action by a hearing officer shall relieve the violator from
complying with any of the provisions of this title.
   D.   Abatement For Correction And Payment:
      1.   Civil penalties shall be partially abated after the violation is
cured and in the discretion of a hearing officer, considering the following
guidelines and other factors:
         a.   Reductions are generally appropriate for promptly curing the
violation pursuant to the following schedule, but the hearing officer may grant
greater or lesser abatements depending on the facts of the case:
            (1)   Cured within fourteen (14) days after second notice: Seventy
five percent (75%) reduction;
            (2)   Cured within twenty eight (28) days after second notice:
Fifty percent (50%) reduction; or
            (3)   Cured within fifty six (56) days after second notice: Twenty
five percent (25%) reduction.
         b.   If strict compliance with the notice and order would have caused
an imminent and irreparable injury to persons or property.
         c.   If the violation and inability to cure were both caused by an
event such as war, act of nature, strike, or civil disturbance.
         d.   Such other mitigating circumstances as may be approved by the
city attorney or designee.
         e.   If a change in the actual ownership of the property was recorded
in the recorder's office after the first or second notice was issued and the
new owner is not related by blood, marriage or common ownership to the prior
owner.
      2.   If the hearing officer finds that the noticed violation occurred and
no applicable defense applies, the hearing officer may, in the interest of
justice and on behalf of the city, enter into an agreement for the delayed or
periodic payment of the applicable penalty.
   E.   Collection Of Civil Penalties:
      1.   If the penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter remains unsatisfied
after forty (40) days or when the penalty amounts to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) from the receipt of notice, or ten (10) days from such date as may
have been agreed to by the hearing officer, the city may use such lawful means
as are available to collect such penalty, including costs and attorney fees.
      2.   Commencement of any action to remove penalties shall not relieve the
responsibility of any penalty to cure the violation or make payment of
subsequently accrued civil penalties, nor shall it require the city to reissue
any of the notices required by this chapter. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012; amd.
Ord. 2021- 19, 8-5-2021)
13.94.080: SHORT TERM RENTAL VIOLATIONS:
No person or entity, whether as an owner, agent or representative, shall use,
permit the use of, or facilitate the use of any property within the City in
violation of section
13.76.735  of this Title nor use, permit the use of or facilitate the use of
any property as a short term rental without the issuance of an approval by the
City. Any violation of this section shall be a Class B Misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a minimum fine of not less than $1,000.00. In addition to any fine
or jail time imposed, the Court shall be authorized to require the repayment of
any rental income received during all periods of violation. Each day of rental
or use in violation of Section
13.76.735  shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 2020-07, 5-7-2020)
CHAPTER 13.98
GROUP HOMES; OTHER FACILITIES
SECTION:
13.98.010: Definitions
13.98.020: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
13.98.030: Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons
13.98.040: Design Standards For Group Homes For People With Disabilities And
Residential Facilities For Elderly People When Allowed As A Permitted Or
Conditional Use Within The City Of Holladay
13.98.050: Nonresidential Treatment Facilities
13.98.060: Limitations
13.98.010: DEFINITIONS:
See section
13.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 2013-10, 5-9-2013)
13.98.020: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Applicability: This section shall be deemed to govern any facility,
residence, or other circumstance that meets the definition of a residential
facility as set forth in this title, and the definition of a disabled person as
set forth in this title; for the requirements of this section shall govern the
same notwithstanding any other provisions of this code.
   B.   Purpose: The purposes of this section are:
      1.   To comply with title 10, chapter 9a, section 520, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended; and
      2.   To avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities
as provided in the Utah fair housing act and the federal fair housing
amendments act as interpreted by the courts having jurisdiction over the city
of Holladay.
   C.   Permitted Use: A residential facility for persons with a disability
shall be a permitted use in any zoning district where a dwelling is allowed.
Each such facility shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall comply with all applicable building, safety and
health regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, fire regulations, and
all applicable state core standards and licensing requirements, and any
standards set forth in any contract with a state agency. The facility shall
also comply with the city's land use provisions applicable to single-family
dwellings for the zone in which it is to be located, except as may be modified
by the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The following site development standards and parking standards shall
be applicable:
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development
standards applicable to a dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is
located; and
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same
as the number required for a dwelling with similar occupancy density in the
same zone.
      3.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a direct threat or
substantial risk to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
      4.   Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or
certified by the department of human services or the department of health to
establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a certified copy of such license to the city recorder;
         b.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for
a business license, compliance with the Americans with disabilities act;
         c.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for
a business license, that no person will be placed or remain in the facility
whose prior or current behavior, actions and/or criminal incidents or
convictions, have demonstrated that such person is or may be a substantial risk
or direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, or whose said
behavior, actions and/or incidents or convictions have resulted in or may
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. Such affidavit
shall be supplemented and updated not less than one hundred fifty (150) days
nor more than one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of issuance of the
business license and at the time of the application for renewal of the business
license.
      5.   The use permitted by this section is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
         a.   A facility is devoted to or used as other than a residential
facility for persons with a disability; or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the department of human
services, department of health or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked; or
         c.   The facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in
this section.
      6.   In the FR-0.5, FR-1, FR-2.5, FR-5, FR-10, FR-20, R-1-4, R-1-8, R-1-
10, R-1-15, R-1-21, R-1-43 and R-1-87 zones, no residential facility for
persons with a disability shall exceed six (6) residents, not including staff,
or the family that owns the residence.
      7.   In the R-2-8, R-2-10, R-M and HV zones, no residential facility for
persons with disabilities shall exceed twelve (12) residents, not including
staff, or the family that owns the residence.
      8.   No residential facilities for persons with disabilities shall be
permitted in the P, NC, C-1, C-2 and O-R-D zones.
      9.   Residential facilities for persons with disabilities that are
substance abuse facilities and are located within five hundred feet (500') of a
school, shall provide, in accordance with rules established by the department
of human services under Utah Code Annotated title 62A, chapter 2, licensure of
program and facilities:
         a.   A security plan satisfactory to local law enforcement
authorities;
         b.   Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents; and
         c.   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures.
      10.   No residential facility for persons with disabilities shall be
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such facility as measured
from nearest property line of the existing facility to nearest property line of
the proposed facility.
   D.   Reasonable Accommodations: None of the foregoing conditions shall be
interpreted to limit reasonable accommodations necessary to allow the
establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for person(s) with a
disability.
      1.   Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable
accommodation shall make application to the office of the city manager. Said
applications shall specifically articulate, in writing, the following:
         a.   The name, mailing address, and phone number of the applicant;
         b.   The nature and extent of the disability;
         c.   An exact statement of the ordinance or policy from which the
applicant needs a reasonable accommodation;
         d.   The applicant's proposed reasonable accommodations;
         e.   A statement detailing why a reasonable accommodation is
necessary; and
         f.   The physical address of the property where the applicant intends
on living;
      2.   When considering whether or not to grant a reasonable accommodation,
the city manager shall consider the following factors, among others deemed
appropriate and applicable:
         a.   The land use ordinance applicable to the property;
         b.   The parking, traffic, and noise impact on the neighborhood if the
reasonable accommodation is granted;
         c.   Whether or not the accommodation will be an undue burden or
expense to the city;
         d.   The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit
the applicant;
         e.   The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit
the community;
         f.   Whether or not the accommodation fundamentally alters the
citywide land use ordinance and whether or not the accommodation would likely
create a fundamental change in the character of a residential neighborhood;
         g.   Whether or not the applicant has demonstrated that the
accommodation will affirmatively enhance the applicant's life, or ameliorate
the effects of the applicant's disability, or the lives or disabilities on
whose behalf the entity is applying;
         h.   Whether or not, without the accommodation, similar housing is
available in the city of Holladay for the applicant or group of applicants;
         i.   Given the scope of the accommodation requested, what is the
impact on the immediate neighborhood; and
         j.   The requirements of applicable federal and state laws and
regulations;
      3.   Written findings and conclusions of the city manager shall be sent
to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the decision by the city
planning commission; and
      4.   If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, such decision
may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 2013-10, 5-9-2013)
13.98.030: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with title 10,
chapter 9a, section 516, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
   B.   Compliance: "Residential facilities for elderly persons" shall comply
with all requirements of section 10-9a-516, Utah Code Annotated, and also the
following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall meet all applicable building codes, safety codes,
land use regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, and health ordinance
applicable to single-family or similar dwellings; except as may be modified by
the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a substantial risk or
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others;
      3.   Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a
dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is located;
      4.   The facility shall be capable of being used as a residential
facility for elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations that
would change the structure's residential character;
      5.   The use granted and permitted by this section is nontransferable and
terminates if the structure is devoted to any use other than as a residential
facility for the elderly or if the structure fails to comply with the
applicable health, safety, land use and building codes; and
      6.   No residential facility for elderly persons which facility has more
than five (5) elderly persons in residence shall be established or maintained
within three-fourths (3/4) of a mile measured in a straight line between the
closest property lines of the lots or parcels of similar facilities, or
residential facilities for persons with disabilities. (Ord. 2013-10, 5-9-2013)
13.98.040: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR GROUP HOMES FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES AND
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE WHEN ALLOWED AS A PERMITTED OR
CONDITIONAL USE WITHIN THE CITY OF HOLLADAY:
   A.   Any newly constructed, or remodeled facility in a residential zone or
immediately abutting a residential zone shall comply with the following design
standards:
      1.   All setbacks shall be according to the requirements of the
residential zone in which the facility sits, or if the facility is in a
commercial zone abutting a residential zone the setbacks shall be those of the
abutting residential zone;
      2.   All required parking areas may be located either in the rear yard
area of the lot, or behind the main building or garage;
      3.   The maximum height restrictions of the individual residential zone
shall apply to any newly constructed or remodeled facility or building;
      4.   In order for new construction to reflect the design and character of
the existing neighborhood the following standards shall be met:
         a.   The roof design of the proposed structure or remodel shall be a
pitched roof of the same slope as the most common roof slope of the homes on
the side of the block on which the building is proposed; and
         b.   The type of exterior materials shall be of traditional home
finished materials of brick, siding, or stucco. The use of these materials
shall be applied in such a manner as to blend in with the neighborhood where
the building is located and not draw undue attention to the building because of
the materials, their color and combination being uncharacteristic of the other
buildings in the neighborhood;
      5.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a substantial risk or
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
      6.   To the extent similar requirements to any contained in this section
are contained in the specific zone in which any facility referred to herein may
be located, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, and the requirements
stated herein shall be considered to be in addition to presently existing land
use regulations, subject to the conflicts resolution provisions of this
subsection. (Ord. 2013-10, 5-9-2013)
13.98.050: NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES:
   A.   Nonresidential treatment facilities shall not be built within the city
of Holladay except as specifically allowed as a permitted or conditional use by
proper designation in a zone or zones in this title. Each permitted facility,
or facility allowed as a conditional use, shall conform to the following
requirements:
      1.   The facility shall comply with all building, safety, land use and
health regulations, the Americans with disabilities act, fire regulations, and
all applicable state core standards and licensing requirements, and any
standards set forth in any contract with a state agency.
      2.   The following site development standards and parking standards shall
be applicable:
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development
standards applicable to a business in the zone in which the facility may be
located; and
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same
as the number required for an office building with similar size, occupancy, and
density in the same zone.
      3.   Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or
certified by the department of human services or the department of health to
establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a certified copy of such license with the city recorder;
         b.   Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with application for a
business license, compliance with the Americans with disabilities act.
      4.   The use permitted by this section is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
         a.   A facility is devoted to or used as other than a nonresidential
facility; or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the department of human
services, department of health or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked, or the facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in this
section.
      5.   No nonresidential treatment facility shall be established or
maintained within seven hundred feet (700') measured in a straight line between
the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of the following facilities:
         a.   A residential facility for persons with a disability;
         b.   A residential facility for elderly persons with more than five
(5) elderly persons in a residence; or
         c.   Any of the following facilities: protective housing facility,
transitional housing facility, assisted living facility or rehabilitation/
treatment facility, a nonresidential treatment facility, and elementary
schools.
      6.   No facility shall be made available to an individual who has
demonstrated, by prior behavior, actions and/or criminal convictions, or as a
resident, that he or she:
         a.   May be determined to be or does constitute a direct threat or
substantial risk to the health or safety of other individuals; or
         b.   Has or may engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
      7.   To the extent similar requirements to any contained in this section
are contained in the specific zone in which any facility referred to herein may
be located, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, and the requirements
stated herein shall be considered to be in addition to presently existing land
use regulations, subject to the conflicts resolution provisions of this
subsection. (Ord. 2013-10, 5-9-2013)
13.98.060: LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Only such uses and facilities as are specifically authorized in this
chapter and in this title as permitted or conditional uses shall be allowed.
All other uses and facilities are prohibited. (Ord. 2013-10, 5-9-2013)
CHAPTER 13.100
APPENDIX A - ALLOWED USES
SECTION:
13.100.010: Table Of Allowed Uses
13.100.010: TABLE OF ALLOWED USES:
 
C = Conditional use P = Permitted use - = Not allowed SDMP = Site development
                                                             master plan
 
           R-1-4,  R-1-
    All FR R-1-8,  2 1,    R-2- 8/
Use Zones  R-1-10, R-1-    R-2-10  R-M PO HCR O-R-D P RO NC C-1 C-2 HV R/M-U LU
           R-1-15  4 3,
                   R-1-8 7
                                                        R-  R-
                                                        1-  1-
                                                        4,  2
                                                        R-  1,  R-
                                                  All   1-  R-  2-
Use                                               FR    8,  1-  8/  R-M PO  HCR O-  P   RO  NC  C-1 C-2 HV  R/M- LU
                                                  Zones R-  4   R-              R-D                         U
                                                        1-  3,  2-
                                                        10, R-  10
                                                        R-  1-
                                                        1-  8 7
                                                        15
   Accessory Uses*
 Accessory dwelling unit                         p23   p23 p23 p23 p23                          
Alcoholic beverage retail sales14:                                                          
 Bar establishment                               -     -   -   -   -   -   P22 C   -   -   -   -   C   -
 Bar establishment, equity                       -     -   -   -   -   -   P22 C   C   -   -   -   C   -
 Bar establishment, fraternal                    -     -   -   -   -   -   P22 C   -   -   -   -   C   -
 Brewery                                         -     -   -   -   -   -   P22 C   -   -   -   -   C   -
 Off premises                                    -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   P   P   P   P
 On premises banquet and catering                -     -   -   -   -   -   P22 C   P   -   -   -   C   P
 On premises beer retailer                       -     -   -   -   -   -   P22 P   P   -   -   -   P   P
 Restaurant - beer only                          -     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   P   P   P   P
 Restaurant - full service                       -     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   P   P   P   P
 Restaurant - limited service                    -     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   P   P   P   P
 Single event permit                             -     P   P   P   P   P   P22 P   P   -   P   P   P   P
Drive-through                                     -     -   -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -   -   C   P   -
Family food production                            P1    P1  P1  -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Flea market/farmers' market                       -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   P   -   -   P   P   P
Guesthouse and/or caretaker quarters              C9    C9  C9  -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Home daycare/preschool                            C3    C3  C3  C3  C3  C3     -   -   -   -   -   -   -        See
Home daycare/preschool, small                     C4    P4  P4  P4  P4  P4     -   -   -   -   -   -   -        chapter
Home occupation                                   P5    P5  P5  P5  P5  -   P5  P5  -   -   -   -   -   -   See  13.63
Household pets                                    P10   P10 P10 P10 P10 -   P   P   -   -   -   -   -   -   SDMP of this
Livestock, large                                  P1    -   P1  -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -        title
Livestock, small                                  P1    P1  P1  -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Merchandise vending machine, outside              -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   P
Micro-education entity                            P24   P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24 P24
Mobile food trailer                               -     -   -   -   -   -   P18 P   P17 -   -   P   P   P
Mobile food truck                                 -     -   -   -   -   C18 P18 P   P17 -   -   P   P   P
Outside dining                                    -     -   -   -   -   -   C   C   C   -   C   C   C   C
Outside display                                   -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   C   P   P   P
Outside storage                                   -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   C   C   -
Permanent cosmetics                               -     -   -   -   -   C14 P   P14 -   -   P14 P14 P14 P14
Resource recycling collection                     -     -   -   -   -   -   P18 P8  P8  -   P8  P8  P8  -
Seasonal sales                                    -     -   -   -   -   -   P13 P13 P13 -   P13 P13 P13 P13
Short term rental                                 -     -   -   C6  C6  -      C   -   -   -   -   -   -
Sportsman's kennel, cattery, animal hobby permit  P11   P11 P11 -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Stable, private                                   -     -   P1  -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Temporary buildings incidental to construction,   C13   C13 C13 C13 C13 C13 P13 P13 P13 -   P13 P13 P13 P13
including living quarters for security
Temporary sales/use                               -     -   -   -   -   -   P13 -   P13 -   -   P13 P13 -
   Primary Uses
Agriculture:                                                                                       See
                                                                                                                 chapter
                                                                                                            See  13.63
 Agriculture                                     P     P   P   P   P   -      -   P   -   -   P   P   -   SDMP of this
                                                                                                                 title

Entertainment and recreation:                                                               
 Arcade                                          -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   P   -
 Auditorium, exhibit hall, convention center     -     -   -   -   -   -      P   -   -   -   C   P   -        See
 Motion picture theater, live theater            -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   -        chapter
 Private nonprofit recreational grounds and      C     C   C   C   -   C      -   C   -   -   C   C   -   See  13.63
  facilities                                                                                                SDMP of this
 Professional, fraternal and social association  -     -   -   -   -   P   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   -        title
 Recreation, commercial, indoor                  -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   -
 Recreation, commercial, outdoor                 -     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   C   C   -
 Recreation, fitness center                      -     -   -   -   -   C14 -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P
Industrial and manufacturing:                                                               
 Building materials sales and services           -     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -        See
 Disinfecting and exterminating                  -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   C   -   See  chapter
 Educational and scientific research, medical/   -     -   -   -   -   P   -   P   -   C   -   P   P   -   SDMP 13.63
  dental laboratories                                                                                            of this
 Landscaping installation and maintenance        -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   C   P   P   -        title
 Light Manufacturing and Assembly                -     -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -   -   -   C   C   -
Planned unit development:                                                                          See
 Mixed-use planned unit development              -     -   -   -   -   C   P   C   -   -   -   C   C   C        chapter
 Nonresidential planned unit development         -     -   -   -   -   C   P   C   -   -   -   C   C   -   See  13.63
                                                                                                            SDMP of this
 Residential planned unit development            C     C   C   C   C   -      C   -   -   -   -   -   -        title

Public:                                                                                            See
 Cemetery                                        -     -   -   -   -   -      -   P   -   -   -   -   -        chapter
 Charter school                                  -     -   -   -   -   P   P   -   P   -   -   -   -   -   See  13.63
 Educational facility, public                    -     -   -   -   -   -      -   P   -   -   -   -   -   SDMP of this
 Public use                                      -     -   -   -   -   -      -   P   -   -   -   -   -        title
 Quasi-public use                                -     -   -   -   -   -      -   P   -   -   -   -   -
Residential:                                                                                
 Bed and breakfast                               C2    -   C2  C2  C2  -      -   -   C   P   P   P   P
 Dwelling:                                                                                 
    Live/work                                 -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   P   -   -   -   -
    Multiple-family                           -     -   -   -   P   -   P   P   -   -   C14 P14 P14 P
    Single-family                             P     P   P   P   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    Two-family                                -     -   -   P   P   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Group homes:                                                                              
    Assisted living facilities, type I:                        -                                See
     Large                                    -     -   -   -   C   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   C   -   See  chapter
     Small                                    -     -   -   -   C   -      -   -   -   C   P   P   -   SDMP 13.63
     Limited                                  -     -   -   P   P   -      -   -   C   P   P   P   -        of this
    Assisted living facilities, type II:                                                       title
     Large                                    -     -   -   -   C   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   C   -
     Small                                    -     -   -   -   C   -      -   -   -   C   P   P   -
     Limited                                  -     C   -   C   P   -      -   -   C   P   P   P   -
    Nursing home                              -     -   -   -   C   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    Residential facilities for persons with a P     P   P   P   P   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   P
  disability
    Residential facility for elderly persons  P     P   P   P   P   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Temporary lodging, hotel, motel, etc.           -     -   -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   C   P   P
Retail:                                                                                     
 Drugstore (pharmacy)                            -     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -   -   P   P   P   P16
 Gas station                                     -     -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -   -   -   C   C   -
 Groceries/food                                  -     -   -   -   -   -   P   C   -   -   P   P   P   -
 Mobile food court                               -     -   -   -   -   -      C   C   -   -   C   C   C        See
 Motor vehicle sales, rental (new only)          -     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   C   -        chapter
 Motorcycle sales, rental                        -     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   P   -   See  13.63
 Neighborhood market, large                      -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   SDMP of this
 Neighborhood market, small                      -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   P        title
 Nursery, garden center                          -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   C   P   P   -
 Recreational vehicles sales, rental             -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   C   -
 Restaurant                                      -     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -   -   P   P   P   P16
 Retail, general                                 -     -   -   -   -   -   P   C   -   -   P   P   P   P16
 Sexually oriented business                      -     -   -   -   -   -      C   -   -   -   -   -   -
Services:                                                                                   
 Banking and credit                              -     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   -   P   P   -
 Blood plasma facility                           -     -   -   -   -   -   P12 C   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Commercial daycare, preschool                   C12   C12 C12 C12 C12 -   C12 P14 P12 P12 P12 P12 P12 C
 Commercial kennel                               -     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -
 Commercial stable (on lots of 1 acre or more)   -     -   C   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Dry cleaning15                                  -     -   -   -   -   -   C19 -   -   -   -   P   P   -
 Educational facility, private                   -     -   -   -   -   P   P   C   C   C   -   C   C   -
 Equipment rental and leasing                    -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   P   P   -
 Funeral home, crematory                         -     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -
 Hospital                                        -     -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -   -   -   -   C   -        See
 Imaging center                                  -     -   -   -   -   -      P   -   -   -   -   -   -        chapter
 Laundry, self-service                           -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   P   P   P16 See  13.63
 Medical, dental, and related health             -     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   P   P   P   P   SDMP of this
 Medical laboratory                              -     -   -   -   -   -      C   -   -   -   -   -   -        title
 Motor vehicle repair                            -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   C   P   -
 Nonresidential treatment facility               -     -   -   -   -   C      -   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Personal service                                -     -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -   P   P   P   P16
 Pet grooming/pet daycare                        -     -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   P16
 Professional offices and business services      -     -   -   -   -   P   -   P   -   C   P   P   P   P
 Public health center                            -     -   -   -   -   -      P   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Reception center                                -     -   -   -   C   -   C   -   -   -   -   P   P   -
 Small engine repair, appliance, electrical, and -     -   -   -   -   -      -   -   -   -   C   P   -
  machine repair
 Surgical out-patient facility                   -     -   -   -   -   -      C   -   -   -   -   -   -
 Veterinary services                             -     -   -   -   -   -   P   -   -   -   -   P   P   -
Transportation, communications, and utility                                                 
facilities:
 Local, suburban and interurban transportation   -     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -   -   P   P   P   -        See
 Public parking                                  -     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   -   P   P   P   P   See  chapter
 Radio and television broadcasting studio        -     -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -   -   -   C   C   -   SDMP 13.63
 Utility company, public                         C     C   C   C   -   P   P   P   C   -   C   P   P   -        of this
 Utility facility company                        C     C   C   C   -   P   P   P   C   -   C   P   P   -        title
 Wireless telecommunications                     See
                                                  chapter 13.83 of this title
 
Notes:
* Includes accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted
or conditional use.
1.   See section
13.76.240, “Animal And Fowl Restrictions”, of this title.
2.   See section
13.76.715, “Bed And Breakfast”, of this title.
3.   See section
13.76.720, “Home Daycare/Preschool”, of this title.
4.   See section
13.76.725, “Home Daycare/Preschool, Small”, of this title.
.5.    License Required according to Section
5.54.010, “Home Occupations Defined”; Regulations according to Section
13.76.730, “Home Occupation”, of this title.
6.   See section
13.76.735, “Short Term Rental”, of this title.
7.   Reserved.
8.   See section
13.76.750, “Resource Recycling Collection Facility”, of this title.
9.   See section
13.14.110, “Accessory Buildings”, of this title.
10.   Provided the area is not in a watershed area.
11.   Subject to title 8, “Animals”, of this code.
12.   See section
13.76.260, “Commercial Daycare/Commercial Preschool Facilities”, of this title.
13.   See sections
13.76.250, “Temporary Sales/Seasonal Sales Permit”, and
13.76.501, “Temporary Uses”, of this title.
14.   When accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
15.   Subject to well source protection ordinance.
16.   May not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
17.   By contract with public entity only.
18.   Subject to Section
13.76.770 “Mobile Food Businesses”.
19.   Drop off and pick up only.
20.   Indoor display, sales and service only.
21.   Restricted district only.
22.   Subject to the following controls:
   a.   A minimum separation of 200' shall be maintained between the use and
any residentially zoned or used property lying outside the boundary of the HCR
Zone; and,
   b.   No outside music, entertainment or special events are, or shall be,
permitted unless authorized by the City via issuance of a Special Events Permit
or similar consent.
23.   When accessory to a detached single-family dwelling.
24.   Business license required and subject to all regulations in Title 5.63
“Home-Based Micro-schools and Micro-Education Entities”.
(Ord. 2014-15, 8-21-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-17, 12-10-2015; Ord. 2016-03, 3-17-
2016; Ord. 2018-06, 5-17-2018; Ord. 2019-03, 2-28-2019; Ord. 2019-07, 4-4-2019;
Ord. 2019-09, 5-16-2019; Ord. 2021-02, 3-4-2021; Ord. 2021-24, 9-9-2021; Ord.
2022-03, 1-20-2022; Ord. 2022-15, 6-16-2022; Ord. 2024-04, 3-21-2024; Ord.
2024-18, 11-7-2024; Ord. 2025-03, 3-20-2025)
CHAPTER 13.101
APPENDIX B - LAND USE AND APPEAL AUTHORITIES
SECTION:
13.101.010: Types Of Decisions And Applicable Authorities
13.101.010:    TYPES OF DECISIONS AND APPLICABLE AUTHORITIES:
Decision To Be Made Recommending Body Land Use Authority Appeal Authority
Decision To Be  Recommending Land Use    Appeal Authority
Made            Body         Authority
Legislative                             
decisions:
Adoption or
amendment of    Planning     City        Third District Court; 30 days from decision
the General     Commission   Council
Plan
Adoption or
amendment to
the land use    Planning     City
ordinance       Commission   Council     Third District Court; 30 days from decision
(includes
subdivision
language)
Temporary land  None         City        Third District Court; 30 days from decision
use regulation               Council
                Historical
Designation of  Preservation City
a historic site Commission/  Council     Third District Court; 30 days from decision
                Planning
                Commission
Annexation      Planning     City        Third District Court; 30 days from decision
applications    Commission   Council
Administrative                          
decisions:
                             Planning
                             Commission;
Conditional use TRC/         may be
permit,         Community    delegated   City Council; 10 days from decision
conditional use Development  to
site plan       Director     Community
                             Development
                             Director
                TRC/         Community
Site plan,      Community    Development City Council; 10 days from decision
final           Development  Director
                Director
                TRC/         Community
Change of use   Community    Development Administrative Appeals Officer
                Development  Director
                Director
                TRC/
Conditional use Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
amendment       Development  Commission
                Director
Temporary use                Community
permit          None         Development Planning Commission; 10 days from decision
                             Director
Home            Business     Community
occupations,    license      Development Planning Commission; 10 days from decision
phone and mail  official     Director
only
Home            Business     Planning
occupations,    license      Commission  City Council; 10 days from decision
with customers  official
Establishment   TRC/
of limit of     Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
disturbance in  Development  Commission
the FR zones    Director
Number of off   TRC/
street parking  Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
stalls in the   Development  Commission
FR zones        Director
                TRC/
Site plan in    Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
the FR zone     Development  Commission
                Director
Site
Development
Master Plan     Planning     City        Third District Court; 30 days from decision
(SDMP) and R/M- Commission   Council
U Zone
amendments
Site plan       TRC/CDD,     Planning
approval, HV,   Design       Commission  City Council; 10 days from decision
HCR Zone        Review Board
Site
development                  Community
plan for        None         Development Administrative Appeals Officer
permitted use                Director
in the FCOZ
Site            TRC/
development     Community    Planning
plan for        Development  Commission  City Council; 10 days from decision
conditional use Director
in the FCOZ
Site plan       TRC/
approval in the Community    Planning
Commercial      Development  Commission  City Council; 10 days from decision
Zones, C-1 and  Director
C-2 and R/M-U
                TRC/
Subdivision in  Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
the FCOZ        Development  Commission
                Director
Waiver of slope TRC/
protection      Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
standards in    Development  Commission
the FCOZ        Director
Flood damage                 Community
prevention      None         Development Administrative Appeals Officer
regulations                  Director
Determination   TRC/
of boundaries   Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
of mapped       Development  Commission
hazards         Director
Exceptions from City         Planning
development     Engineer     Commission  City Council; 10 days from decision
near waterways
Tree protection              Community
standards       None         Development Administrative Appeals Officer
                             Director
                             Community
Fencing permit  None         Development Administrative Appeals Officer
                             Director
                TRC/
Planned unit    Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
development     Development  Commission
                Director
                TRC/
Shared parking  Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
                Development  Commission
                Director
                             Community
Sign permit     None         Development Administrative Appeals Officer
                             Director
                TRC/
Modification to Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
a historic site Development  Commission
                Director
                TRC/
Special         Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
exception       Development  Commission
                Director
Additional uses TRC/
for historic    Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
buildings       Development  Commission
                Director
Subdivision:    TRC/
preliminary     Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
plan and plat,  Development  Commission
                Director
Subdivision     TRC/         TRC/        Dispute related to the Final plat of review process regarding public
final plan and  Community    Community   improvements or engineering standards: “Appeal Panel”; 10 days from
plat, no new    Development  Development applicant request.
public street   Director     Director    All other disputes/appeals, Planning Commission; 10 days from decision
                                         UCA §10-9a-604.2(8a)
Subdivision                  City
final plat,                  Council, to
dedication of   Planning     accept      Third District Court; 30 days from decision
new public      Commission   public
street                       street
                             dedication
                             TRC/
Lot line        None         Community   Planning Commission; 10 days from decision
adjustment                   Development
                             Director
Vacation/       Planning     City
amendment of a  Commission   Council     Third District Court; 30 days from decision
public street
                TRC/         TRC/
Subdivision     Community    Community   City Council; 10 days from decision
plat amendment  Development  Development
                Director     Director
Consolidation                Community
of parcels      TRC          Development Planning Commission; 10 days from decision
                             Director
Building                     Community
permit, zoning  TRC          Development Administrative Appeals Officer
compliance                   Director
Street          TRC/
identification  Community    City        Third District Court; 30 days from decision
change          Development  Council
                Director
Quasi-judicial:                         
Administrative               Community
interpretations None         Development Planning Commission; 10 days from decision
                             Director
                TRC/
Nonconformity   Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
determinations  Development  Commission
                Director
                TRC/
Variances       Community    Appeal      Third District Court; 30 days from decision
                Development  Authority
                Director
Zone boundary                Community
or map          TRC          Development Planning Commission
interpretation               Director
Revocation of a TRC/
conditional use Community    Planning    City Council; 10 days from decision
permit          Development  Commission
                Director
Enforcement of               Community
provisions of   None         Development Administrative Hearing Officer
this title                   Director
 
(Ord. 2018-05, 5-17-2018; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 2-1-2024)
CHAPTER 13.102
APPENDIX C - NOTICING
SECTION:
13.102.010: Noticing
13.102.010: NOTICING:
        POSTED (ON THE CITY WEBSITE                 PUBLISHED (UTAH PUBLIC
ACTION: OR IN AT LEAST THREE (3)    DIRECT MAILING: NOTICE WEBSITE)* Previously
        PUBLIC PLACES WITHIN THE                    General Circulation:
        CITY:
                    POSTED (ON THE CITY                     PUBLISHED (UTAH
                    WEBSITE OR IN AT                        PUBLIC NOTICE
ACTION:             LEAST THREE (3)     DIRECT MAILING:     WEBSITE)*
                    PUBLIC PLACES                           Previously General
                    WITHIN THE CITY:                        Circulation:
Agenda, Posting of; Minimum 24 hours in                     Minimum 24 hours in
City Council,       advance of meeting,                     advance of meeting,
Planning            In Accordance with                     In Accordance with
Commission, Design  Utah State Code, as                     Utah State Code, as
Review Board, Tree  amended.                                amended.
Board.
                    10 days prior to    Required mailing 10
                    the first hearing   days prior to the
                    before Planning     first hearing to
                    Commission and City each Affected       10 days prior to
                    Council. Any        Entity and to each  the first hearing
Zone Map Amendments subsequent hearings Property Owner      before the Planning
                    shall be posted at  whose property is   Commission and City
                    least 24 hours      at least partially  Council.
                    prior to hearing.   within the area to
                    On the subject      be zoned or
                    property .          rezoned.
                    10 days prior to
                    the first hearing   Required mailing 10 10 days prior to
                    before the Planning days prior to the   the first hearing.
General Plan        Commission and City first hearing to    Any subsequent
Amendments          Council. Any        each Affected       hearings shall be
                    subsequent hearings Entity, Wasatch     so published at
                    shall be posted at  Front Regional      least 24 hours
                    least 24 hours      Council.            prior to hearing.
                    prior to hearing.
                    10 days prior to
                    the first hearing                       10 days prior to
                    before the Planning                     the first hearing.
Ordinance           Commission and City                     Any subsequent
Amendments          Council. Any                           hearings shall be
                    subsequent hearings                     so published at
                    shall be posted at                      least 24 hours
                    least 24 hours                          prior to hearing.
                    prior to hearing.
                    10 days prior to    Required mailing 10 10 days prior to
                    the first hearing   days prior to the   the first hearing.
                    before City         first hearing to    Any subsequent
Historic            Council. Any        the affected        hearings shall be
Designations        subsequent hearings property and to     so published at
                    shall be posted at  each property owner least 24 hours
                    least 24 hours      within 500 ft.      prior to hearing.
                    prior to hearing.
                                        Courtesy mailing 10
                                        days prior to the
Appeals of a;       10 days prior to    appeal,             10 days prior to
Administrative      the date set for    reconsideration, or the date set for
Decision, Planning  the appeal,         call-up hearing, to the appeal,
Commission          reconsideration, or all parties who     reconsideration, or
Decisions           call-up hearing.    received mailed     call-up hearing.
                                        notice for the
                                        action being
                                        appealed.
                                        Courtesy mailing 10
                    10 days prior to    days prior to the   10 days prior to
Conditional Use     the first hearing   first hearing       the first hearing
Permit              before the Planning before the Planning before the Planning
                    Commission. On the  Commission, to      Commission.
                    subject property.   Property Owners
                                        within 500 ft.
Administrative                          Courtesy mailing 10
Conditional Use     10 days prior to    days prior to Final No published notice
Permit              Final Action.       Action, to adjacent required.
                                        Property Owners.
                                        Courtesy mailing 10
Variance Requests,  10 days prior to    days prior to the   10 days prior to
Non- conforming Use the first hearing   first hearing       the first hearing
Modifications       before the Appeal   before the Appeal   before the Appeal
                    Officer.            Officer, to owners  Officer.
                                        within 500 ft.
Annexations         In accordance with current State law. Consult with the City
                    of Holladay Recorder’s Office.
                    10 days prior to    Courtesy mailing 10 10 days prior to
Subdivision &       the first hearing.  days prior to the   the first hearing
Condominium Plat    On the subject      first hearing to    before the Planning
Applications        property.           Property Owners     Commission and City
                                        within 500 ft.      Council.
                                        Courtesy mailing 10 10 days prior to
Subdivision &       10 days prior to    days prior to the   the first hearing
Condominium Plat    the first hearing.  first hearing to    before the Planning
Amendments                              Property Owners     Commission and City
                                        within 500 ft.      Council.
Implementing an                         The City shall give
Amendment to                            a thirty (30) day
Adopted                                 mailed notice and
Specifications for                     an opportunity to    
Public Improvements                     comment to anyone
that Apply to a                         who has requested
Subdivision or                          the notice in
Development                             writing.
                                        Required mailing to
                    10 days prior to    each Property Owner
                    each hearing before of record of each
Vacating or         the City Council on Parcel or Lot that
Changing a Public   or near the Street, is accessed by the  10 days prior to
Street, Right-of-   Right-of-Way, or    Public Street,      the hearing before
Way, or Easement    easement in a       Right-of-Way or     the City Council.
                    manner that is      easement at least
                    calculated to alert 10 days prior to
                    the public.         the hearing before
                                        the City Council.
1) For all Applications, notice will be given to the Applicant of date, time,
and place of the public hearing and public meeting to consider the Application
and of any Final Action on a pending Application.
2) All notices, unless otherwise specified in this Code or by State law, must
state the general nature of the proposed action; describe the land affected;
and state the time, place and date of the hearing. Once opened,the hearing may
be continued, if necessary, without re-publication of notice until the hearing
is closed.
3) A copy of each Staff report regarding the Applicant, or the pending
Application, shall be provided to the Applicant at least three (3) business
days before the public hearing or public meeting.
4) If notice provided per this Section is not challenged within 30 days after
the meeting or action for which notice is given, the notice is considered
adequate and proper.
5) All days listed are the minimum number of days required.
 
General Public Notice Requirements.
   (a)   For each land use application which requires a public hearing or
public meeting, public notice shall be done as provided within this chapter,
except as required by Utah State Code.
   (b)   For each land use application which requires a public hearing or
public meeting, and public notice is not specified by Utah State Code, the City
shall provide notice (including the type of meeting, date, time, location,
description of land use application, and City contact information) as follows:
      (1)   Notice of Public Hearing. The City shall provide notice of a public
hearing at least three days before the hearing that shall be posted in at least
three public locations within the City, on the City's official website, and on
the Utah Public Notice Website.
      (2)   Notice for Public Meetings. The City shall provide notice of a
public meeting at least 24 hours before the meeting that shall be posted in at
least three public locations within the City, on the City's official website,
and on the Utah Public Notice Website.
Third-Party Public Notice.
   (a)   For each land use application that requires a public meeting or
hearing that concerns a specific parcel of property, public third-party notice
shall be done as provided within this chapter, except as required by Utah State
Code. The City shall:
      (1)   Mail notice at least five days before the public hearing or public
meeting to the record owner of each parcel within 500 feet of the property that
is the subject of the hearing, including property owners within the City
boundaries and property owners within adjacent jurisdictions; or
      (2)   Post notice at least ten days before the public hearing or public
meeting on the property with a sign of sufficient size, durability, print
quality, and location that is reasonably calculated to give notice to
passersby.
         a.   The City shall take a photo verifying that the notice has been
posted. The City shall inspect and verify, with another photo, at least one
other time during notice period. This verification shall be included in the
application packet for the public meeting/hearing.
         b.   This posted notice should include the following: type of meeting,
date, time, location, description of land use application, and City contact
information.
         c.   If this posted notice is destroyed, vandalized or disappears
during the notice period, the City's ability to hold the public meeting/hearing
will not be delayed, and it will not affect the validity of decisions made at
the public meeting/hearing.
   (b)   For all rezone, residential subdivision, and commercial site plan
(within 250 feet of a residential zone district boundary) land use applications
that require a public meeting or hearing, the City shall mail notice to
adjacent property owners and post notice on the property as required by State
Code and this section.
State Code Required Notices.
   (a)   General Plan.
   See U.C.A. 1953, §10-9a-203 and 10-9a-204.
   (b)   Zone District Map and Land Development Code.
   See U.C.A. 1953, §10-9a-205
   (c)   Subdivision Amendments.
   See U.C.A. 1953, §10-9a-207.
   (d)   Street Vacations, Alteration, Amendments or Closure.
   See U.C.A. 1953, §10-9a-207 and §10-9a-208.
   (e)   Miscellaneous Notice Requirements.
   See U.C.A. 1953, § 10-9a-206, § 10-9a-210, § 10-9a-211, § 10-9a-212, and §
10-9a-213.
   (f)   Applicant Notice—Waiver of Requirements.
   See U.C.A. 1953, § 10-9a-202.
   (g)   Notice Challenge.
   See U.C.A. 1953, § 10-9a-209.
(Ord. 2021-18, 8-5-2021: amd. Ord. 2024-21, 11-21-2024)
TITLE 14
HIGHWAYS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 14.04
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14.04.010: Class C Roads
14.04.020: Construction
14.04.030: City Roads
14.04.040: Curb Line
14.04.050: Department
14.04.060: Fence Line
14.04.070: Highway Authorities
14.04.080: Limited Access Facility
14.04.090: Maintenance
14.04.100: Official Map
14.04.110: Person
14.04.120: Public Highway
14.04.130: Right Of Way
14.04.140: Section
14.04.150: Sidewalk
14.04.010: CLASS C ROADS:
"Class C roads" mean the same as "city road", defined in this chapter. (1999
Code)
14.04.020: CONSTRUCTION:
"Construction" means the construction, reconstruction, replacement and
improvement of the public highways, including the acquisition of rights of way
and material sites. (1999 Code)
14.04.030: CITY ROADS:
"City roads" include all public roads and streets within the city that are not
designated as state highways. (1999 Code)
14.04.040: CURB LINE:
"Curb line" means a line on either side of the center of a highway ten feet
(10') inside the right of way line and running parallel to the right of way
line. Any individual exceptions to this definition must be approved by the
city. (1999 Code)
14.04.050: DEPARTMENT:
"Department" means the city community development department or other designee
of the city. (1999 Code)
14.04.060: FENCE LINE:
"Fence line" means a line on either side of the center of a highway coterminous
with the outside boundary or limits of the highway. (1999 Code)
14.04.070: HIGHWAY AUTHORITIES:
"Highway authorities" means the state road commission, the city, or its
designated representative. (1999 Code)
14.04.080: LIMITED ACCESS FACILITY:
"Limited access facility" means a highway, road or street especially designed
for through traffic and over, from or to which neither owners nor occupants of
abutting lands, nor other persons, have any right to easement, or have only a
limited right or easement of access, light, air or view. (1999 Code)
14.04.090: MAINTENANCE:
"Maintenance" means the performance of all things necessary to keep a public
highway in serviceable condition. (1999 Code)
14.04.100: OFFICIAL MAP:
"Official map" means the official maps of the city, as adopted by the city
council in accordance with law, showing the highways, freeways, parks,
parkways, and sites for public buildings or works, including subsurface
facilities, in the acquisition, financing, or construction of which the city
has participated or may be called upon to participate. (1999 Code)
14.04.110: PERSON:
"Person" includes any individual, firm, company, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, association, other entity, or any group or combination,
and the plural as well as the singular, unless the intent to give a more
limited meaning is disclosed by the context. (1999 Code)
14.04.120: PUBLIC HIGHWAY:
"Public highway" or "highway" means any road, street, lane, court, place,
viaduct, tunnel, culvert, bridge, alley, or other public way situated within
the city laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated, abandoned or
open to the public, or made such in any action for the partition of real
property, or such other public property so designated by any ordinance or
statute, and includes the entire area within the right of way. (1999 Code)
14.04.130: RIGHT OF WAY:
"Right of way" means land, property or an interest therein, usually in a strip,
acquired for or devoted to use as a public highway. (1999 Code)
14.04.140: SECTION:
"Section" means a section of this title unless some other section is
specifically mentioned. (1999 Code)
14.04.150: SIDEWALK:
"Sidewalk" means that area between the curb line and the fence line on either
side of a highway. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.08
CITY COUNCIL AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
14.08.010: Jurisdiction And Control
14.08.020: Gifts, Bequests And Donations To City
14.08.030: Contribution Of Property By City
14.08.040: Determination Of Width Of Right Of Way
14.08.050: Preparation And Storage Of Plats And Descriptions
14.08.060: Agreements With Political Subdivisions And Federal Government
14.08.070: Acquisition Of Property And Property Rights For Limited Access
Facilities
14.08.080: Authority To Provide And Maintain Limited Access Facilities
14.08.090: Restricting Use Of Highway
14.08.100: Local Service Roads
14.08.010: JURISDICTION AND CONTROL:
   A.   All highways, roads, paths, and ways within the city that are not
designated as federal or state, special highways, roads, paths, or ways shall
be under the direction and authority of the city. Such roads shall be
constructed and maintained by or under the authority of the city from funds
made available for that purpose, and the city shall have the authority to
expend, or by contract cause to be expended, such funds as are allocated to the
city from the state road fund under rules mutually adopted by the city and the
state road commission. The amount used annually from the state road fund for
this purpose, together with such other amounts from federal, county or other
sources as may be made available, shall constitute the funds to be spent in
constructing and maintaining class C roads in the city.
   B.   When in the opinion of the city council the funds available for road
purposes from sources other than the levy made against tangible property are
adequate to properly construct and maintain the class C roads, the city may
cease making a levy for city road purposes, or, at its option, may use any
portion of the class C road funds provided by Utah Code Annotated title 27, for
the construction and maintenance of class A state roads by cooperative
agreement with the state road commission. (1999 Code)
14.08.020: GIFTS, BEQUESTS AND DONATIONS TO CITY:
Gifts, bequests and donations by persons to the city, unless designated for
another purpose, shall become part of the city capital improvement fund and
shall be expended under the direction of the city council. (1999 Code)
14.08.030: CONTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY BY CITY:
The city is authorized to contribute real or personal property to the state
road commission for state or federal highway purposes. (1999 Code)
14.08.040: DETERMINATION OF WIDTH OF RIGHT OF WAY:
The department may, subject to ordinances adopted by the city council,
determine the permissible width of rights of way for public highways in the
city. (1999 Code)
14.08.050: PREPARATION AND STORAGE OF PLATS AND DESCRIPTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the department to provide for the preparation and
storage of current plats and descriptions of all city roads and of such other
highways as the city may from time to time locate upon public lands within the
city. The plats and descriptions shall be kept on file with the department.
(1999 Code)
14.08.060: AGREEMENT WITH POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
The city council is authorized to enter into agreements with other governmental
entities with respect to the financing, planning, establishment, improvement,
maintenance, use, regulation or vacation of limited access facilities or other
public ways to facilitate the purposes of this section. (1999 Code)
14.08.070: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY AND PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR LIMITED ACCESS
FACILITIES:
The city may acquire private or public property or property rights for limited
access facilities and service roads, including rights of access, air, view and
light, by gift, devise, purchase, or condemnation, in the same manner as it now
or hereafter may be authorized by law to acquire such property or property
rights in connection with highways, roads and streets within the city. All
property rights so acquired may be in fee simple or in any lesser estate or
interest. In connection with the acquisition of property or property rights for
any limited access facility or portion thereof or service road in connection
therewith, the city may, in its discretion, acquire an entire lot, block or
tract of land if, by so doing, the interests of the public will be best served,
even though said entire lot, block, or tract is not immediately needed for the
right of way proper. (1999 Code)
14.08.080: AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE AND MAINTAIN LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES:
The highway authorities of the city are authorized to plan, designate,
establish, regulate, vacate, alter, improve, maintain and provide limited
access facilities for public use whenever such authorities are of the opinion
that traffic conditions, present or future, will justify such special
facilities. The highway authorities of the city may also exercise, relative to
limited access facilities, any and all additional authority now or hereafter
vested in them relative to public highways within their respective
jurisdictions. Such authorities may regulate, restrict or prohibit the use of
such limited access facilities by pedestrians, animals or the various classes
of vehicles or traffic. (1999 Code)
14.08.090: RESTRICTING USE OF HIGHWAY:
Whenever it is deemed necessary, because of construction, maintenance work, or
emergency, to suspend all or part of the travel on a public highway (or portion
thereof) in the city, the department may, subject to ordinances adopted by the
city council, restrict the use of or close such highway or portion thereof.
Whenever such highway or portion thereof is so restricted or closed to travel,
the department shall erect suitable barriers and notices to be posted at the
point where the detour road takes off from such closed or restricted highway,
and such detour road shall be clearly indicated by signs and adequately
maintained. (1999 Code)
14.08.100: LOCAL SERVICE ROADS:
In connection with the development of any limited access facility, the
department may, subject to city council approval, plan, designate, establish,
use, regulate, alter, improve, maintain and vacate local service roads and
streets or designate as local service roads and streets any existing roads or
streets. The department may exercise jurisdiction over service roads in the
same manner as is authorized over limited access facilities. Such local service
roads or streets shall be of appropriate design, and shall be separated from
the limited access facility by means of all devices designated as necessary or
desirable by the proper authority. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.12
STANDARDS FOR ROADWAY DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
14.12.010: Definitions
14.12.020: Roadway To Comply With Standards
14.12.025: Curb Ramps, Ramps And Sidewalks To Comply With Standards
14.12.030: Policies
14.12.040: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
14.12.050: Landscaping Overhanging Street Pavement
14.12.060: Sidewalks
14.12.065: Curb Ramps
14.12.070: Horizontal Clearance To Obstructions
14.12.080: Cul-De-Sacs
14.12.090: Roadway Design
14.12.100: Minimum Right Of Way And Pavement Design
14.12.110: Driveway Approaches
14.12.120: Intersection Design
14.12.130: Private Roadways
14.12.140: Street Direction And Grade (Rep. by Ord. 2015-15, 10-8-2015)
14.12.150: Exceptions
14.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AASHTO GUIDELINES: The engineering and development standards published by
AASHTO in the current edition titled "a policy on geometric design of highways
and streets".
ADA ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES (ADAAG): The minimum standards set forth in the
federal register, volume 56, number 144, July 26, 1991, regarding the
accessibility to places of public accommodation and commercial facilities by
persons with disabilities.
ARTERIAL: Generally signalized streets that serve primarily through traffic and
provide access to abutting properties as a secondary function.
CLEAR VIEW: That portion of the corners at intersections where obstructions are
limited to two feet (2') in height in order to preserve a safe sight distance
for motorists entering intersections.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street providing land access and traffic circulation
service within residential, commercial and industrial areas. They enable
moderate quantities of traffic to move efficiently between local streets and
the major street network.
CORNER LOT: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135o).
CURB RAMPS: A short ramp cutting through a curb or built up to a curb.
DECISION SIGHT DISTANCE: The distance required for a driver to detect an
unexpected or otherwise difficult to perceive information source or hazard in a
roadway environment that may be visually cluttered, recognize the hazard or its
threat potential, select appropriate speed and path, and initiate and complete
the required safety maneuver safely and efficiently.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Those land uses other than agricultural.
DRIVEWAY: An access constructed within and abutting a roadway, connecting the
roadway with abutting property and intended to be used in such a way that the
access into the abutting property will be complete and will not cause the
blocking of any sidewalk border area or roadway.
LOCAL STREETS: Streets primarily providing access to immediately abutting
properties. Through movement may be possible, but is not encouraged.
MULTI-FAMILY DRIVEWAY: A driveway providing access to more than four (4)
dwelling units.
PRIVATE ROADWAY: A roadway in private ownership which is controlled and
maintained by the owners and not the city.
PUBLIC ROADWAY: A roadway which has been dedicated, deeded or otherwise
conveyed to public use.
RAMP: A walking surface which has a running slope greater than one to twenty
(1:20).
ROADWAY: The entire width between the boundaries of any highway, street or road
which is used for vehicular traffic. The terms "roadway", "highway", "street"
and "road" are used interchangeably in this chapter.
SIDEWALK: A facility provided for pedestrian movement, usually segregated from
vehicular traffic by a curb or provided on a separate right of way.
SIGHT DISTANCE: The same as "stopping sight distance".
STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE: The minimum sight distance required that will allow
motorists traveling at or near the design speed to stop before reaching a
stationary object in its path. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
14.12.020: ROADWAY TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS:
All public and private roadway development located within and subject to the
jurisdiction of the city shall meet the requirements of this chapter. Where
specific elements of design and construction are not addressed in this chapter,
roadway design and construction shall comply with the engineering guidelines
for design set forth in the AASHTO publication, "A Policy On Geometric Design
Of Highways And Streets", 1990, and any successor editions. The department or
its designee shall utilize the AASHTO manual in setting safe design
requirements. (1999 Code)
14.12.025: CURB RAMPS, RAMPS AND SIDEWALKS TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS:
All public and private curb ramp, ramp and sidewalk development located within
and subject to the jurisdiction of the city shall meet the requirements of this
chapter. Where specific elements of design and construction are not addressed
in this chapter, curb ramp, ramp and sidewalk construction shall comply with
the minimum guidelines for design set forth in the ADAAG, July 26, 1991, and
any successor editions. The department shall utilize the ADAAG in setting
appropriate design requirements. (1999 Code)
14.12.030: POLICIES:
The department may adopt policies for use by developers and others in the
overall layout and design of streets and adjacent developments. The department
will keep and make available to the public copies of the policy. (1999 Code)
14.12.040: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
   A.   Minimum Corner Sight Distance: "Corner sight distance for local
streets", as defined in the AASHTO guidelines, shall be a minimum of three
hundred feet (300'). All other locations shall be provided with sight distance
in accordance with AASHTO guidelines.
   B.   Clear View Of Intersection Streets:
      1.   Corner Lots: In all zones, no obstruction to view in excess of two
feet (2') in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area
formed by the edge of the paved surface and a line connecting them at points
forty feet (40') from the intersection of the paved surfaces, except a
reasonable number of trees pruned so as to permit unobstructed vision to
automobile drivers (figure A of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4994.gif]
      2.   Clear View At Driveways: All driveways entering onto a public
street, or right of way, shall have a clear view for drivers entering onto the
street. That clear view shall be measured two feet (2') above the surface of
the ground and form a triangle fifteen feet (15') from the intersection of the
driveway, or right of way, except a reasonable number of trees pruned so as to
permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers (figure B of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e522aed3718d1895a606fbb92b5de2c9245bfa5b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4996.gif]
   C.   Removal By City: Landscaping material or other obstructions which
infringes the clear view of intersecting streets creates a safety hazard, after
twenty (20) days' notice to property owner by certified mail has been given,
may be trimmed or removed by city employees or by any other person or entity
designated by the city.
   D.   Reimbursement To City: The city shall be entitled to reimbursement of
the costs incurred by it in trimming or removing landscaping or obstructions
under this section, and may seek such reimbursement by sending an itemized
invoice by certified mail to the property owner at its last known address. If
the property owner fails to pay such costs to the city within twenty (20) days
after the date of mailing such invoice, the city may cause suit to be brought
in an appropriate court of law seeking such payment, interest thereto at the
statutory rate, and the city attorney fees and costs of suit. (Ord. 2016-23, 9-
22-2016)
14.12.050: LANDSCAPING OVERHANGING STREET PAVEMENT:
Trees and landscaping which overhang the street pavement shall be trimmed to a
minimum height of thirteen and one-half feet (131/2') above the street
pavement. Trees and landscaping which violate the requirements of this section
may be trimmed or removed by city employees or by any other person or entity
designated by the city after twenty (20) days' notice by certified mail to the
property owner has been given. The city shall be entitled to reimbursement of
the costs incurred by it in trimming trees and landscaping under this section,
and may seek such reimbursement by sending an itemized invoice by certified
mail to the property owner at its last known address. If the property owner
fails to pay such costs to the city within twenty (20) days after the date of
mailing such invoice, the city may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate
court of law seeking such payment, interest thereon at the statutory rate, and
the city attorney fees and costs of suit. (1999 Code)
14.12.060: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Location; Width: Sidewalks shall be located as far as practical from
travel lanes. As the minimum standard, concrete sidewalks shall be four feet
(4') in width with a five foot (5') utility strip between the roadway edge of
sidewalk and back of curb.
   B.   Integral Sidewalks Permitted: A five foot (5') sidewalk will be allowed
integral with the back of curb where exceptional topographic conditions exist
or where specifically approved by the city. Where integral sidewalk is
permitted, the right of way may be reduced accordingly. (1999 Code)
   C.   Abutting Properties: When properties are abutting, but do not access or
front on public right of way, a stamped brick pavement in the utility strip or
other suitable approved finishing material shall be required to reduce
maintenance in these areas unless an exception is granted by the city. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   D.   Aesthetic Alternatives: In developments which have a minimum lot area
of one acre, aesthetic alternatives may be approved in lieu of standard
concrete, except areas along collectors and arterials. The department or its
designee shall review and approve all design and geometric standards for such
requests.
   E.   Obstructions Prohibited: Sidewalks shall remain unobstructed from
vegetation and other obstructions to a minimum height of seven feet (7').
Landscaping or other obstructions which violate the requirements of this
section may be trimmed or removed by city employees or by any other person or
entity designated by the city after twenty (20) days' notice by certified mail
to the property owner has been given. The city shall be entitled to
reimbursement of the costs incurred by it in trimming or removing landscaping
or obstructions under this section, and may seek such reimbursement by sending
an itemized invoice by certified mail to the property owner at its last known
address. If the property owner fails to pay such costs to the city within
twenty (20) days after the date of mailing such invoice, the city may cause
suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law seeking such payment,
interest thereon at the statutory rate, and the city attorney fees and costs of
suit. (1999 Code)
14.12.065: CURB RAMPS:
   A.   When Required: Curb ramps shall be provided wherever an accessible
route crosses a curb.
   B.   Slope: The least possible slope shall be used for any curb ramp. Slope
shall be measured by: Slope equals Y:X, where X is a level plane.
   C.   Maximum Slope: The maximum slope of a curb ramp in new construction
shall be one to twelve (1:12). Curb ramps to be constructed on existing sites
or in existing buildings or facilities may have slopes and rises less than one
to twelve (1:12) as follows:
      1.   A slope between one to ten (1:10) and one to twelve (1:12) is
allowed for a maximum rise of six inches (6");
      2.   A slope between one to eight (1:8) and one to ten (1:10) is allowed
for a maximum rise of three inches (3"); and
      3.   A slope steeper than one to eight (1:8) is not allowed.
   D.   Minimum Width: The minimum width of a curb ramp shall be thirty six
inches (36"), exclusive of flared sides.
   E.   Surfaces: Surfaces or curb ramps shall be stable, firm and slip
resistant.
   F.   Flared Sides: If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must walk
across the ramp, or where it is not protected by handrails or guardrails, it
shall have flared sides, the maximum slope of the flare shall be 1:10. Curb
ramps with returned curbs may be used where pedestrians would not normally walk
across the ramp.
   G.   Built Up Curb Ramps: Built up curb ramps shall be located so that they
do not project into vehicular traffic lanes.
   H.   Obstruction By Vehicles: Curb ramps shall be located or protected to
prevent their obstruction by parked vehicles.
   I.   Marked Crossings: Curb ramps at marked crossings shall be wholly
contained within the markings, excluding any flared sides.
   J.   Corner Type: If diagonal (or corner type) curb ramps have returned
curbs or other well defined edges, such edges shall be parallel to the
direction of pedestrian flow. The bottom of diagonal curb ramps shall have
forty eight inches (48") minimum clear space. If diagonal curb ramps are
provided at marked crossings, the forty eight inch (48") clear space shall be
within the markings. If diagonal curb ramps have flared sides, they shall also
have at least a twenty four inch (24") long segment of straight curb located on
each side of the curb ramp and within the marked crossing.
   K.   Raised Islands: Any raised islands in crossings shall be cut through
level with the street or have curb ramps at both sides and a level area at
least forty inches (40") long between the curb ramps in the part of the island
intersected by the crossings. (1999 Code)
14.12.070: HORIZONTAL CLEARANCE TO OBSTRUCTIONS:
On all streets a minimum clearance of twenty four inches (24") shall be
provided between the curb face or shoulder edge and obstructions such as
utility poles, fire hydrants, etc., except standard mailboxes approved by the
U.S. postal service. (1999 Code)
14.12.080: CUL-DE-SACS:
   A.   Right Of Way Radius: Cul-de-sacs and turnarounds shall have a minimum
right of way radius of fifty feet (50') in residential areas and sixty feet
(60') in commercial and industrial areas. A circular left hand offset is
desirable.
   B.   Hammerhead And Similar Turnarounds: Hammerhead, "L", "Y" and "T"
turnarounds shall only be allowed when approved by the city planning commission
upon written recommendation and design review of the department.
   C.   Temporary For Stub Streets: A temporary turnaround for stub streets in
excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') long shall be provided where the
extension of a street is planned and anticipated.
   D.   Length: The length of a cul-de-sac shall vary inversely with density to
accommodate a maximum of twenty five (25) lots and shall not be longer than one
thousand feet (1,000'). (1999 Code)
14.12.090: ROADWAY DESIGN:
   A.   Maximum Vertical Grades: All vertical grades shall be a maximum of ten
percent (10%).
   B.   Minimum Vertical Grade And Crown Slope: A minimum vertical grade of
four-tenths of one percent (0.4%) and a minimum crown slope of two percent (2%)
shall be provided for adequate drainage of runoff.
   C.   Vertical Crest Grades: All approach legs of intersections shall provide
vertical crest grades not to exceed two percent (2%) for a distance of at least
fifty feet (50') from right of way line of intersecting streets.
   D.   Crest Length: The length of crest and sag vertical curbs shall be
designed in accordance with AASHTO guidelines.
   E.   Vertical And Horizontal Curves: Vertical and horizontal curves shall be
designed to provide a minimum stopping sight distance in accordance with AASHTO
guidelines using the design speeds listed below. Decision sight distances,
however, may be required as outlined in AASHTO's guidelines where more complex
driver information error is likely to occur.
   F.   Design Speeds: All roadways shall be designed in accordance with the
following design speeds using AASHTO's guidelines, principles, and practices:
      1.   Local: Twenty five (25) miles per hour;
      2.   Collector: Forty (40) miles per hour;
      3.   Arterial: Fifty (50) miles per hour.
   G.   Super Elevation: Super elevation rates above 0.06 foot/foot shall be
prohibited to minimize slipping across a roadway when stopped or attempting to
slowly gain momentum from a stopped position. Super elevation will not be
allowed on local residential streets.
   H.   Circular Curve: Where a centerline deflection angle of more than ten
degrees (10o) occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced. There shall be a
tangent of at least fifty feet (50') on local streets and one hundred feet
(100') for collectors and arterials between reverse curves. (1999 Code)
14.12.100: MINIMUM RIGHT OF WAY AND PAVEMENT DESIGN:
   A.   Pavement Width And Design: The minimum pavement width and pavement
design standards shall be provided as follows:
 
          Right Of  Pavement  Minimum
          Way Width Width     Design Section
Local     42'       25'       8" base 3" asphalt
Local     50'       25'       8" base 3" asphalt
Collector 60'       35'       8" base 3" asphalt
Collector 66'       41'       8" base 3" asphalt
Collector 80'       55'       10" base 4" asphalt
Arterial  106'      55' - 81' 12" base 6" asphalt
 
   B.   Geotechnical Specifications: All roadway sections shall be designed in
accordance with specific geotechnical specifications acceptable to the city.
Such geotechnical specifications shall be paid for by the applicant. The city
shall required analysis and additional design requirements when unusual site or
traffic conditions exist. (1999 Code)
14.12.110: DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
   A.   Commercial, Industrial, Manufacturing And Multiple-Family Uses:
Requirements for commercial, industrial, manufacturing, and multiple-family
uses requiring motor vehicle access shall meet the requirements as hereinafter
provided:
      1.   Access shall not be by more than one driveway approach for each one
hundred feet (100') of frontage on any street. The city planning commission or
staff where specifically delegated, may modify this requirement when
considering a particular site plan in those cases where the commission or staff
determines that the safety and convenience of the general public would be
better served by more or less driveway approaches.
      2.   Wherever possible, abutting sites should share driveway approaches.
      3.   Additional driveway approaches may be warranted by table 3-A of this
section for on center spacing of driveway approaches:
TABLE 3-A
RECOMMENDED DRIVEWAY APPROACH SPACING
 
Median Barrier Principal Arterial Arterial Collector
No             250 feet           200 feet 175 feet
Yes            185 feet           115 feet 85 feet
 
      4.   No two (2) of said driveway approaches shall be closer to each other
than fifty feet (50').
      5.   No driveway approach shall be closer than one hundred feet (100') to
the point of intersection of the two (2) property lines at any corner. If there
is not one hundred feet (100') of frontage, then the driveway approach will be
placed five feet (5') from the property line furthest from the intersection of
the property lines, if the nearest existing driveway approach is fifty feet
(50') or further away. In no instance shall a driveway approach be closer than
sixty feet (60') from the projected intersection right of way lines with a
minimum of five foot (5') flared section. Flared driveway approaches are
required for distinction from intersection corners.
      6.   The minimum width of a driveway approach shall be twelve feet (12')
and the maximum shall be thirty feet (30').
      7.   The community development director may approve a driveway approach
up to a maximum of fifty feet (50') wide.
   B.   Single-Family Dwellings: Single-family dwellings shall meet the
following requirements as hereinafter provided:
      1.   Single-family dwellings shall be permitted only one access unless a
circular driveway approach is utilized.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of thirty five feet (35') between the
entrances of circular driveway approaches and the two (2) closest edges of the
driveway approach.
      3.   Corner lots will be allowed to have one driveway approach per street
frontage.
      4.   There shall be a minimum ten feet (10') distance between all
approved driveway approaches except on cul-de-sacs.
      5.   The minimum street driveway approach width at the property line
shall be ten feet (10') and the maximum shall be thirty feet (30').
      6.   A minimum five foot (5') radius or flared section shall be used.
      7.   No radius or flare portion of a driveway approach shall intersect
the abutting projected property line except where shared approaches are
utilized.
      8.   On corner lots, driveway approaches shall be set back a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the right of way
lines.
   C.   Grades: All driveway approach grades shall not exceed four percent (4%)
within twenty feet (20') of the roadway boundary.
   D.   Approaches: Approaches shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from a side
property line at the front lot line except on cul-de-sacs. (Ord. 2015-15, 10-8-
2015)
14.12.120: INTERSECTION DESIGN:
   A.   Minimum Radius: The minimum radius of curb return on local streets in
residential areas shall be twenty five feet (25'). A larger radius shall be
used in industrial areas or higher functional classification streets as
approved by the department or its designee in accordance with AASHTO
guidelines.
   B.   Angle Of Intersect: Streets shall intersect at an angle of ninety
degrees (90o) where possible, but in no case shall the angle of intersection be
less than eighty degrees (80o).
   C.   Offset Intersections: Offset intersections shall be avoided whenever
possible and offsets shall be provided with minimum distances as follows:
      1.   Local streets: One hundred fifty feet (150');
      2.   Collectors: Five hundred feet (500');
      3.   Arterials: Eight hundred feet (800').
   D.   Left Turns: Left turns shall be prohibited within two hundred feet
(200') of major intersections either by signs or concrete medians. (1999 Code)
14.12.130: PRIVATE ROADWAYS:
   A.   Width: The width of all private roadways shall consist of a minimum of
twenty feet (20') of unobstructed travel surface. Roadways shall be twenty five
feet (25') wide where they form cul-de-sacs greater than five hundred feet
(500') in length. Short sections may be reduced to preserve trees or other
features as approved by the fire department.
   B.   Surfaces: All surfaces shall consist of an approved design capable of
carrying twenty four (24) ton vehicles.
   C.   Compliance Required: Except as modified by subsections A and B of this
section, all private roadways shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter and Appendix D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads, as provided by the
International Fire Code.
   D.   Maintenance And Repairs: Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads as
printed in the 2018 IFC (International Fire Code) is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated as if printed herein in full. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2021-30, 12-2-2021)
14.12.140: STREET DIRECTION AND GRADE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2015-15, 10-8-2015)
14.12.150: EXCEPTIONS:
The following exceptions are authorized under this title:
   A.   Reduced Width Of A Private Driveway, Lane Or Road: The Community and
Economic Development Director may grant an exception for the width of a private
drive, lane or road upon a recommendation from the technical review committee
based on the following:
      1.   Unusual topographical conditions;
      2.   Consent of public safety;
      3.   Aesthetic considerations; or
      4.   Other exceptional conditions or circumstances such as:
         a.   Configuration of existing parcels and proposed lots;
         b.   Preservation of significant trees, natural features and/or
historic landmarks;
         c.   Snow storage; and
         d.   Reduction of negative environmental impacts.
   B.   Installation Of Sidewalks: The Community and Economic Development
Director may grant an exception to the installation of curb, gutter, and
sidewalk as required in section
13.76.210 of this code, upon a recommendation from the technical review
committee based on the following:
      1.   Where it is not necessary to serve the public need;
      2.   The street does not fall within any “safe sidewalk” route to a
public or private school or quasi-public land use or facility;
      3.   Public health, safety and welfare is preserved;
      4.   There are no sidewalks currently installed on adjacent properties;
      5.   Other exceptional conditions or circumstances such as:
         a.   Configuration of existing parcels and proposed lots;
         b.   Preservation of significant trees, natural features and/or
historic landmarks;
         c.   Snow storage; and
         d.   Reduction of negative environmental impacts. (Ord. 2015-15, 10-8-
2015; amd. Ord. 2021-08, 4-8-2021)
CHAPTER 14.16
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
14.16.010: Definitions
14.16.015: Annual Plan
14.16.020: Permit Application Requirements
14.16.030: Emergency Work
14.16.040: Fees
14.16.050: Permit; Contents; Duration And Extensions
14.16.060: Permit; No Transfer Or Assignment
14.16.070: Compliance With Specifications, Standards, Traffic Control
Regulations; Site Permittee Identification
14.16.080: Other Highway Permits
14.16.090: Relocation Of Structures In Public Ways
14.16.100: Impact Of Excavation On Existing Improvements
14.16.110: Restoration Of Public Property
14.16.120: Insurance Requirements
14.16.130: Bond; When Required, Conditions, Warranty
14.16.140: Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations On City Liability
14.16.150: Work Without Permit; Penalty
14.16.160: Failure To Comply; Default In Performance
14.16.170: Failure To Conform To Design Standards; Penalty
14.16.180: Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation Or Stop Order
14.16.190: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
14.16.200: Conflict With Governing Provisions
14.16.210: Violation; Penalty
14.16.220: Collection Of Expenses By Lawsuit
14.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ANNUAL PLAN: A proposed schedule with regard to the construction, maintenance
or other similar activities planned by a proposed permittee within city limits
for the then current calendar year which is submitted to the city in writing on
or before January 31 of such calendar year.
ANNUAL PLAN PERMITTEE: A permittee who has filed with the city an approved
annual plan; who is performing the work under the permit in strict accordance
with such approved annual plan; and who is not otherwise in violation of any
aspect of such approved annual plan.
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
APPURTENANCES: Miscellaneous concrete surfaces within the public way such as
parking bays.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property, or which
causes interruption of utility or public services. "Emergency" shall include,
without limitation, any war, general strike, earthquake, tornado, mudslide,
avalanche or other act of God. "Emergency" shall not include, without
limitation, any economic or financial concern (such as, for example, any
projected increase in labor or material costs) facing the permittee from time
to time.
ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The standards set forth in the
latest version of the city construction standards manual published by the city
engineer.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet engineering design and
construction standards, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard
condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement
of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the engineering design and
construction standards.
NEWLY RESURFACED ROAD: A roadway that has been paved, repaved, overlaid, micro-
overlaid, or chip sealed within the previous three (3) years.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or
stormwater, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
state public service commission, or any business entity providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone, communication or other utility product or
services for use by the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainageways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the city.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway, or ditch installed in a right
of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term
does not include private drain lines.
TRAFFIC BARRICADE MANUAL: The "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
(MUTCD).
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering design and construction
standards, and includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling,
compaction, stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in
acceptable condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or
revocation of the permit. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.015: ANNUAL PLAN:
The annual plan will be used by the city to coordinate proposed excavation
projects with the city's pending public works projects, construction/
maintenance activities within city limits proposed by other proposed
permittees, etc., in order to minimize disturbances to the citizenry and to
protect the city infrastructure investment. On or before February 25 of such
year, the city will either approve such annual plan or will provide the
proposed permittee with any suggested revisions. The proposed permittee shall
then have ten (10) days to object to the city in writing to any such proposed
revisions to the annual plan as originally filed with the city. If the proposed
permittee so objects, then the city and such permittee shall cooperate to
formulate a mutually acceptable annual plan. The city acknowledges, however: a)
the legal obligation of certain public utility providers to provide service to
new developments; and b) that such a public utility may not have knowledge of
proposed new developments in adequate time to include such work in the
utility's annual plan for that calendar year. The failure by any such public
utility provider to include such work in its annual plan shall not constitute a
violation of its annual plan if the utility notifies the city immediately upon
learning of the need to deliver its services to a new development. (Ord. 08-18,
7-17-2008)
14.16.020: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permitted Excavations: No public way of the city shall be dug up or
excavated and no approach, road, driveway, pole, pipeline, conduit, sewer,
ditch culvert, advertising sign, or other structure or object of any kind or
character shall be placed, constructed or maintained within any such public way
except as permitted by and in accordance with the city's ordinances and
regulations.
   B.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring to perform work of any kind
in a public way within the city shall make application for a permit prior to
beginning such work. Such application shall be filed with the department on a
form or forms to be furnished by the city. Property owners and/or tenants for
whom work is being done shall be responsible for obtaining the permits;
provided, however, contractors may obtain the permit in the contractor's name.
   C.   Eligible Persons: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work within the public ways of the city, save and except the
following:
      1.   Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
      2.   Public utility companies; (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
      3.   Property owners installing, replacing, or maintaining less than five
hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb
and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the department,
upon a portion of the public way abutting their residence; or (Ord. 2015-02, 2-
5-2015)
      4.   Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public
way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings, and painting or cleaning of
buildings or signboards or other structures.
   D.   Denial Based On Past Performance: The department may deny the issuance
of permits to contractors, public utility companies, or other permit applicants
who have shown by past performance that in the department's opinion will not
consistently conform to the engineering design and construction standards or
the requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Filing Of Plans And Specifications: When the department determines that
it is necessary to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to
existing or proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether
the work proposed complies with the engineering design and construction
standards, the city may require the filing of engineering plans, specifications
and sketches showing the proposed work in sufficient detail to permit
determination of such relationship or compliance, or both, and the application
shall be deemed suspended until such plans and sketches are filed and approved.
The city shall use its reasonable best efforts to review and respond to the
permittee concerning such plans and sketches within five (5) business days
after filing.
   F.   Commencement Of Work Without Permit Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for
any person to commence work upon any public way until the department has
approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work,
except as specifically otherwise approved in this chapter.
   G.   Appeal: The disapproval or denial of an application by the city
community development director or other designee appointed by the city may be
appealed by the applicant to the city council by filing of a written notice of
appeal within ten (10) days of the date of the denial. The city council may
hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed as soon as
practicable, and render its decision within a reasonable time following such
appeal.
   H.   Limitation Of Authority: In approving or disapproving work within any
public way, or permits therefor, in the inspection of such work; in reviewing
plans, sketches or specifications; and generally in the exercise of the
authority conferred hereunder, the department shall act in such manner as to
preserve and protect the public way and the use thereof, but shall have no
authority to govern the actions or inaction of permittees and applicants or
other persons which have no relationship to the use, preservation or protection
of the public way.
   I.   Exception From Permit Requirement: A permit is not required from the
department for a city, county, state, federal, or other government employee to
perform routine maintenance work, not involving excavations.
   J.   Hand Digging Excavations: A permit is not required from the department
for hand digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler systems
and landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public way. However,
conformance to the engineering design and construction standards is required.
(Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.030: EMERGENCY WORK:
   A.   Authorized: Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the
public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided, a
permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
   B.   Notification To City During Business Hours: In the event that emergency
work is commenced on or within any public way of the city during regular
business hours, the department shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour
from the time the work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such
work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the
public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is
accomplished according to the traffic barricade manual and other applicable
laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in the industry.
   C.   Notification To City Other Than Business Hours: Any person commencing
emergency work in the public way during other than business hours without a
permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during
the first hour of the first regular business day on which city offices are open
for business after such work is commenced. A permit for such emergency work may
be issued which shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at
the discretion of the department. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.040: FEES:
   A.   Charges; Restoration Guarantee: The city shall charge and the applicant
shall pay with the application for a permit, a fee in the amount set forth in
title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. The fees may be amended from time to time by the
city council. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
In addition, all permittees shall post cash deposits, irrevocable letter of
credit or bonds as set forth in section
14.16.130 of this chapter, the amount of which shall be determined by the
department, but in no case less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). The
amount shall be sufficient to reasonably ensure the proper restoration of the
ground and the laying of pavement. Should the applicant fail to perform, the
expense to the city of restoring the surface of the ground and pavement shall
be deducted and the balance returned to the applicant without interest after
the excavation and pavement is restored. The cash deposits, irrevocable letter
of credit or bonds shall further guarantee the restoration of the work site for
a period of two (2) years from the completion date of the restoration,
reasonable wear and tear excepted. Settlement of trench backfill, road base,
asphalt, and/or concrete will be incontrovertible evidence of inadequate
compaction of backfill. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008; amd. Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
   B.   Waiver: The city manager may waive the fees or penalties or portion
thereof provided for in this chapter, when it determines that such fee or
penalty:
      1.   Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons
whose income is below the median income level for the city; or
      2.   Pertains to an encroachment on the public way involving a
beautification project which furthers specific goals and objectives set forth
in the city strategic plan, general plans, or other official documents,
including decorative street lighting, building facade lighting, flower and
planter boxes, and landscaping.
   C.   Additional Charges: Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and
expenses of any required engineering review, inspection, and work site
restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the city to each
applicant, in addition to the fee described above. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.050: PERMIT; CONTENTS; DURATION AND EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Term Of Permit: Each permit application shall state the starting date
and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed within thirty (30) days
from the starting date or as directed by the department. The city community
development director or other designee appointed by the city shall be notified
by the permittee of commencement of the work at least two (2) business days
prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time period
specified in the permit.
   B.   Extension: If the work is not completed during such period, prior to
the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the department for an
additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the department for
good cause shown.
   C.   Length Of Extension Subject To Approval: The length of the extension
requested by the permittee shall be subject to the approval of the department
in its sole discretion. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.060: PERMIT; NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
chapter and under said permit. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.070: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS, TRAFFIC CONTROL
REGULATIONS; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Standards: The work performed in the public way shall conform to: 1)
"City Of Holladay Road Cut Standards"; 2) other applicable engineering design
and construction standards from time to time adopted by the department; and 3)
the current edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   B.   Signage: Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the
work, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall be attached to a
barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the permittee's name, or
company name, local telephone number of a responsible party, and after hours
local telephone number of a responsible party.
   C.   Minimum Interference; Barricades: All excavations shall be conducted in
a manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or interruption of
street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and businesses
fronting on the public way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and
sufficient barricades and/or other structures will be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must
be in place until all of the permittee's equipment is removed from the site and
the excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in
place, except where backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the city; in
which case the barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or
torches, must remain in place until the backfill work is actually commenced by
the city. From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be
clearly outlined by adequate signal lights, torches, etc. The permittee shall
notify: 1) the Salt Lake County sheriff (or other law enforcement services
provider for the city); 2) the unified fire authority, and any other emergency
services provider for the city at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of
any planned excavation requiring street closure or traffic detour. (Ord. 08-18,
7-17-2008)
14.16.080: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
   A.   When City Permit Required: Holders of permits for work on highways
owned or under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but located
within the city limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from the city
under the provisions of this chapter, unless the work extends beyond the back
side of the curb, or beyond any other designated jurisdictional boundary. Any
city permit shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a county road or
a state highway within the city without an applicable county or state permit.
   B.   Authority Of City Regulation: The department shall have the right and
authority to regulate work under permits issued by other governmental entities
with respect to hours and days of work, and measures required to be taken by
the permittee of said governmental entity for the protection of traffic and
safety of persons and property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to impose any duty, implied or express, on the city
or its employees, officers, agents or assigns, relative to the protection of
traffic and safety of persons or property, arising out of the issuance of any
permit issued by government entities other than the city, or arising out of any
work performed on any public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.090: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Authority Of City: The department may direct any person owning or
maintaining facilities or structures in the public way to alter, modify or
relocate such facilities or structures as the department may require. Sewers,
pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and
overhead and underground gas, electric, telephone, telecommunication and
communication facilities shall specifically be subject to such directives.
   B.   Basis For Directive: Any directive by the department shall be based
upon the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or determined by the department to be structurally
unsound or defective;
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a "nuisance", as defined under
state statute or city ordinance. (This section shall not, however, be deemed to
diminish the vehicle impound authority of the Salt Lake County sheriff or other
law enforcement services provider for the city.);
      3.   The authority under which the facility or structure was installed
has expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The facility or structure is not in conformity with public
improvements proposed for the area; or
      5.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction.
   C.   Failure To Comply: Any person owning or maintaining facilities or
structures in the public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such
facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the department shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor as described in section
1.08.020 of this code, and promptly shall perform such alterations,
modifications or relocation. All costs of alteration, modification or
relocation shall be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or
structures involved. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.100: IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Temporary Sidewalk Or Ramp: If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by
excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or
provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient
for users, and consistent with applicable standards for such.
   B.   Temporary Gravel Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such time
as the permanent repairs are completed.
   C.   Disturbance Of Property:
      1.   At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or
personal property of a private property owner or the city, such permittee shall
ensure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of
the work.
      2.   The costs associated with the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the permittee. Further, a
permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the city, for any actual damage
caused by the permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in
connection with the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this
subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private property
owner when that subscriber or private property owner requests that the
permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the service
provided by the permittee to the property owner and when the permittee
exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber
or private property owner provided false information to the permittee on which
the permittee relied to its detriment.
   D.   Acts Included: Examples of types of acts specifically included in this
section are the following:
      1.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or
fence, to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate equipment,
sprinkler systems, cable or other appurtenances of the permittee;
      2.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the
permittee;
      3.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of
construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
      4.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances
due to the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if
applicable).
   E.   Water Flow Not Interrupted: Existing drainage channels, such as gutters
or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow
will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt
flow of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be submitted
for approval by the department prior to the blockage of the channel.
   F.   Applicable To Subcontractors: The requirements imposed upon the
permittee extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the
permittee might employ to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
   G.   Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply to the
removal by a permittee of a permanent structure placed by a property owner in a
public way, unless such property owner has received prior written permission
from the department granting the property owner the right to install a
permanent structure on a public way, and such written permission has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder.
   H.   Newly Resurfaced And Reconstructed Roads: No permit shall be granted to
excavate any road or highway that has been resurfaced or reconstructed within
three (3) years prior to the date of the application for permit except in cases
of emergency or as approved by the department upon such terms and conditions as
the city engineer deems appropriate. The city shall make available upon request
a schedule of the planned dates that roads in the city will be resurfaced.
   I.   Notification Of Emergency: Any permittee shall immediately notify the
city of any emergency situations (including, without limitation, damages to
pipes, lines or other underground apparatus of electrical, telephone, water or
other utility service providers) caused by or resulting from such permittee's
activities on a public way.
   J.   Markings: Any permittee marking the asphalt or concrete surfaces of any
public way shall, subject to any applicable state law: 1) make such markings as
unobtrusive as possible; and 2) use only paint or another marking material that
disintegrates or otherwise is obliterated as soon as possible. (Ord. 08-18, 7-
17-2008)
14.16.110: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Required; Standards And Specifications: The permittee and any other
person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public way shall, at its
own expense, restore the surface of any public way to its original condition
and replace any removed or damaged pavement with the same type and depth of
pavement as that which is abutting, including the gravel base material. Refills
shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation
shall be left in the ground. All restoration shall conform to the engineering
design and construction standards and specifications required in this chapter
or otherwise adopted by the department and shall be accomplished within the
time limits set forth in the permit, unless additional time is granted in
writing by the department. There shall be a penalty for each day after the time
limits set forth in the permit that restoration is not accomplished. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   B.   Responsibility Of Permittee: If, within the preceding three (3) years,
the pavement to be excavated has been: 1) paved or repaved with asphalt, then
the permittee shall be responsible for replacing the entire width of the
excavated pavement from road edge to road edge and to a distance of six feet
(6') from each side of the excavation with new asphalt to match the existing
asphalt thickness plus one inch (1"), but in no case less than four inches (4")
or more than six inches (6"); and slurry seal the entire width of the pavement
surrounding the excavation from road edge to road edge and to a distance of
twenty five feet (25') from each side of the excavation; or 2) resurfaced with
slurry seal or chip seal, then, in addition to its other pavement restoration
obligations under this chapter, the permittee shall be responsible for slurry
sealing the entire width of the pavement surrounding the excavation from road
edge to road edge and to a distance of twenty five feet (25') from each side of
the excavation.
   C.   Suspension Of Operations: The director of the department has authority
to suspend operations under excavation permits where, in his opinion based on
standards from time to time adopted by the American Association Of State
Highway And Transportation Officials (AASHTO), climatic changes would prevent
proper restoration of pavement surfaces.
   D.   Failure To Comply: If the permittee fails to restore the surface of any
public right of way to its original condition in accordance with the standards
required in this chapter, the department may authorize and employ the necessary
assistance to restore the surface to its original condition. The permittee
promptly shall pay all expenses incurred to restore the surface. The department
shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in such
restoration and shall deliver a copy thereof to the permittee and/or the
bondholder.
   E.   Guarantee Term: All work by a permittee to restore the surface of any
public right of way to its original condition shall be deemed guaranteed by the
permittee for a period of two (2) years after such restoration is completed. If
the city discovers defects in such restoration at any time within such guaranty
period, then the city shall so notify the permittee and the permittee shall
perform all necessary repairs within seven (7) business days after its receipt
of such notice of defects from the city. If the permittee fails to so act, then
the department may authorize and employ the necessary assistance to restore the
surface to the required condition. The department shall prepare an itemized
statement of all expenses incurred in such restoration and shall deliver a copy
thereof to the permittee. The permittee promptly shall pay all expenses
incurred by the city to restore the surface. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.120: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Evidence Required; Amounts: Before a permit is issued, the applicant
shall furnish to the department evidence that such applicant has a
comprehensive general liability and property damage policy that includes
contractual liability coverage endorsed with the following limits and
provisions:
      1.   A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage
and not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The
general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general
aggregate limit shall be two (2) times the required occurrence limit. The
coverage shall be in the nature of broad form commercial general liability
coverage. The city may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits, depending
on the potential liability of any project.
      2.   All policies shall include the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the
"city" shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns.
      3.   The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance
or self-insurance maintained by the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance
and shall not contribute to or with it.
      4.   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall
not affect coverage provided to the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns.
      5.   Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
      6.   Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against
the city, it being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so
affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all
losses covered by the described insurance.
      7.   The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no
recourse against the city for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy.
      8.   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage
shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in limits,
except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, sent to the city with a copy to the city attorney.
      9.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend
the city and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property occurring by
reason of permit work done by the permittee, his/her subcontractor or agent,
whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right of way
has been opened to public travel.
      10.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the city and its officers and employees against any claim or loss,
damage or expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work
pursuant to the permit, including, but not limited to, falling objects or
failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time
work begins until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public
use.
   B.   Rating Of Insurer: Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an A.M.
Best rating of no less than an A carrier, with a rating of "7" or higher.
   C.   Certificates And Endorsements: The permittee shall furnish the
department with certificates of insurance and original endorsements affecting
coverage required by the permit. The certificates and endorsements for each
insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to
bind coverage on its behalf. The city expressly reserves the right to require
complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies at any time.
Consequently, the permittee shall be prepared to provide such copies prior to
the issuance of the permit.
   D.   Unsatisfactory Policy: If any of the required policies are, or at any
time become, unsatisfactory to the city as to form or substance, or if a
company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to
the city, the permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to
the city for approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as
required by the city. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such
insurance as provided herein, the city may declare the permit to be in default
and pursue any and all remedies the city may have at law or in equity,
including those actions outlined in this chapter.
   E.   Subcontractors Included: The permittee shall include all subcontractors
as insured under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and
endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be
subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
   F.   Deductibles And Retentions To Be Approved: Any deductibles or self-
insured retentions shall be declared to and approved by the city. At the option
of the city, either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or
self-insured retentions as respects the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the permittee shall procure a
bond, in a form acceptable to the city, guaranteeing payment of losses and
related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses. (Ord. 08-
18, 7-17-2008)
   G.   Work Performed By Property Owner: A property owner personally
performing work abutting his residence may submit proof of a homeowner's
insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements of this section. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-5-2015)
   H.   Public Utility Company: A public utility company may be relieved of the
obligation of submitting certificates of insurance if such company shall submit
satisfactory evidence in advance that:
      1.   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this chapter, or has
complied with state requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may
submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit; and
      2.   Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage that
would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.130: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY:
   A.   Bond Required: Except as noted in this chapter, each applicant, before
being issued a permit, shall provide the city with a cash deposit, escrow
agreement or an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount set forth in section
14.16.040 of this chapter to guarantee faithful performance of the work
authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the bond
required may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the department
whenever it appears that the amount and cost of the work to be performed, and
not satisfactorily completed, may vary from the amount of bond otherwise
required under this chapter. The form of the irrevocable letter of credit or
bond and the entity issuing the same shall be subject to the approval of the
city attorney.
   B.   Public Utilities: Public utilities franchised by the city shall not be
required to file a cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit or corporate
surety bond if such requirement is expressly waived or otherwise provided for
in the franchise documents.
   C.   Conditions Of Bond: The bond required by this section shall be
conditioned as follows:
      1.   That the permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the
city ordinances and regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by
the city relative to work in the public way, and respond to the city in damages
for failure to conform therewith;
      2.   That after work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with
diligence and expedition and shall promptly complete such work and restore the
public way to engineering design and construction standards, so as not to
obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
      3.   That the permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for
a period of two (2) years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear
and tear excepted; and
      4.   That unless authorized by the department on the permit, all paving,
resurfacing or replacement of street facilities on major or collector streets
shall be done in conformance with the regulations contained herein within three
(3) calendar days, and within seven (7) calendar days from the time the
excavation commences on all other streets, except as provided for during
excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not allow paving
according to the engineering design and construction standards. In winter, a
temporary patch must be provided. In all excavations, restoration or pavement
surfaces shall be made immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete
is cured. If work is expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall
submit a detailed construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address
means and methods to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction
as soon as reasonably possible. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.140: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
   A.   Hold Harmless Agreement: The permittee agrees to save the city, its
officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and
liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work
performed under the permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under
this chapter shall constitute such a hold harmless agreement by the permittee
to this section.
   B.   Limitation Of Liability: This chapter shall neither be construed as
imposing upon the city, its officers, employees and agents, any liability or
responsibility for damages to any person injured by or by reason of the
performance of any work within the public way, or under a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter; nor shall the city, its officers, officials,
employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof be deemed to have assumed any
such liability or responsibility by reason of inspection authorized hereunder,
the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any work. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-
2008)
14.16.150: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT; PENALTY:
   A.   Stop Order: A stop order may be issued by the department directed to
any person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way
without a permit. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
   B.   Fee: Any person found to be doing work in the public way without having
obtained a permit, as provided in this chapter, shall be required to pay a fee
equal to five (5) times the normal fee as set forth in the fee schedule adopted
pursuant to title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
14.16.160: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Violations: Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order
issued by the department, after notice to the permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any
provision of this chapter;
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law
relating to the work; or
      3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   B.   Immediate Effect; Notice: A suspension or revocation by the department,
and a stop order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the
department and notice to the person performing the work in the public way.
Notice to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the
department has posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written
notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by
the permittee on the permit.
   C.   Written Notice: Whenever the department finds that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written
notice thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond, if
there is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the
estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the department to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
   D.   Performance By City: In the event that the surety (or principal),
within a reasonable time following the giving of such notice (taking into
consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the
requirements of public safety and for the protection of persons and property),
fails either to commence and cause the required work to be performed with due
diligence, or to indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work, as set
forth in the notice, the city may perform the work, at the discretion of the
department, with city forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be
commenced by the city attorney against the contractor and bonding company, if
necessary, and such other persons as may be liable, to recover the entire
amount due to the city, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the
event that cash or irrevocable letter of credit has been deposited, the cost of
performing the work may be charged against the amount deposited, and suit
brought for the balance due, if any. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.170: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
For failure to conform to the engineering design and construction standards,
the department may:
   A.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
   B.   Issue a stop order;
   C.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
   D.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
   E.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.180: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the department may be appealed by
the permittee to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within
ten (10) days of the action of the department. The city council may hear such
appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed, as soon as practicable,
and render their decision within a reasonable time following filing such
appeal. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.190: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.200: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.210: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as described in section
1.08.020 of this code. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate
offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise
complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-18, 7-17-2008)
14.16.220: COLLECTION OF EXPENSES BY LAWSUIT:
If collection by lawsuit of the city's expenses under this chapter becomes
necessary, then the city shall be entitled to judgment for all expenses
incurred in the restoration of the public way or other property, together with
interest thereon and the city's court costs and reasonable attorney fees. The
city shall be entitled to execution on such judgment as provided by law. (Ord.
08-18, 7-17-2008)
CHAPTER 14.18
FRANCHISE RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION:
14.18.010: Definitions
14.18.020: Declaration Of Finding And Intent
14.18.030: Scope Of Chapter
14.18.040: Excluded Activity
14.18.050: Franchise Required
14.18.060: Compensation And Other Payments
14.18.070: Franchise Applications
14.18.080: Construction And Technical Requirements
14.18.090: Franchise, License, Transfer Or Sale
14.18.100: Oversight And Regulation
14.18.110: Rights Of City
14.18.120: Obligation To Notify
14.18.130: General Provisions
14.18.140: Federal, State And City Jurisdiction
14.18.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense may include the future tense, words in the single number may
include the plural number, words in the plural number may include the singular.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION: Means the process by which a provider submits a request and
indicates a desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights-of-way of
all, or a part, of the City. An application includes all written documentation,
verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a
provider to the City concerning: the construction of a utility system over,
under, on or through the rights-of-way; the utility services proposed to be
provided in the City by a provider; and any other matter pertaining to a
proposed system or service.
CITY: Means City of Holladay, Utah.
COMPLETION DATE: Means the date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the City.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: Means all costs of constructing a system, including make
ready costs, other than engineering fees, attorneys or accountants fees, or
other consulting fees.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Means actual working control in whatever
manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through
ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may
be, of the system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence
of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership,
directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert,
of more than twenty five percent (25%) of any provider (which person or group
of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
FRANCHISE: Means the rights and obligation extended by the City to a provider
to own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights-of-
way within the boundaries of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include:
   A.   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the
ordinances and laws of the City;
   B.   Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations on rights- of-way or public property including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits
or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the rights-of-way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: Means a contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the City and a franchisee that sets forth,
subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will
be exercised.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of chapter 26, title 11 Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Means a person providing to another, for the purpose
of providing utility services to customers, all or part of the necessary system
which uses the rights-of-way.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Means any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights-of-way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to sections 651, et seq., of the
Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: Means the system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave
guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters,
equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing,
receiving, amplifying or distributing open video services to or from
subscribers or locations within the City.
OPERATOR: Means any person who provides service over a telecommunications
system and directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest
in such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation
of such a system.
ORDINANCE: Means this chapter concerning the granting of franchises in and by
the City for the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a
utility system.
PSC: Means the Public Service Commission, or any successor hereto.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the Act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PCS services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights- of-way.
PROVIDER: Means an operator, infrastructure provider, resaler, or system
lessee.
RESALER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Means the surface of and the space above and below any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or
hereafter existing as such within the City, but shall not include City electric
utility easements and rights-of-way until a separate joint facilities (pole
attachment) agreement is entered into by the City and provider. City and other
utility providers have or may have easements and rights-of- way that may be
prescriptive in nature. Nothing in this chapter or in any franchise agreement
shall "surcharge the easement or right-of-way", or be implied to in any way
grant or extend the permission or right to use an easement or right-of-way
beyond those rights the City and other utility providers have acquired.
Easements and rights-of-way may also be subject to third party, prior, or
after-acquired interests and each franchise applicant and provider shall be
responsible to examine each individual easement and right-of-way and the legal
arrangement between the City or other utility providers and adjacent property
owners before using the easement or right-of-way. The City shall have no duty
or obligation to defend any interest in any easement or right-of-way and
providers shall remain solely responsible to make any necessary legal
arrangements required as a result of other persons claiming an interest in the
City or other utility providers easements or right-of-way.
SIGNAL: Means any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or
laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or
digital format.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Means the transmission, between or among points specified
by the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and
voice), without change in the form or content of the information sent and
received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE(S) OR SERVICES: Means any telecommunications
services provided by a provider within the City that the provider is authorized
to provide under Federal, State and local law, and any equipment and/or
facilities required for and integrated with the services provided within the
City, except that these terms do not include "cable service" as defined in the
Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 USC section 521, et seq.),
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Telecommunications system or systems
also includes an open video system.
UTILITY: Means any private company or association which provides a service and/
or product for the convenience and/or necessity of the public for a fee.
Utility shall include but not be limited to telecommunications, fiber and
broadband internet and internet protocol television providers. A governmental
entity is not a utility for purposes of this chapter.
UTILITY SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: Means all conduits, pipes, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the rights-of-
way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or
analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications
services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video
system.
WIRE: Means fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.020: DECLARATION OF FINDING AND INTENT:
   A.   Findings And Intent:
      1.   Findings Regarding Rights-Of-Way: The City Council of the City of
Holladay, Utah, finds that the rights-of-way within the City of Holladay
(hereinafter "City"):
         a.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property
in the business and social life of the City;
         b.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
         c.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and
other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered
for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic
well-being of the City and its citizens; and
         d.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation, and maintenance in the rights-of-way.
      2.   Finding Regarding Compensation: The City finds that the City should
receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the rights-of-way.
      3.   Finding Regarding Local Concern: The City finds that while utility
systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also
involve rights-of-way, Municipal franchising, and vital business and community
service, which are of local concern.
      4.   Finding Regarding Promotion Of Utility Services: The City finds that
it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid
development of utility services, including those utilizing emerging technology,
on a nondiscrimination basis, responsive to community and public interest, and
to assure availability for Municipal, educational and community services.
      5.   Findings Regarding Franchise Standards: The City finds that it is in
the interests of the public to franchise and to establish standards for
franchising providers in a manner that:
         a.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
         b.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use the rights-of-way to serve the public;
         c.   Fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm
that may flow from such commercial use of rights-of-way;
         d.   Protects the police powers and rights-of-way management authority
of the City, in a manner consistent with Federal and State law;
         e.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and
use of the City infrastructure;
         f.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights-
of-way; and
         g.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("Act") [United States PL No.
104 - 104].
      6.   Power To Manage Rights-Of-Way: The City adopts this chapter pursuant
to its power to manage the rights-of-way, pursuant to common law, the Utah
Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable,
compensation for the use of rights- of-way by providers as expressly set forth
by section 253 of the Act. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.030: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers of utility
services and systems that require the use of the rights-of-way, including
providers of both the system and service, those providers of the system only,
and those providers who do not build the system but who only provide services.
This chapter shall apply to all future providers and to all providers in the
City prior to the effective date of this chapter, whether operating with or
without a franchise as set forth herein. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.040: EXCLUDED ACTIVITY:
   A.   Exclusions:
      1.   Provisions Applicable To Excluded Providers: Providers excused by
other law that prohibits the City from requiring a franchise shall not be
required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this
chapter through the exercise of the City's police power and not preempted by
other law shall be applicable.
      2.   Interconnection Of Facilities Owned By Single Business: The
requirement of obtaining a telecommunications franchise shall not apply to a
business that only desires to cross or use City rights-of-way to interconnect
its own facilities, wholly located within City limits, if the City Manager
finds:
         a.   That the business will use City rights-of-way only to
interconnect its own facilities; and
         b.   The entity agrees to enter into a written license agreement with
the City wherein the entity agrees to:
            (1)   Assume all costs (including City oversight and inspection
costs) associated with construction and maintenance of the facilities,
including all costs associated with the complete restoration of the City right-
of-way after construction (or removal) of the facilities in the City right-of-
way;
            (2)   Assume all liability arising from the construction,
installation, maintenance, repair, use, operation, and/or removal of the
facilities and indemnify, defend and hold City harmless from any such
liability; and
            (3)   Pay a reasonable license fee for use of right-of-way based on
comparable revenues received by the City from its franchisees.
      3.   City Facilities Or Poles: Nothing herein shall give the entity the
right to use City facilities or poles, the use of which shall be governed by
the license agreement. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.050: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Nonexclusive Franchise: The City is empowered and authorized to issue
nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction, and
maintenance of systems in the City's rights-of- way, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the City and provider.
   B.   Every Provider Must Obtain A Franchise: Except to the extent preempted
by Federal or State law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise
prior to constructing a utility system or providing utility services using the
rights-of-way, and every provider must obtain a franchise before constructing
an open video system or providing open video services via an open video system.
Any open video system or service shall be subject to the customer service and
consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV companies to the
extent the City is not preempted or permitted as ultimately interpreted by a
court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The fact that
particular utility systems may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate
the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By way of illustration and
not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable
franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications services over
the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights-of-way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights-of-
way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or
subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the
property of others, including the City's property. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so
long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
   D.   Current Providers: Except to the extent exempted by Federal or State
law, any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date of this
chapter shall request issuance of a franchise from the City within ninety (90)
days of the effective date of this chapter. If such request is made, the
provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations. If a
timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is not
granted, the provider shall comply with the provisions of section
14.16.010 et seq., of this title and this chapter. If a provider has previously
entered into a telecommunications franchise agreement with City the term of
which has not expired, the provider may continue to operate under the existing
franchise agreement until the term of the franchise agreement expires or may
negotiate a new franchise agreement with City.
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the City under the
provisions of this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system
on, over and under the rights-of- way in order to provide services.
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate Federal, State and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the City upon the written request of the City
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   G.   Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of
less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise
shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.060: COMPENSATION AND OTHER PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation And Payments:
      1.   Compensation: As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter, a provider shall have the following
obligations:
         a.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the City to
review an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees,
permits or charges, a provider shall pay to the City, at the time of
application, a non-refundable application fee as shown on the consolidated fee
schedule adopted by the City Council.
         b.   Franchise Fees: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in
the franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence
on the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee
or Business License Tax enacted by the City.
         c.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for
an excavation permit as provided in section
14.16.010 et seq., of this title.
      2.   Timing: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month.
      3.   Fee Statement And Certification: Unless a franchise agreement
provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement
showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to
its accuracy.
      4.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the City or to third parties,
at the direction of the City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the services of third parties
(including but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
chapter or a franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the
parties are unable to agree, the parties may submit the issue to arbitration in
accordance with the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration
Association.
      5.   Taxes And Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the use of the City
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter.
      6.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent State Taxes.
      7.   No Accord And Satisfaction: No acceptance by the City of any fee
shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct
amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release
of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
      8.   Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees: The fee payment is not a payment
in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this chapter, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the City owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
      9.   Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider
continues to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the
franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation,
all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such
continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way
be construed as a renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a
limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such
continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and
restitution.
      10.   Costs Of Publication: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-
2018)
14.18.070: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Applications:
      1.   Franchise Application: To obtain a franchise to construct, own,
maintain or provide services through any system within the City, to obtain a
renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter or to obtain the City
approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in subsection
14.18.090A2 of this chapter granted pursuant to this chapter, an application
must be filed with City on the form approved by the City Council. The
application form may be changed by the City Manager so long as such changes
request information that is consistent with this chapter. Such application
form, as amended, is incorporated by reference.
      2.   Application Criteria: In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to this chapter, the City may, but shall not be limited to,
request the following from the provider:
         a.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a Certificate of
Convenience and Necessity.
         b.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate
the City for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights-of-way
during the franchise term proposed by the provider;
         c.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of section
14.18.080 of this chapter.
         d.   Prior to using any City electrical utility right-of-way and/or
making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter into a joint
facilities use agreement (pole attachment agreement) with the City. Any costs
associated with any work to be done by the Power and Public Works Department to
provide space on City owned poles shall be borne by the provider.
      3.   Franchise Determination: The City, in its discretion, shall
determine the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other
considerations relevant to the use of the rights-of-way, without competitive
bidding. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.080: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   General Requirement: No provider shall receive a franchise unless it
agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this section governing
construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the City or the
franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of
locating portions of the system with other systems or with City utilities. A
provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation
ordinance, before commencing any work in the rights-of-way.
      2.   Quality: All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time,
it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by State or
Federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system,
including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or
within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
      3.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility
for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system, including but not limited to any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the City to use private property, easements,
poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including but not limited to excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
      4.   Relocation Of The System:
         a.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights-of- way
are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
         b.   The City Authority To Move System In Case Of An Emergency: The
City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as
determined by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of
the system and appurtenances on, over or under the rights-of-way of the City,
in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The City
shall notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event
as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following
any action taken under this section. Notice shall be given as provided in
subsection
14.18.130D of this chapter.
         c.   A Provider Required To Temporarily Move System For Third Party: A
provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the City or any person
holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable
under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the
moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any
person other than the City for any such movement of its systems.
         d.   Rights-Of-Way Change - Obligation To Move System: When the City
is changing a rights-of-way and makes a written request, a provider is required
to move or remove its system from the rights-of-way, without cost to the City,
to the extent provided in the excavation ordinance. This obligation does not
apply to systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the rights-of-way, if that
private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether
or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit.
      5.   Protect Structures: In connection with the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the
City and all designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any
designated landmark district. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent
of the City to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage
system, or any other Municipal structure on, over or under the rights-of-way of
the City required because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration
shall be made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider
agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City to replace or
repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably
specified by the City, any Municipal structure or any other rights-of-way of
the City involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal
of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work
thereon by or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
      6.   No Obstruction: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably
obstruct the rights-of-way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent
of the appropriate authorities.
      7.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements including but not
limited to the National Electric Safety Code.
      8.   Repair By City: After written reasonable notice to the provider,
unless, in the sole determination of the City, an eminent danger exists, any
rights-of-way within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the
construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be
repaired by the City at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that
prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit
to such a provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and
restoring the rights-of-ways intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount
thereof.
      9.   System Maintenance: A provider shall:
         a.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a non- dangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
         b.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard
prudent engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the
National Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other Federal, State and
local laws or regulations.
         c.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly
authorized representative of the City of the system and its effect on the
rights-of-way.
      10.   Trimming Of Trees: A provider shall have the authority to trim
trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and
easement restrictions, upon and hanging over rights-of-way so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its system.
      11.   Location To Minimize Interference: All lines, poles, towers, pipes,
conduits, equipment, property, structures, and assets of the provider shall be
located so as to cause minimum interference with the use of streets, alleys,
rights-of-way, and public property by others and shall cause minimum
interference with the rights of owners of property that abuts any of said
streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or public property.
      12.   Repair Of Damage By Provider: If during the course of work on its
facilities, the provider causes damage to or alters any street, alley, right-
of-way, sidewalk, utility, public improvement, or other public or private
property, the provider (at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by
the City) shall promptly and completely replace and restore such street, alley,
right-of-way, sidewalk, utility, public improvement or other public or private
property in accordance with applicable City ordinances, policies, and
regulations relating to repair work of similar character to the reasonable
satisfaction of the City. Except in case of emergency, the provider, prior to
commencing work in the public way, street, or public property, shall make
application for a permit to perform such work from the City Engineer or other
department or division designated by the City. Such permit shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The provider shall abide by all reasonable regulations
and requirements of the City for such work.
      13.   Restoring Landscaping: In constructing and installing its system,
the provider shall restore landscaping and the general appearance of any
property located within the City in a manner consistent with the surrounding
properties. Such obligation to repair and restore the appearance of property
shall include, but not be limited to, the landscaping of front yards and
parkways in residential zones; the reinstallation of curb, gutter, sidewalk,
and parkway landscaping in those areas where similar improvements have been or
are being installed on contiguous properties; and the screening of provider's
facilities directly abutting a public street or abutting residential property
with appropriate landscaping or screening material as required by the City's
Planning Commission.
      14.   Guarantee Of Repairs: For a period of one year following the
completion of the repair work performed pursuant to subsection A12 of this
section, the company shall maintain, repair, and keep in good condition those
portions of said streets, alleys, rights- of-way, or public property restored,
repaired, or replaced to the satisfaction of the City. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.090: FRANCHISE, LICENSE, TRANSFER OR SALE:
   A.   Sale Or Transfer:
      1.   Notification Of Sale:
         a.   Notification And Election: When a provider is the subject of a
sale, transfer, lease, assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in
part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation
or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or
seek the approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall
promptly notify the City of the nature of the transaction. The notification
shall include either:
            (1)   The successor entity's certification that the successor
entity unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's
franchise agreement, or
            (2)   The successor entity's application in compliance with section
14.18.070 of this chapter.
         b.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with subsection A1a(1) of this section, the City
designee, as provided in subsection
14.18.110A1a of this chapter, shall send notice affirming the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. If the City has good cause to believe that
the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the franchise
agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application
shall comply with section
14.18.070 of this chapter.
         c.   If PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists,
or if its regulations or State law no longer require approval of transactions
described in subsection A1 of this section, and the City has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the
franchise agreement, it may require an application. The application shall
comply with section
14.18.070 of this chapter.
      2.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A1 of this section:
         a.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
provider's assets to another person;
         b.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more
of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to
create a new controlling interest in a provider;
         c.   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new
controlling interest in such a provider; or
         d.   The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the
management or operation of such provider or its system. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-
2018)
14.18.100: OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION:
   A.   Oversight And Regulation:
      1.   Insurance, Indemnity, And Security: Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and
shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the
franchise.
      2.   Oversight: The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of
limitations.
      3.   Maintain Records: A provider shall at all times maintain:
         a.   On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records
and "as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights-of- way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights-of-
ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, "as-built" maps include
"file construction prints". Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps,
including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be
submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30)
days after completion of modification and repairs. "As-built" maps are not
required of the provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the
existing system to the extent they do not exist.
         b.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership,
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the City at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the State of Utah, and generally accepted accounting
principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section.
      4.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by Federal, State or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and
Management Act ("GRAMA"), making it available only to those who must have
access to perform their duties on behalf of the City, provided that a provider
notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems
to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling
shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
      5.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this
chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter or a franchise.
      6.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount
of the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records, provided that the City shall not audit
the books and records of the provider more often than annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the
compensation due the City for the period of such audit. In the event the
accounting rendered to the City by the provider herein is found to be
incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty
(30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the City may accept
any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the City
shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is
later found to be incorrect. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.110: RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Rights Of City:
      1.   Enforcement And Remedies:
         a.   Enforcement - City Designee: The City is responsible for
enforcing and administering this chapter, and the City or its designee, as
appointed by the City Manager, is authorized to give any notice required by law
or under any franchise agreement.
         b.   Enforcement Provision: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
      2.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events
not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of
God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.
      3.   Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services:
         a.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or
revocation of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the City shall have
discretion to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide
services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the
date of such expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its
system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter.
         b.   Continuation By Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: If for a
telecommunications system, the provider is the incumbent local exchange
carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its system and provide
services without regard to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to
negotiate a renewal in good faith.
      4.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
         a.   Abandoned System: In the event that:
            (1)   The use of any portion of the system is discontinued for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months, and thirty (30) days after no response
to written notice from the City to the last known address of provider;
            (2)   Any system has been installed in the rights-of-way without
complying with the requirements of this chapter or franchise; or
            (3)   The provisions of subsection
14.18.050B of this chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a
provider, except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall
be deemed to have abandoned such system.
         b.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The City, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights-of- way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
chapter and any Security Fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
         c.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any
system in place, a provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City
a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the
City the ownership of the abandoned system.
         d.   Removal Of Above-Ground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the City shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all above ground portions of a system from the rights-of-way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If for a telecommunications system, the provider is the incumbent
local exchange carrier, it shall not be required to remove its system, but
shall negotiate a renewal in good faith.
         e.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth in this chapter, a provider may abandon any underground
system in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the
rights-of-way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or
other person. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.120: OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be
performed. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
14.18.130: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter
in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall control. For
agreements entered prior to the adoption of this chapter, the agreement shall
be controlling.
   B.   Severability: If any provision of this chapter is held by any Federal,
State or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting
with any Federal or State Statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in
any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all
appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the chapter provisions in
question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the
event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full
force and effect and shall again be binding on the City and the provider,
provided that the City shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer
period of time as may be reasonably required for a provider to comply with such
a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring
compliance with such provision.
   C.   New Developments: It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend
this chapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the relevant field of utility
service and technology which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public.
   D.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the City required under this
chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the Mayor. A provider shall provide in
any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to
receive notices from the City. A provider shall immediately notify the City of
any change in its name, address, or telephone number.
   E.   Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the City reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-
2018)
14.18.140: FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   Construction: This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent
with all applicable Federal and State Statutes.
   B.   Chapter Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all franchises
granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall
further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable Federal or State law to
all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date of this chapter and
to a provider providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
   C.   Other Applicable Chapters: A provider's rights are subject to the
police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its
police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the City zoning
and other land use requirements.
   D.   City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the City
to enforce prompt compliance.
   E.   Construed According To Utah Law: This chapter and any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
substantive laws of the State of Utah. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-4-2018)
CHAPTER 14.20
ENCROACHMENTS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
14.20.010: Encroachments Prohibited
14.20.015: Temporary Closure Of Highway Without Permit Prohibited
14.20.020: Conformance To Grade Required
14.20.030: Improvements On Or Near Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp
14.20.040: Obstructing Traffic On Sidewalk, Curb Ramp Or Highway Prohibited
14.20.050: Unattended Animals On Highway Prohibited
14.20.060: Impoundment Of Animals
14.20.070: Removal Of Unlawful Installations
14.20.080: Advertising; Permit Required
14.20.090: Confining And Securing Loads On Vehicles Required
14.20.100: Water Upon Highway Prohibited
14.20.105: Placing Snow Upon Highway Prohibited
14.20.110: Encroachments Deemed Obstructions
14.20.120: Revocable License For Certain Preincorporation Encroachments
14.20.010: ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to extend or construct any sidewalks or curb ramps so as to
encroach upon any highway, nearer to the center thereof than the curb line as
designated in this title, or to encroach upon any sidewalk or curb ramp with
any building, fence, wall, post or other obstruction nearer than the fence
line, so as to make the sidewalk narrower than the widths approved by the
department. (1999 Code)
14.20.015: TEMPORARY CLOSING OF HIGHWAY WITHOUT PERMIT PROHIBITED:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful to fully or partially close one or more
traffic lanes of any highway in the city in connection with any excavation,
maintenance, or for any other purpose, except as permitted by and in accordance
with the city's ordinances and regulations.
   B.   Application For Permit: Except as otherwise provided in this code, any
person desiring to temporarily close any portion of a highway within the city
shall first make application for a closure permit. Such application shall be
filed with the city community development department on a form to be furnished
by the city. Permits shall not be transferable or assignable. Each permit
application shall state the starting date and estimated ending date. The permit
shall be valid only for the time period specified in the permit.
   C.   Eligible Persons: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work on the city's highways, save and except the following:
      1.   Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
      2.   Public utility companies; (1999 Code)
      3.   Property owners installing, replacing, or maintaining less than five
hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb,
and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the department,
upon a portion of the public way abutting their residence; or (Ord. 2015-02, 2-
5-2015)
      4.   Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public
way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings, and painting or cleaning of
buildings or sign boards or other structures.
   D.   Denial Or Issuance Conditions: The city may deny the issuance of a
permit when, in the city's reasonable judgment, the requested closure is
unnecessary. The city also may designate the time and date of any requested
closure as necessary to reduce the adverse impact of such closure on public use
of the highway. In approving or disapproving closure of any highway, the
department shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect the city's
highways and the public use thereof.
   E.   Approval Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to fully or
partially close any portion of a highway in the city until the department has
approved the application, the applicant has paid any closure fee required by
title 3,
chapter 3.16 of this code or any other provisions of this code, and until a
closure permit has been issued by the department, except as specifically
otherwise approved in this code.
   F.   Appeal: The disapproval or denial of an application by the community
development department or other designee appointed by the city may be appealed
by the applicant to the mayor by filing of a written notice of appeal within
ten (10) days after the date of the denial. The mayor may hear such appeal, if
written request therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render a
decision within a reasonable time following such appeal.
   G.   Exceptions: A closure permit is not required for a city, county, state,
federal, or other government employee to perform routine maintenance work, not
involving excavations.
   H.   Emergencies: Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the
public way may temporarily close, without a permit, such portion of a highway
as reasonably may be necessary when emergency circumstances demand such
closure; provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been
obtained beforehand. If an emergency closure of a highway occurs during regular
business hours, the department shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour
after the time the closure is commenced. If an emergency closure of a highway
occurs after regular business hours, then the department shall be notified
during the first hour of the next day that the city offices are open for
business. The person conducting such closure shall take all necessary safety
precautions for the protection of the public and the direction and control of
traffic, and shall ensure that such closure and any attendant work in the
public way is accomplished according to the traffic barricade manual and other
applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in the
industry.
   I.   Application For Permit Following Emergency: Any person undertaking an
emergency closure of all or part of a highway shall apply for a permit as soon
as possible after such closure commences, but no later than during the first
hour of the first regular business day on which city offices are open for
business after such closure is commenced. In the department's discretion, a
permit for such emergency closure may be issued retroactively to the date when
the closure commenced. (1999 Code)
14.20.020: CONFORMANCE TO GRADE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to lay, build or construct any sidewalk upon any highway in the
city where the grade has been fixed by order of the city, except in accordance
with such grade, or to lay, build or construct any permanent pavement or
sidewalk, except upon specifications furnished by the department or its
designee in accordance with such fixed grade; and it is the duty of the
department to keep records, plats or maps showing the grades as fixed, for
reference, and for furnishing specifications therefrom, the fee provided by law
to be charged for such specifications and to be paid into the city treasury.
(1999 Code)
14.20.030: IMPROVEMENTS ON OR NEAR SIDEWALK OR CURB RAMP:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, place, keep or maintain upon or
across any sidewalk or curb ramp in the city any porch, platform or other
structure, except as the grade thereof, or any flume, pipe or structure, except
at or below the grade thereof. Where any platform, porch, flume, pipe or
structure is below the grade, it shall be covered to grade; and such platform,
porch, flume, pipe, or structure shall be kept in good repair by the party in
whose interest it is constructed or used, so as not to be dangerous to
pedestrians or an obstruction to the safe and ordinary use of the sidewalk or
curb ramp. (1999 Code)
14.20.040: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC ON SIDEWALK, CURB RAMP OR HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
   A.   Obstructions: It is unlawful to construct, place, keep or maintain upon
or across any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway in the city any open ditch, flume,
conduit, waterway, headgate, log, building material, vehicle, railway, or other
obstruction; provided, building materials, vehicles or objects may be placed
temporarily in such manner on public highways as not to impede, endanger or
obstruct ordinary traffic, but no such building material, vehicles or other
objects shall be permitted to remain on such highway contrary to instructions
from the city. It is unlawful to pile any dirt or other material, or make any
other defacement on any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway so as to interfere with
the ordinary use thereof.
   B.   Animals Or Other Objects: It is unlawful to drive or place any vehicle,
animal or other object upon or along any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway or to
permit the same to remain thereon in a manner likely to impede or obstruct the
ordinary use thereof. (1999 Code)
14.20.050: UNATTENDED ANIMALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
Every person staking, tethering, herding, grazing, pasturing, allowing to run
at large, or causing to be staked, tethered, herded, grazed, pastured or
allowed to run at large, any horse, cow, mule, sheep, goat, swine or other
animal upon any of the public highways of the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1999 Code)
14.20.060: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
It is the duty of animal control to take into its custody any horse, cow, mule,
sheep, goat, swine or other animal found by him staked, tethered, herded,
pastured or running at large upon any of the public highways of the city, and
to deliver such animal to the city animal control officials. Those officials
shall retain possession of the animal until the costs of capturing,
transporting and maintaining the animal are paid in full. (1999 Code)
14.20.070: REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL INSTALLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to place, construct or maintain any approach,
road, driveway, pole, pipeline, conduit, sewer, ditch, culvert, billboard,
advertising sign or any other structure or object of any kind or character
within the right of way of any city road without complying with the regulations
of the department, which may:
   A.   Removal Required: Remove such installation from the right of way or
require such person to remove the same; or
   B.   Notice; Removal By City: Give written notice to such person to remove
the installation from the right of way. The notice may be served either by
personal service or by mailing the notice to the person by registered mail and
posting a copy thereof on the installation for a period of ten (10) days. If
the installation is not removed within ten (10) days after the notice is
complete, the department may remove the same and recover costs and expenses, as
per title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code for each day the same remained within the right of
way after notice was complete, in an action for that purpose; or
   C.   Abatement Of Nuisance: Bring an action to abate the same as a nuisance
if such person disputes or denies the existence of such installation or refuses
to remove or permit its removal. If judgment is recovered by the department,
there shall also be recovered, in addition to having the same abated, the costs
of action and additional fees as per title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code for every day such nuisance remained within the right
of way after notice was given for its removal. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
14.20.080: ADVERTISING; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to place any form of advertising upon any part of
the public domain in the city, or along any city highway within three hundred
feet (300') of such highway, except upon land in private ownership situated
along such highway (subject to the other requirements of this code), without
first receiving a permit to do so from the department, subject to the approval
of the city. (1999 Code)
14.20.090: CONFINING AND SECURING LOADS ON VEHICLES REQUIRED:
   A.   Contents Escaping: No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any city
highway unless so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
reasonable amounts of sand, salt or other abrasives may be dropped for the
purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a
roadway for cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
   B.   Fastening Of Load: No person shall operate on a public highway any
vehicle with a load unless the load and any covering thereon is suitably
fastened, secured and confined according to the nature of the load so as to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a
hazard to other users of the highway. (1999 Code)
14.20.100: WATER UPON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any users of water from any ditch, stream or well to
wilfully or carelessly permit the same to run upon any city highway in such a
manner as to damage or interfere with the proper use of same, or to cause pools
of water to stand thereon, or to cause anything to be placed or left upon such
highway so as to obstruct travel or to endanger property or persons upon the
same. (1999 Code)
14.20.105: PLACING SNOW UPON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person removing snow, ice or other material from a
sidewalk or driveway to place or deposit said snow, ice or other material upon
any city road or highway in such a manner as to interfere with the proper use
of the same or so as to obstruct travel or to endanger property or persons upon
the same. (1999 Code)
14.20.110: ENCROACHMENTS DEEMED OBSTRUCTIONS:
It is the duty of the department to treat as obstructions to public highways
all encroachments declared by the terms of this chapter to be unlawful. (1999
Code)
14.20.120: REVOCABLE LICENSE FOR CERTAIN PREINCORPORATION ENCROACHMENTS:
The mayor is authorized, but is not obligated, to grant a revocable license for
the maintenance on a public highway of an encroachment or obstruction otherwise
declared by the terms of this chapter to be unlawful; provided, that: a) the
encroachment or obstruction has continually existed in substantially its
current state since on or prior to the city's incorporation on November 30,
1999; and b) the mayor determines, in the mayor's sole discretion, that such
encroachment or obstruction does not constitute an immediate danger to public
health or safety; and c) the city's grant of such revocable license is effected
only by a written license agreement in such form as the city council may from
time to time specify by ordinance or by resolution; and d) the written license
agreement is executed and delivered to the city by the owner of the
encroachment or obstruction and by all owners of fee title to, or leasehold
interests in, the private real property to which the encroachment or
obstruction relates; and e) the written license agreement thereafter is
recorded in the office of the Salt Lake County recorder as an issue affecting
title to the private real property to which the encroachment or obstruction
relates. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.24
POLES, POSTS AND FENCES
SECTION:
14.24.010: Prohibited Generally
14.24.020: Telephone Poles
14.24.030: Electric Light Poles
14.24.040: City Permission Required When
14.24.050: Mailboxes
14.24.060: Fences
14.24.070: Posts On Property Abutting Public Highway
14.24.080: Reservation Of Poles For City Use
14.24.090: Violation Deemed Obstruction
14.24.010: PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to set, place, keep or maintain any pole, post,
fence or like obstruction upon or along any public highway, road, street,
avenue, lane, alley, trail, curb ramp or sidewalk in the city, except as
designated in this chapter. (1999 Code)
14.24.020: TELEPHONE POLES:
Telephone poles shall be set along the pole line, with the face of the pole
nearest the center of the street, one foot (1') toward the property line from
the curb line or in that area designated for utilities. (1999 Code)
14.24.030: ELECTRIC LIGHT POLES:
Electric light or other poles for carrying electric current for commercial
purposes shall be set in the same manner as telephone poles, one foot from the
curb line or in that area designated for utilities. (1999 Code)
14.24.040: CITY PERMISSION REQUIRED WHEN:
No telephone, electric light or other pole used for support of wires carrying
electric current shall be set on any public highway in the city without
permission or a grant of right of way therefor being first obtained from the
city. (1999 Code)
14.24.050: MAILBOXES:
Posts or structures for carrying or holding mailboxes shall be set either along
the tree or pole line defined above for a sufficient distance back of the curb
line so as not to obstruct the street, highway, sidewalk or curb ramp traffic.
(1999 Code)
14.24.060: FENCES:
Fence posts may be set along a fence line, which is designated as the distance
from the center of any highway not less than half the surveyed and platted
width of the highway; no public highway in the city being regarded as surveyed
and platted less than fifty feet (50') in width. It is unlawful to place or
maintain any fence or building the face of which is nearer the center of any
highway than the line designated as the fence line. (1999 Code)
14.24.070: POSTS ON PROPERTY ABUTTING PUBLIC HIGHWAY:
It is unlawful to set, place or maintain any telephone, electric light or
current poles, trees, mail, sign or other posts, except as provided in this
chapter, upon property abutting on any public highway in the city, at a point
nearer to the fence line than a line centering one foot (1') therefrom on the
side farthest from the center of the highway; and it is unlawful to set or
maintain any sign or other post at a point nearer the centerline than one-half
foot (1/2') from the outside of the outer limit of any alley or lane. (1999
Code)
14.24.080: RESERVATION OF POLES FOR CITY USE:
It is provided that any grant or permission hereafter given to set telephone or
electric light poles upon any of the public highways in the city, shall be made
subject to the reservation, whether or not the reservation is specifically set
forth in the grant or permission, that wherever the city shall deem it
necessary for the public good or service, the city shall have the right to
place crossarms on the poles, and to string one set of wires thereon, for
furnishing electric light and current to the city, and to use and operate the
same during the period of such grant or permission, with reasonable regard for
the rights of the grantee. (1999 Code)
14.24.090: VIOLATION DEEMED OBSTRUCTION:
It is the duty of the department to treat as obstructions to public highways,
all poles, posts, fences or other obstructions set or placed in violation of
the terms of this chapter. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.32
SIDEWALK USE AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
14.32.005: Installation Of Street Improvements Required
14.32.010: Sidewalk, Drive Approach, Curb And Gutter Repair Or Replacement And
Maintenance Responsibilities
14.32.020: Inspections
14.32.030: Notice To Repair
14.32.040: Permits For Repairs Required When
14.32.050: Repair By City
14.32.060: Right Of Review; Request; Hearing
14.32.070: Stay Of Notice To Repair
14.32.080: Encroachment Or Obstruction Of Sidewalks Or Curb Ramps Prohibited
14.32.090: Reserved
14.32.100: Snow Removal; Required
14.32.110: Snow Removal; Clogging Gutter Prohibited
14.32.120: Obstructing Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp While Receiving Goods
14.32.130: Cellar Doors
14.32.140: Driving Or Riding On Sidewalks Prohibited
14.32.150: Games On Sidewalks, Curb Ramps Or Streets
14.32.160: Loitering Prohibited
14.32.005: INSTALLATION OF STREET IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Included Improvements: An owner of property who constructs upon or
otherwise improves that property by redevelopment, increasing the square
footage of primary or secondary structures, or a change of use of the same as
per applicable building permits, shall also improve the abutting public right
of way. The improvements required by this section include the installation of
curb, gutter, sidewalk and street paving along the entire frontage of the
property being improved, and also include the replacement of existing pavement,
curb, gutter or sidewalk if any of these improvements have deteriorated to a
degree that replacement or repair is required, as determined by the city
engineer.
   B.   Permits And Certificates Conditioned Upon Compliance: The issuance of a
building permit, and the subsequent final inspection approval and permanent
certificate of occupancy, shall be conditioned upon the owner's compliance with
this section.
   C.   Deferral: The City Manager may approve a written deferral of
installation of improvements required by this section upon the recommendation
of the city public works director, and under such terms and conditions as will
assure future installation of required improvements. (Ord. 03-07, 3-20-2003;
amd. Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015; Ord. 2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.010: SIDEWALK, DRIVE APPROACH, CURB AND GUTTER REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT AND
MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Owner Responsible: The owner of a parcel of property abutting a public
right of way is responsible for maintenance, replacement or repair of curb,
gutter or sidewalk and public improvements, such as park strip, landscaping,
and street trees as per Street Tree Preservation Section
13.77 abutting the owner’s property which has deteriorated to a degree which
the city engineer determines requires repair or replacement. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit the liability of any person causing damage
to curb, gutter or sidewalk located in a public right of way. A person who
damages any curb, gutter or sidewalk, negligently or otherwise, is liable for
the full cost of replacement.
   B.   Repair By City; Conditions: If the City Manager, upon the advice of the
City Engineer, finds that existing curb and gutter, drive approach or sidewalk
fronting on parcels which have a single-family dwelling or a duplex use require
replacement for safety reasons, and that inclusion of the repair in a special
improvement district is not practical, the city public services department may
cause the repair work to be done, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The public services director finds that the city has sufficient
personnel and related support resources to accomplish the repair work; and
      2.   Sufficient budgeted funds are available to pay for the repair work.
   C.   Order Of Priority: Proposed repair requests under this section will
generally be given priority according to the prioritized list maintained by the
city engineer. The city engineer may assign a different order of priority to
requests to maximize efficient utilization of resources or to coordinate repair
work with other public works projects.
   D.   Reimbursement By City: If the owner of a parcel of property wants to
remove and replace the curb and gutter, drive approach, or sidewalk on public
property because of deteriorated conditions as defined by standards adopted by
the city engineer, with prior written approval and agreement of the city, the
city, subject to availability of funds, may reimburse the eligible participant
fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the eligible project, not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per lot/parcel. For purposes of this section,
“eligible project” means a new, replacement, or repaired sidewalk curb and or
gutter that has complied with a process adopted by the city, that is located in
a residential area within the city, and that is not subject to a delay
agreement or a required improvement by the City of Holladay Planning
Commission. For purposes of this section, “eligible participant” means a
property owner of a residential property located in the city. In such case, the
eligible participant shall, subject to city standards, make the improvements or
employ a contractor to make the improvements. (Ord. 03-07, 3-20-2003; amd. Ord.
2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.020: INSPECTIONS:
The city, through the Community and Economic Development, shall adopt policies
for use by the city, developers and others in the overall layout and design of
streets. The city may inspect the condition of the public curbs, gutters and
sidewalks to determine any defects or needed repairs. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.030: NOTICE TO REPAIR:
   A.   Notice; Content: Notice of needed repairs or defects in the public
curbs, curb ramps, gutters and sidewalks shall be sent to the owner of the
abutting property as shown on the records of the county recorder. Such notice
shall specify the repairs needed or the defect and shall state a deadline for
completing the repairs. A review of such deadline shall not be earlier than
thirty (30) nor later than sixty (60) days after the date of the notice. The
notice shall specifically instruct the property owner of his obligation under
this chapter and of his opportunity for review.
   B.   Fifty Percent Paid By City: As per processes described in this title,
the owner of abutting improvements in need of repair, may petition in writing,
upon forms approved by the city, to pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost thereof
in advance. The amount of cost participation by the city may exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the petition is granted by the city, the city
shall, subject to availability of funds, pay the remaining fifty percent (50%)
of the cost of replacement. In such case, the city shall make the replacement
or employ a contractor to make the same.
   C.   Special Improvement District: The city may propose the creation of a
special improvement district to make the required repairs and to levy
assessment on property in accordance with the Utah municipal improvement
district act, Utah Code Annotated section 17A-3-301 et seq. The creation of
improvement districts requires notice to property owners, hearing, and
opportunity for owners to protest. Districts may be defeated if a sufficient
number of protests are filed, as defined by statute.
   D.   Provisions Not Preclusion: This section does not preclude the city from
replacing defective sidewalks abutting private property, at its own expense, as
it may otherwise deem appropriate. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015;
Ord. 2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.040: PERMITS FOR REPAIRS REQUIRED WHEN:
No permits shall be necessary for such repairs unless it is necessary to alter
the grade, location or dimensions of the curbs, curb ramps, gutters or
sidewalks. In such event, there shall be no charge for the permit. (1999 Code)
14.32.050: REPAIR BY CITY:
In the event that the property owner fails to complete the repairs or to seek
review within the time specified in the notice, the city may at its option make
the repairs with the implied consent of the owner. The city attorney may
instigate civil suit on behalf of the city to recover the city's costs of
repair, plus interest, attorney fees and court costs. (1999 Code)
14.32.060: RIGHT OF REVIEW; REQUEST; HEARING:
   A.   Right Of Review: The owner shall have the right to seek review of the
notice of repairs through the department and to appeal any decision rendered by
the department to the City Manager as provided in subsections B and C of this
section.
   B.   Request Filed; Hearing Scheduled; Notice: The owner may seek review of
the notice of repairs by filing a request with the department. The request must
be filed within ten (10) business days after the date of the notice of repairs.
Upon receipt of the petition requesting a hearing, the department director
shall schedule a hearing within ten (10) business days, before himself or his
designee, and cause notice thereof to be sent to the petitioner.
   C.   Notice Of Decision; Appeal: After the hearing, the department director
or his designee shall cause written notice of his decision to be sent to
petitioner, which notice shall also inform petitioner of his right to appeal to
the City Manager. Petitioner may appeal to the City Manager by filing a written
request with the city recorder within ten (10) business days after the date of
the director’s decision. The petitioner shall be entitled to a hearing within
sixty (60) days after the date the appeal is filed. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2021-
08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.070: STAY OF NOTICE TO REPAIR:
The timely filing of a request for hearing with the director of the department,
or upon appeal therefrom, a request for hearing before the City Manager, shall
stay the terms of the notice of repair during review proceedings, and all
deadlines shall be redetermined by the hearing authority. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.080: ENCROACHMENT OR OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS OR CURB RAMPS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises, to place or permit upon the sidewalk, curb ramp or the half of the
street next to such premises with any building, fence or other obstruction so
as to make the sidewalk narrower than the widths as designated in this title or
to alter or eliminate any existing curb ramp:
   A.   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, refuse matter, ice, water, mud,
garbage, ashes, tin cans or other substances;
   B.   Any vehicle, lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building material, dead
trees, tree stumps, merchandise, or other thing that obstructs the public
street, curb ramp or sidewalk or any part thereof, or the free use and
enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over and upon the same, or any part
thereof, without the written permission of the city. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.090: RESERVED:
(1999 Code)
14.32.100: SNOW REMOVAL; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor or agent of property abutting on
a paved sidewalk to fail to remove or cause to be removed from such paved
sidewalk and any existing curb ramp all hail, snow or sleet falling thereon,
within twenty four (24) hours after the hail, snow or sleet has ceased falling.
(Ord. 08-07, 4-17-2008)
14.32.110: SNOW REMOVAL; CLOGGING GUTTER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person removing snow from a sidewalk or curb ramp to
deposit snow, dirt or other material in a gutter so as to clog the same, or
prevent the free flow of water therein. (1999 Code)
14.32.120: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALK OR CURB RAMP WHILE RECEIVING GOODS:
It is unlawful for any person to place or keep, or suffer to be placed or kept,
upon any sidewalk or curb ramp, any goods, wares or merchandise that he may be
receiving or delivering without leaving a ten foot (10') passageway clear upon
such sidewalk or curb ramp; and it is unlawful for any person receiving or
delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain
on such sidewalk or curb ramp for a period longer than one hour. (1999 Code)
14.32.130: CELLAR DOORS:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building having a cellar which
opens upon any street, curb ramp or sidewalk to fail to keep the door or other
covering thereof in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary
traffic on the street, curb ramp or sidewalk. (1999 Code)
14.32.140: DRIVING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a self-propelled vehicle or team, with
exception of self-propelled wheelchairs or other similar mobility devices for
people with disabilities or for health purposes, or lead, drive or ride any
animal upon any sidewalk except at established crossings. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2021-08, 4-8-2021)
14.32.150: GAMES ON SIDEWALKS, CURB RAMPS OR STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, curb ramp or street by
playing games thereon, such as ball games, marbles, flying of kites, or to
annoy or obstruct the free travel of any pedestrian, team or vehicle. (1999
Code)
14.32.160: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on any
sidewalk or curb ramp for a longer period than two (2) minutes in such manner
as to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon, or to wilfully remain
standing, lying or sitting thereon in the manner for more than one minute after
being requested to move by any peace officer, or to wilfully remain on any
sidewalk or curb ramp in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of any
person or vehicle into or out of any property abutting upon the sidewalk, curb
ramp or any property having access to such sidewalk or curb ramp. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.36
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
14.36.010: Permit Required
14.36.020: Bond Required
14.36.030: Specifications And Grades
14.36.040: Deviation From Permitted Construction Unlawful
14.36.050: Inspection And Approval
14.36.060: Construction Regulations
14.36.010: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, build, establish or maintain any
sidewalk, curb ramp, curb and gutter, or driveway over, across or upon any
public street, road, thoroughfare, or parkway, or to cut or change the
construction of any public sidewalk, curb or gutter for any purpose, without
having first obtained from the department a permit for such construction, cut
or change. (1999 Code)
14.36.020: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Amount: Before issuance of any such permit, the contractor or person
proposing the construction shall file with the bond office, on a form furnished
by the city, a penal bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with
good and sufficient surety thereon, conditioned that the makers shall save
harmless, defend and indemnify the city against or on account of accidents,
damages or claims arising out of or during the construction by the contractor.
All such bonds shall be continuing until terminated by notice in writing given
thirty (30) days in advance.
   B.   Contractors: In addition, a contractor making a business of such
construction in the city shall maintain on file with the department a
performance and completion bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) to guarantee for one year after the date of acceptance by the city
work done in the city. (1999 Code)
14.36.030: SPECIFICATIONS AND GRADES:
All construction authorized by the permit issued under section
14.36.010 of this chapter shall be in accordance with the specifications and
grades approved by the department. The acceptance of such permit shall be
deemed an agreement by the permittee to perform such construction in accordance
with such specifications and grades. (1999 Code)
14.36.040: DEVIATION FROM PERMITTED CONSTRUCTION UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk, curb and gutter, or
driveway over, across or upon any public street, road, thoroughfare or parkway,
or to cut or change the construction thereof except in accordance with the
permit issued by the department. (1999 Code)
14.36.050: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
All sidewalks, curb ramps, curb and gutters, and driveways constructed in
accordance with the permits authorized by this chapter shall be subject to
supervision, inspection and approval by the department. (1999 Code)
14.36.060: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
No permit shall be granted by the department for any driveway more than thirty
feet (30') in width. No driveway, including sidewalk, shall be less than six
inches (6") thick. When more than one driveway is required for any one parcel
of land, a sidewalk island of at least twelve feet (12') shall be provided
between driveways, and in no case shall a permit be granted for a driveway that
will be within ten feet (10') from the property line where it adjoins any
street. It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicles over or across any
such street corner or within ten feet (10') therefrom, as provided in this
section. Where, in the opinion of the department, it would be dangerous, or
where a driveway conflicts with any permanent improvements or waterways, the
department may refuse to issue the permit and the matter shall be referred to
the mayor for further consideration, in which event a driveway may be permitted
at such place if approved by the mayor. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.40
BRIDGES, DITCHES AND WATERWAYS
SECTION:
14.40.010: Generally
14.40.020: Bridges
14.40.030: Ditches And Waterways
14.40.040: Headgates
14.40.050: Water Mains
14.40.060: Duty To Repair Bridges And Flumes
14.40.070: Violations Deemed Obstructions
14.40.010: GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, place, set, keep or maintain any
bridge, sewer, well, spill, or like obstruction, upon, in, under or along any
public highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley, trail, sidewalk or curb ramp
in the city, except as designated in this chapter and coordinated with the
applicable irrigation company. (1999 Code)
14.40.20: BRIDGES:
Bridges over any ditch, waterway or opening across any sidewalk shall not be
less than the full width of such sidewalk. Bridges over any ditch, waterway or
opening across any roadway section of any highway, trail or sidewalk shall not
be narrower than the full width of the roadway section. In all cases, bridges
shall be set square with the road or sidewalk, and their coverings shall be
made to conform to the grade of the road or sidewalk as fixed by the city. All
bridges shall be of substantial material and construction, and the plans and
specifications shall be approved by the department. Bridges connecting the
roadway with the sidewalk shall be made to conform with the established grade
of the roadway and sidewalk. (1999 Code)
14.40.030: DITCHES AND WATERWAYS:
   A.   Construction: All ditches, canals or waterways constructed across or
over any sidewalk or highway shall be securely bridged or flumed; the bridges
or flumes shall conform to the regulations provided in this chapter.
   B.   Permission Required; Grade Change: No ditch, canal or waterway shall be
made or constructed across any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway except upon
receiving permission from the city and except after conforming with the
established grade thereof. When a change in the grade of any sidewalk, curb
ramp or highway becomes necessary for the convenience of any ditch, canal or
waterway, the changed grade shall be done by or at the expense of the person
constructing the ditch, canal, or waterway, and shall be constructed only after
receiving permission to proceed from the city or its delegated agent and shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the city or its agent.
   C.   Location: All ditches, canals or waterways running along any highway
shall be placed at a location approved by the department. (1999 Code)
14.40.040: HEADGATES:
Headgates for the control of irrigating or other water shall be placed in a
location approved by the department. (1999 Code)
14.40.050: WATER MAINS:
Water mains for carrying water along or across any highway may be laid by
permission or upon order of the city council, at a sufficient depth to keep the
roadway secure, and when laid along any highway shall be located in the roadway
centering on a line five feet nearer the center of the highway than the curb
line as now fixed by ordinance. No excavation for laying water mains or pipes
shall be made in any public highway without first obtaining the consent of the
city council. (1999 Code)
14.40.060: DUTY TO REPAIR BRIDGES AND FLUMES:
It is unlawful for any person conveying water through or along any ditch, canal
or waterway along or across any highway to permit any flume, bridge, etc.,
under the control of or owned by the person to become out of repair, and to
remain so after attention has been called thereto, longer than is necessary to
institute the work of repairs thereon, which work shall be diligently
prosecuted to completion. (1999 Code)
14.40.070: VIOLATIONS DEEMED OBSTRUCTIONS:
It is the duty of the department to treat as obstructions any bridges, flumes,
pipes or ditches placed or constructed in violation of this chapter. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 14.44
STREET TREES
SECTION:
14.44.010: Care Of Trees
14.44.020: Planting Line
14.44.030: Condemnation And Removal Of Trees
14.44.040: Abutting Property Owner Responsible
14.44.010: CARE OF TREES:
In all cases the abutting property owner who receives the beneficial use of and
benefit from protected street trees is to care for and water the same. Failure
to care for protected street trees or removal without a tree removal permit is
considered a violation of this Code and requires remediation and/or payment of
a fine. (Ord. 2019-05, 2-28-2019)
14.44.020: PLANTING LINE:
The line on which the street trees are to be centered within a City highway
right-of-way shall be determined by the City. (Ord. 2019-05, 2-28-2019)
14.44.030: CONDEMNATION AND REMOVAL OF TREES:
The City, upon giving proper notice to abutting property owner, shall have the
authority to remove, trim or prune, or order the removal, pruning or trimming
by the abutting property owner of, any tree, tree stump, shrub or vine upon any
City roads, avenues, or ways where the tree, tree stump, shrub or vine is dead,
diseased or for any other reason undesirable. The City shall have authority to
trim or prune any street tree or remove any street tree that is in violation of
any City ordinance, without serving notice upon the abutting property owner.
(Ord. 2019-05, 2-28-2019)
14.44.040: ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
The owner of a parcel of property abutting a public right-of- way is
responsible for the maintenance and, if necessary, replacement of a protected
street tree(s). A person who damages any street tree(s), negligently or
otherwise, is liable for the full cost of replacement. (Ord. 2019-05, 2-28-
2019)
CHAPTER 14.48
STREET VACATIONS
SECTION:
14.48.010: Purpose
14.48.020: Street Defined
14.48.030: Conditions For Vacation
14.48.040: Fees And Advertising Costs
14.48.050: Legal Interest Of City
14.48.060: Evaluation Of Need For Street
14.48.070: Compensation
14.48.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a consistent standard regarding
compensation to the city for the vacation and/or transfer of its interest in
public streets. Vacation of the city's interest in streets should be viewed as
a transfer of a substantial property right for which the public should be
compensated. To prevent windfall enrichment to abutting property owners at
public expense, such transfer should not be made without compensation being
paid to the city. (1999 Code)
14.48.020: STREET DEFINED:
"Street" means all major and minor streets, alleys, walkways and trails. (1999
Code)
14.48.030: CONDITIONS FOR VACATION:
Petitions for vacation of public streets shall be considered on the basis of
the following:
   A.   Alleys, Walkways And Trails: Alleys, walkways and trails are not
generally within the current planning and maintenance policies of the city.
Vacation of an alley, walkway or trail relieves the city from present and
future obligations to maintain such alley, walkway or trail. This benefit to
the city is declared to be adequate compensation for the city's interest. Where
appropriate, the city may require conditions precedent to the vacation of any
alley, walkway or trail such as installation of landscaping, fencing or other
improvements which must be completed or bonded for prior to the enactment of
the vacation ordinance.
   B.   Major And Minor Streets: Major and minor streets shall not be vacated
or permanently closed unless adequate compensation has been paid for the
transfer of the city's interest in the land. (1999 Code)
14.48.040: FEES AND ADVERTISING COSTS:
No petition for vacation of a city street shall be considered unless
accompanied by the fee required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this code. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-9-2010)
14.48.050: LEGAL INTEREST OF CITY:
No action shall be taken on any petition to vacate a street until the
department identifies and verifies the specific manner in which the city
acquired its interest in the street and the city attorney determines the legal
interest of the city in the street. (1999 Code)
14.48.060: EVALUATION OF NEED FOR STREET:
Each petition shall be evaluated in terms of the current use of the street and
the need in the foreseeable future for its use as a public street or for any
other public purpose. If such need exists or may exist in the foreseeable
future, the petition shall be denied. (1999 Code)
14.48.070: COMPENSATION:
Any action providing vacation, sale or other transfer of the city's interest in
any street where compensation is required shall be conditioned upon prior
payment of such compensation and shall not be completed by an enactment of the
ordinance until all required compensation is paid to the city, together with
advertising costs for all public notices. Generally, such compensation shall be
the fair market value of the land. In appropriate cases compensation may be
provided for, in part or in whole, through an exchange of land or relocation of
streets within an existing subdivision. Where the city's interest in a street
is transferred to another public entity for a public use which benefits the
city, the mayor may determine that the benefit to the city from such use is
adequate compensation for the land. Where appropriate, the city may require
conditions precedent such as the installation of landscaping, fencing or other
improvements which must be completed or bonded for prior to the enactment of a
vacation ordinance. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14.52
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES AND LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES
SECTION:
14.52.010: Disregard Of Warning Or Barricade
14.52.020: Livestock Use On Highway Unlawful
14.52.030: Injury To Trees On Highway; Penalty
14.52.040: Violation Of Class C Road Use Regulations
14.52.050: Liability For Damage To Highway Or Structure
14.52.055: Liability For Damage To Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp
14.52.060: Liability For Damages Due To Illegal Operation
14.52.070: Violation; Penalty
14.52.010: DISREGARD OF WARNING OR BARRICADE:
No person shall wilfully fail to observe any barricade, warning light, sign or
flagman, warning the public that a highway or portion thereof is restricted or
closed to traffic. (1999 Code)
14.52.020: LIVESTOCK USE ON HIGHWAY UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to drive livestock upon the public highways.
However, this provision shall not prohibit the riding of horses, use of
horsedrawn carriages, and walking of animals on a leash. (Ord. 09-10, 7-2-2009)
14.52.030: INJURY TO TREES ON HIGHWAY; PENALTY:
Whoever digs up, cuts down or otherwise injures or wilfully destroys any trees
planted and standing on any city highway in conformity to law is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall also be liable to the owner for treble the amount of
damages sustained. (1999 Code)
14.52.040: VIOLATION OF CLASS C ROAD USE REGULATIONS:
No person shall wilfully violate any of the rules and regulations of the city
council as to the use of class C roads or traffic thereon, nor shall anyone
unlawfully remove, deface or interfere with any road sign, notice, warning or
barrier. (1999 Code)
14.52.050: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAY OR STRUCTURE:
Any person who wilfully or negligently injures or damages any city highway,
highway equipment or road sign shall be liable for such damage. The amount of
such damage may be recovered in a civil action brought by the city attorney in
the name of the city. (1999 Code)
14.52.055: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO SIDEWALK OR CURB RAMP:
Any person who wilfully or negligently injures or damages any city sidewalk or
curb ramp shall be liable for such damage. The amount of such damage may be
removed in a civil action brought by the city attorney in the name of the city.
(1999 Code)
14.52.060: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES DUE TO ILLEGAL OPERATION:
Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance upon any city, highway,
or highway structure shall be liable for all damage that the highway structure
may sustain as a result of the illegal operation, driving or moving of the
vehicle, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight
specified by law. Whenever the driver is not the owner of such vehicle, object
or contrivance, but is operating the same with the express or implied
permission of the owner, then the owner and driver shall be jointly and
severally liable for the damage. Such damage (together with the city attorney
fees and costs, if any) may be recovered in a civil action brought by the city
attorney in the name of the city at the request of the department. (1999 Code)
14.52.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Where the performance of an act is prohibited or declared unlawful by the
provisions of this chapter but no penalty is prescribed for the violation of
the provisions, the doing of such an act is declared to be a misdemeanor. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 14.56
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
14.56.010: Purpose
14.56.020: Application Of Provisions
14.56.030: Definitions
14.56.040: Permit Required
14.56.050: Qualifying Activities
14.56.060: Permit; Application Procedures
14.56.070: Permit; Application Processing
14.56.080: Permit; Fees
14.56.090: Permit; Approval And Issuance
14.56.100: Permit; Liability Insurance And Indemnification
14.56.110: Appeal Procedures
14.56.120: City Liability
14.56.130: Violation; Penalty
14.56.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations governing the time, place and manner of holding special events on
City streets and on City property, in order to promote, protect and assure the
safety and convenience of the people in their use of public streets and places.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.020: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory requirements on certain activities which are
held on City streets and property and which are defined as "special events".
The requirements imposed by this chapter do not alter, supersede or nullify any
requirements contained in other statutes, ordinances or regulations which may
also regulate these same activities. These requirements shall be applied in a
content-neutral manner and without discrimination as to race, religion, sex,
national origin, political affiliation or other unlawful discriminatory
classification. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ATHLETIC EVENT: An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group
of people collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise,
including, but not limited to, running, jogging, walking, bicycling or skating,
on any City street or City park.
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT: An organized event having as its primary purpose the
entertainment or amusement of a group of people, including, but not limited to,
parades, carnivals, fairs, concerts, block parties or neighborhood gatherings,
on any City street or City park.
POLITICAL EVENT: An organized event, not including an athletic or entertainment
event, having as its primary purpose the exercise of expressive activities of a
political nature, including, but not limited to, speech making, picketing,
protesting, marching, demonstrating or debating public issues, on any City
street or City park.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any athletic event, entertainment event or political event,
whether held for profit, nonprofit or charitable purposes. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-
2018)
14.56.040: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a special event
without first obtaining a special event permit and paying the fees as required
in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.050: QUALIFYING ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall not be
applied to regulate the use of traditional public forums as alternative
channels of communication by the public, provided such use is for the free
exercise of constitutionally protected activities and does not disrupt or
interfere with traffic on public streets or the use of public places by other
members of the public.
   B.   Purpose Statement: For the purpose of preserving and protecting public
discussion on current and topical issues, and in the interest of: 1) the
public's comfort and enjoyment of the park/streets; 2) the success of community
events and local businesses; 3) safety and protection; 4) convenient flow of
pedestrian traffic; 5) noise reduction; 6) litter control; and 7) promotion of
aesthetics, the City Council of the City of Holladay hereby adopts the
following time, place and manner restrictions on the use of public parks for
qualifying activities, as defined in subsection C of this section, during or
concurrent with public special events and activities.
   C.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, qualifying activities
shall mean any special events held on City streets or City property involving
the use of any tents, tables, awnings, carts, trailers or vehicles or other
temporary structures for the purpose of conveying information, ideas or
advertising goods and services. The sale of goods and services during special
events shall be governed by subsection G of this section.
   D.   Restrictions: For the specific purpose of preserving the primary and
intended use of City parks and other public property for the benefit of the
public, during special events, qualifying activities shall be restricted to
those areas set forth in subsection E of this section. Areas identified
specifically for the location of the qualifying activities may be closed from
time to time for qualifying activities for the preservation of public health
and safety. During such times of closure, the City may identify alternative
areas for qualifying activities by executive order of the City Manager.
   E.   Specified Locations: Qualifying activities shall be conducted only
within the areas identified below or otherwise designated by executive order of
the City Manager.
      1.   For City Hall Park, the activities shall be located within the
graveled area located at the far southern end of the park, or between the Casto
Home and the basketball/pickleball courts located at the northwestern end of
the park.
      2.   For the Holladay Village Center Plaza, the activities shall be
located on the public sidewalks adjacent to Laney Avenue and 2300 East Street.
   F.   Sound Amplification: The use of amplification of sound in conjunction
with the qualifying activities shall be prohibited.
   G.   Sales Of Goods And Services: During special events, the sale of goods
and services not contemplated in the issued special event permit shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.060: PERMIT; APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Form; Information: All applications for special event permits shall be
made on a special event permit application form prescribed by the City and
shall include the following information:
      1.   Type and description of event;
      2.   Name of the sponsoring entity, contact person, address and telephone
number;
      3.   Name of the promoting entity, contact person, address and telephone
number;
      4.   Proposed date, together with beginning and ending times;
      5.   Proposed location, including barricade plan and route map;
      6.   Estimated numbers of event staff, participants and spectators;
      7.   Admission fee, donation, or other consideration to be charged or
requested;
      8.   Signature of applicant; and
      9.   If the event is a block party, applicant must collect and submit
with the application form a list of signatures consenting to the street closure
from all neighbors whose vehicular access to their property is affected by the
street closure.
   B.   Obtain From Department: Special event permit application forms may be
obtained from the department.
   C.   Submission; Time Limit: Completed application forms shall be submitted
to the department at least thirty (30) calendar days before the event is
scheduled to take place, in order to allow sufficient time to process the
application and to allow timely appeal to the Mayor in the event the
application is denied. Applications submitted less than thirty (30) calendar
days prior to the scheduled event shall be denied unless the applicant
demonstrates to the Mayor that compliance with the thirty (30) day deadline was
impractical or impossible due to the nature of the event.
   D.   Advertising: No advertising of a special event shall be permitted until
City approval of the special event is granted and a special event permit is
issued.
   E.   Multiple Jurisdictions: Special events which cross or involve multiple
governmental jurisdictions shall be approved only if the applicant also obtains
formal authorization from all respective governing bodies.
   F.   Qualifying Activities: Special event permits may include, under the
event permit, qualifying activities as defined in subsection
14.56.050C of this chapter. For the temporary duration of special events, the
City may also permit the use of mobile trailers or carts for special events.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.070: PERMIT; APPLICATION PROCESSING:
   A.   Approval Of Agencies: Upon receipt of a special event permit
application, the department shall circulate copies of the application to the
following agencies for the purpose of obtaining their approval or disapproval
of the proposed special event:
      1.   Salt Lake City-County Health Department;
      2.   The City law enforcement services provider; and
      3.   Any other City department which is to provide service in connection
with the special event.
   B.   Considerations: In reviewing an application, the departments involved
shall consider the following:
      1.   The impact of the special event on the traffic, security, health and
safety of the public;
      2.   A determination by the department of appropriate and reasonable
requirements for the mitigation of traffic, security, health and safety
concerns, and an evaluation of the measures proposed by the applicant to
satisfy those requirements;
      3.   The demonstrated ability of the applicant to comply with
requirements necessary to protect the safety, health and welfare of the public;
      4.   The location and duration of the special event and the City's
ability to accommodate the event with the necessary resources; and
      5.   Other previously approved special events that could cause scheduling
conflicts during the same period and cause over extension of the City's
resources.
   C.   Additional Requirements Or Conditions: The agencies or departments
involved in reviewing an application may impose additional requirements or
conditions necessary to protect the public interest by ensuring traffic
management, security of property, or the health and safety of the public. (Ord.
2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.080: PERMIT; FEES:
   A.   Fee: Each initial application for a special event permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as required by title 3,
chapter 3.35 of this Code to defray the administrative costs of processing the
application.
   B.   Protection Fees: In order to promote, protect and assure the safety and
convenience of the people in their use of public streets and places, the City
shall coordinate the use of professional peace officers if the special event
requires traffic control or police protection and an additional fee shall be
charged by the City to cover the costs incurred. The City shall specify the fee
required upon its approval of the special event permit application, based upon
the number of officers and amount of support equipment required by such factors
as: the date and time of the event; the route location and length; the
anticipated traffic and weather conditions; the estimated number of
participants and spectators; the nature, composition, format and configuration
of the event; and the estimated time for the event. The fee charged for traffic
control or police protection shall be paid prior to the issuing of the special
event permit.
   C.   Additional Fees: Additional fees may be charged by the Salt Lake City-
County Health Department or other City departments or service providers. Such
additional fees shall be specified at the time the department approves the
special event permit application and shall be paid directly to the agency prior
to the issuing of the special event permit.
   D.   Exempt From Fees: The following special events shall be exempt from the
fees set forth in this section:
      1.   Political events;
      2.   Parades of less than one mile in length;
      3.   School events in the immediate area of the school;
      4.   Events sponsored in whole by the City; and
      5.   Block parties. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.090: PERMIT; APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   Approval; Issuance: A special event permit application shall be
approved and a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the department upon
approval by all affected departments and compliance with the requirements of
this chapter. The department shall notify the Mayor, the City Council and all
affected agencies of all special events permits issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   B.   Reasons For Denial Specified: If a special event permit application is
denied by the department, the reason or reasons for denial shall be provided in
writing to the applicant.
   C.   Authority To Deny: The City reserves the right to deny permit
applications for proposed special events which pose a significant danger or
threat to the public health, welfare or safety, or which may result in
unreasonable inconvenience or cost to the public. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.100: PERMIT; LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Certificate Of Insurance: No special event permit shall be issued
unless and until the applicant has submitted to the department a certificate of
insurance, listing the City as an additional insured, on an occurrence policy
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State, showing
comprehensive general liability and property damage coverage for the event with
minimum limits of: two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for injury
or death for one person in any one occurrence; five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for injury or death for two (2) or more persons in any one
occurrence; and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage
in any one occurrence.
   B.   Exemptions: The following special events shall be exempt from the
insurance requirements set forth in this section:
      1.   Political events;
      2.   Parades of less than one mile in length;
      3.   School events in the immediate area of the school;
      4.   Events sponsored in whole by the City; and
      5.   Block parties.
   C.   Save Harmless Agreement: In consideration for the issuing of a special
event permit and the use of City streets or property, the applicant agrees to
indemnify, save harmless and defend the City, its officers, employees, and
volunteers against any claim for loss, damage or expense (including, without
limitation, the City Attorney fees and costs, if any) sustained by any person
on account of injury, death or property damage occurring by reason of or
arising out of the special event. (Ord. 2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.110: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any permit applicant desiring to appeal an administrative decision of the
department concerning the denial of a special event permit may petition the
Mayor. All appeals shall be in writing, shall state the specific grounds for
the appeal, and shall be filed in the City office within seven (7) calendar
days after the date the applicant received notice of the administrative denial.
An applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor may seek judicial review of
such decision pursuant to rule 65(b), Utah Rules of Civil Procedure, or any
other applicable ordinance, statute or rule providing for such review. (Ord.
2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.120: CITY LIABILITY:
By issuing a special event permit, the City makes no guarantees and assumes no
liability for the safety of participants or spectators of special events. (Ord.
2018-14, 6-28-2018)
14.56.130: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of section
14.56.040 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Failure to obtain a permit as
required by this chapter may also result in enforcement action by the City or
its designee which, in its discretion, may stop an event which has not been
issued a permit and/or may issue citations where event staff or participants
violate other State Statutes or City ordinances, including, but not limited to,
traffic rules and regulations, disturbing the peace, public nuisance, failure
to disperse, trespass, or other health and safety regulations. (Ord. 2018-14,
6-28-2018)
TITLE 15
BUILDING CODES
CHAPTER 15.08
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
15.08.010: Technical Codes Adopted
15.08.020: Fees In General
15.08.030: Fees For Subpermits
15.08.040: Utility Connections
15.08.050: Transition
15.08.010: TECHNICAL CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   As provided in title 15a of the Utah code, the building code, national
electrical code, residential one- and two-family dwelling code, plumbing code,
mechanical code, fuel gas code, energy conservation code, and manufactured
housing installation standard code as adopted by the uniform building code
commission (collectively, the “state building code”) shall be applied to
building construction, alteration, remodeling and repair, and in the regulation
of building construction, alteration, remodeling and repair in the city. When a
new or revised edition of any component part of the state building code is
adopted by the uniform building code commission this section shall be
interpreted to refer to such edition thereof.
   B.   The city of Holladay hereby also adopts the following codes:
      1.   The 1997 edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings (UCADB), as approved by the uniform building code commission, and
      2.   The 2003 edition of the international property maintenance code, and
      3.   The 2006 edition of the Utah Wildland Urban Interface Code. (Ord.
09-13, 7-2-2009; amd. Ord. 2025-22, 12-4-2025)
15.08.020: FEES IN GENERAL:
The 1997 uniform administrative code, as published by the International
Conference of Building Officials (with valuation updates published annually in
the building standards magazine) is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. In addition, section
1.07.3 of the 1997 uniform building code with respect to fees is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference. Section 1.07.3 of the 1997 uniform
building code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended to read as follows:
When submittal documents are required by section
106.3.2 of the 1997 uniform building code, a plan review fee shall be paid at
the time of submitting the submittal documents for review. Said plan fee shall
be as follows:
      1.   Forty percent (40%) of the building permit for other R-3 and U
occupancies; and
      2.   Sixty five percent (65%) of the building permit fee for all other
occupancies.
Exceptions:
      1.   When, in the opinion of the building official, plans can be reviewed
under an established expedited procedure, the plan review fee for R-3 and U
occupancies, including swimming pools and signs, shall not exceed thirty
dollars ($30.00).
      2.   Plans which have been previously reviewed and placed in the city's
plan card file in contemplation of future permit issuance shall be charged a
plan review fee established by the building official. Such plans may be used
for issuing new permits until a new edition of the building code is adopted by
the state of Utah. In such case, the plans shall be resubmitted for review by
the city. The cost of such review shall be as required for "additional plan
review", with a minimum of two (2) hours. Any such plans which are not used for
a period of eighteen (18) months shall be resubmitted for a full plan review,
with all required fees, if they are to be used again. Card file plans shall
comply with administrative procedures established by the building official.
The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in section 107.2 of the 1997 uniform building code and
are in addition to the permit fees.
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional
plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in
section
106.3.4.2 of the uniform building code, an additional plan review fee shall be
charged at the rate shown on the fee table.
Charges for other services to be provided by the building department shall be
based upon the hourly rates indicated in the building code and assessed
according to the following:
   A.   Renewal of expired permits where only final inspections are required,
four (4) hours;
   B.   Reinspection, one hour;
   C.   Inspection requested outside of normal working hours, minimum two (2)
hours;
   D.   Review of new products or materials for acceptance, minimum four (4)
hours;
   E.   Request for verification of conformance to code for existing buildings,
minimum one hour.
The building official may determine charges for other services provided for
which fees are not indicated.
   (Ord. 02-02, 1-3-2002)
15.08.030: FEES FOR SUBPERMITS:
Plumbing, electrical and mechanical fees shall not be assessed when such
permits are issued in conjunction with a building permit for when required fees
have been paid. If two (2) or more subpermits are received, the building permit
must be taken out. If only one subpermit is required, and no other work is to
be done, fees shall be assessed in accordance with the following fee schedule:
   ELECTRICAL, MECHANICAL AND PLUMBING FEES
Minimum fee for any subpermit                                            $17.00
Electrical fees:
For each new or modified circuit                                         5.00
Service change or power to panel (1 meter)                               40.00
Each additional meter on the same inspection                             10.00
Temporary power (each meter base)                                        40.00
Mechanical fees:
For installation, relocation or modification of each appliance or piece  8.50
of equipment regulated by the mechanical code, except as noted below
For each new duct line and outlet                                        5.00
For each commercial hood                                                 23.00
For each evaporative cooler                                              17.00
Plumbing fees:
For each plumbing fixture or set of fixtures on 1 trap (including supply 10.00
and drainage piping)
For each sand or grease trap                                             17.00
For installation or alteration of supply or drainage piping, water       17.00
heater or water treatment device
 
Note: In cases where this fee schedule cannot practically be applied, the fees
shall be determined by the building official.
(Ord. 02-02, 1-3-2002)
15.08.040: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any utility company to provide service to any
structure or building, or to service equipment or wiring for which a permit is
required, until approval is granted by the building official. The building
official may order the utility services terminated at any location where the
use is not authorized or is in violation of the building, land use or other
ordinances of the city. (Ord. 02-02, 1-3-2002; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
15.08.050: TRANSITION:
All building permits issued by the city prior to January 1, 2002, shall be
governed by the applicable codes as of the date the building permit was issued.
(Ord. 02-02, 1-3-2002)
CHAPTER 15.24
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
15.24.010: Definitions
15.24.020: License And Permit; Required
15.24.030: License And Permit; Fees
15.24.040: Permit; Application; Contents
15.24.050: Independent Mobile Homes; Required
15.24.060: Park; Minimum Area
15.24.070: Location And Fencing
15.24.080: Soils, Drainage And Ground Cover
15.24.090: Street System Requirements
15.24.100: Dedication Of Streets
15.24.110: Access Streets
15.24.120: Park Plan; Construction Requirements
15.24.130: Water Supply
15.24.140: Sewage And Refuse Disposal
15.24.150: Service Buildings; Sanitation Facilities
15.24.160: Sanitation Facilities Required
15.24.170: Refuse Storage And Disposal
15.24.180: Fire Protection
15.24.190: Park Management Responsibilities
15.24.200: Occupant Responsibilities
15.24.210: Enforcement; Inspection For Compliance
15.24.220: Notice, Hearing And Order Procedures
15.24.230: Violation; License Revocation
15.24.240: Appeals Procedure
15.24.250: Violation; Penalty
15.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The director of the city community development department or
any representative authorized to act for him.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use of land for which a conditional use permit is required
pursuant to title 13 of this code.
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A mobile home which does not have a toilet and a bathtub
or shower.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH: The legally designated director of the city-county health
department, or any representative authorized by such official to act in his
behalf.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A mobile home that has a toilet and a bathtub or
shower.
LICENSE: A written license issued by the license official allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions and regulations of
this chapter.
LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate or maintain a mobile home park, as set
forth in this chapter.
MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile homes
are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodation.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park which is designed
for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of a mobile home space which has been reserved for
the placement of one mobile home with appurtenant structures or additions.
PERMIT: A conditional use permit issued by the planning commission, permitting
the construction, alteration and/or extension of a mobile home park under the
provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. Such permit, to be
effective, must also be approved by the building official.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association, or corporation.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing separate toilet and bathing facilities for
men and women and which may also have laundry facilities and a slop water
closet, and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter and which
are apart from the facilities within the individual mobile home.
SEWER CONNECTION: All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet
of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the
sewerage system serving the mobile home park.
SEWER RISER PIPE: That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to
the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home space.
WATER CONNECTION: All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser
pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE: That portion of the water supply system serving the mobile
home park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a
designated point at each mobile home space or stand. (1999 Code)
15.24.020: LICENSE AND PERMIT; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate a mobile home
park within the city unless such person first obtains a license and permit
therefor. (1999 Code)
15.24.030: LICENSE AND PERMIT; FEES:
The license and permit fee for each mobile home are provided for in this title.
In addition to the above fees, if any buildings or structures are built, a
permit fee under the building code must be paid as well as the fee for
mechanical installations, electrical and plumbing work, in accordance with the
current ordinances in effect at the time. (1999 Code)
15.24.040: PERMIT; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
   A.   Investigation And Review: Upon receipt of an application for a
conditional use permit to establish or enlarge a mobile home park, the planning
commission and the other agencies concerned therewith shall make the necessary
investigation and review of the application, the plot plans, the site and the
proposed facilities, to determine whether the establishment or the enlargement
of the park will meet the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Land Use Requirements: Before a conditional use permit for a mobile
home park can be issued, the applicant must follow the requirements of
chapter 13.01 and section
13.08.040 of this code. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
15.24.050: INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOMES; REQUIRED:
All mobile homes placed in the park must be independent mobile homes. No
dependent mobile homes are to be placed in a mobile home park within the city.
(1999 Code)
15.24.060: PARK; MINIMUM AREA:
The minimum permissible area for the construction of any mobile home park shall
be five (5) acres. (1999 Code)
15.24.070: LOCATION AND FENCING:
   A.   Location And Fencing: Location of mobile home parks shall be regulated
by the land use ordinance of the city. Where any boundary of a park directly
abuts property which is improved with a permanent residential building, or
directly abuts unimproved property which may, under existing laws and
regulations, be used for permanent residential construction, or abuts any
street, a six foot (6') high wall properly related to surrounding topography
and the character of the surrounding development shall be provided along such
boundary; except, that at the point where a public street intersects with an
access road, the height of the fence or wall shall be determined by section
13.32.120 of this code. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   B.   Setback: Where any mobile home park boundary is adjacent to a public
street, the fence or wall shall be set back from the street right of way a
minimum of fifteen feet (15'). This ground between the fence or wall and the
street right of way line shall be landscaped and permanently maintained. (1999
Code)
15.24.080: SOILS, DRAINAGE AND GROUND COVER:
   A.   Soil, Topography And Hazards: The condition of soil, groundwater level,
drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health
or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable
smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to
unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for
any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards.
   B.   Soil And Ground Cover: Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every
mobile home park shall be paved or covered with stone screenings or other solid
material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing
soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.
   C.   Site Drainage: The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home
park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe,
efficient manner, subject to approval of the community development director.
(1999 Code)
15.24.090: STREET SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe
and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home lot. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to
topography, subject to the approval of the community development department.
   B.   Access: Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards at the entrance or exits, and allow free movement of
traffic on adjacent streets.
   C.   Internal Streets: Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic.
   D.   Street Construction And Design Standards: All streets shall be provided
with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be durable and well drained
under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges shall be protected to
prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base.
Street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards.
   E.   Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate
surface drainage. (1999 Code)
15.24.100: DEDICATION OF STREETS:
The developer of the mobile home park shall be required to dedicate to the
city, and shall improve to city standards, all streets within the proposed park
determined by the planning commission to be necessary for adequate neighborhood
circulation. (1999 Code)
15.24.110: ACCESS STREETS:
The location and width of the access street shall be determined by the planning
commission. (1999 Code)
15.24.120: PARK PLAN; CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Mobile home parks shall conform to the plan, as submitted and approved by the
respective governmental agencies, and to the following requirements:
   A.   Well Drained Site: The park shall be located on a well drained site,
properly graded to ensure rapid drainage, and free from stagnant pools of
water.
   B.   Space Size: Each park shall provide mobile home spaces, clearly defined
or delineated, which shall have a minimum average area of three thousand
(3,000) square feet, exclusive of streets and sidewalks, and a width of not
less than forty feet (40').
   C.   Clearance Between Homes: Mobile homes shall be so located on each space
as to permit a fifteen foot (15') clearance between the mobile homes.
      1.   Carport covers and patio covers may extend to within three feet (3')
of the side lot lines of the individual homes spaces.
      2.   No mobile home shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15') to
any building within the park or to any property line of the park which does not
abut upon a public street or highway.
      3.   No mobile home shall be located closer to any property line of the
park abutting upon public street or highway than twenty five feet (25'), or
such other distance as may be established by ordinance or regulation as a front
yard setback requirement with respect to conventional buildings in the zoning
district in which the mobile home park is located.
   D.   Circulation Of Street System: The street system shall provide
convenient circulation by means of streets properly located with respect to the
access streets. Closed ends of dead end streets shall be provided with adequate
paved vehicular turning or back space. A turning circle shall be at least
eighty feet (80') in diameter.
   E.   Walkways: Walkways shall be provided on both sides of all access roads,
and shall be constructed of concrete not less than four feet (4') wide.
   F.   Surfacing; Lighting: All streets and walkways shall be hard surfaced
and adequately lighted, subject to approval of the planning commission.
   G.   Service Buildings: Each park shall provide service buildings to house
such toilet, bathing and other sanitation facilities as are required by this
chapter.
   H.   Electrical Service: Electrical service shall comply with the provisions
of the current adopted county electrical code.
   I.   Connections To Services; Responsibility Of Operator: The operator of
the mobile home park is charged with the responsibility of making all
connections from the mobile home to sewer, water, gas, electric or any other
utility services governed by these regulations, and he shall do so in full
conformity with the building code, the plumbing code, the electrical code and
health codes. The operator shall, upon request, deliver to any inspector,
health officer or other official such pertinent information required to provide
compliance with the ordinances at any reasonable time.
   J.   Parking: Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided on each mobile home
space, not in tandem. The mobile home park shall provide an automobile parking
area for the use of guests. One such space shall be provided for every five (5)
lots or fraction of five (5) lots within the park. Each space shall be nine
feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') in size, and shall contain such additional
area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
   K.   Stand Size: Mobile home stands shall be no smaller than ten feet by
fifty feet (10' x 50') in size.
   L.   Recreational Area: Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross site
shall be devoted to recreational facilities. Individual recreation areas shall
not be less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in size.
   M.   Occupied Area: The occupied area of each mobile home space shall not
exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the total area of the lot. Area shall be
deemed occupied when covered or occupied by a trailer coach, cabana, vehicle,
awning, closet, cupboard or other structure of any kind. Unoccupied area shall
be adequately landscaped and maintained.
   N.   Utilities Underground: All utilities in the park shall be placed
underground.
   O.   Tenant Storage Area: Each mobile home space shall provide the tenant
storage area convenient to its entrance, which shall contain one hundred twenty
(120) cubic feet of area. (1999 Code)
   P.   Patio Area: Each mobile home shall be provided with a patio area
containing a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of space; such patio
shall be constructed in accordance with the international building code. (1999
Code; amd. Ord. 02-02, 1-3-2002)
   Q.   Bulk Storage Area: Bulk storage area equivalent to eighty (80) square
feet per mobile home space shall be provided, and the area so designated shall
be asphalted and fenced in such a manner as to screen the compound from
surrounding mobile home spaces.
   R.   Skirting; Anchoring: All mobile homes within the park shall be skirted,
and each home shall be firmly anchored to prevent sway and/or give or play, and
shall be adequately supported.
   S.   Setback: Each mobile home shall be placed seven and one-half feet (71/
2') back from the sidewalk or roadway if there is no sidewalk. (1999 Code)
15.24.130: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Hot Water: An adequate supply of hot water for bathing, washing and
cleaning facilities shall be provided in the service buildings at all times. An
adequate supply of such water shall be considered to be at least twenty (20)
pounds of water pressure per square inch on a one-half inch (1/2") line.
   B.   Potable Water: An accessible, adequate, safe, potable supply of water
shall be provided in each mobile home park. Where a public supply of water of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be
made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water
supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and
used, as approved by the director of health. (1999 Code)
15.24.140: SEWAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Adequate And Safe System Required: An adequate and safe sewage system
shall be provided in all mobile home parks for conveying and disposing of all
sewage. Such system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with state and local laws.
   B.   Line Location: All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of
sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other movements, and
shall be separated from the park water supply system at a safe distance. Sewers
shall be at a grade which will ensure a velocity of two feet (2') per second
when flowing full. All sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved
by the director of health, shall be adequately vented, and shall have
watertight joints.
   C.   Waste Discharged: Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals,
lavatories and slop sinks in service and other buildings shall be discharged
into a public sewer system.
   D.   Connection Size: Each mobile home space shall be equipped with a sewer
connection having a minimum size of three inches (3"), protected by a concrete
collar at least three inches (3") deep and extending twelve inches (12") from
the connection in all directions. The sewer connection shall be provided with
suitable fittings to permit a watertight junction to be made with the mobile
home outlet. All sewer lines shall conform to the plumbing code.
   E.   Manholes: Manholes shall be provided at every change in direction, at
every major junction of two (2) or more branch sewers, and at intervals of not
more than four hundred feet (400'). Cleanouts extending to grade may be used
instead of manholes on four inch (4") and six inch (6") lines, and shall be
provided wherever a manhole would otherwise be necessary and at intervals of
not more than one hundred feet (100'). All cleanouts shall be capped with
cleanout plugs. (1999 Code)
15.24.150: SERVICE BUILDINGS; SANITATION FACILITIES:
Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be permanent structures
complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating building,
electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems. The buildings
shall be well lighted at all times, ventilated with screened openings,
constructed of such moisture proof material which may be painted woodwork, as
shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a
temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68oF) during the period
of October 1 to May 1. Floors of service buildings shall be constructed of
materials impervious to water. All service buildings and grounds of the park
shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition, and kept free from any
condition menacing to the health of occupants or the public, or constituting a
nuisance. (1999 Code)
15.24.160: SANITATION FACILITIES REQUIRED:
   A.   Facilities Required: The licensee, owner or lessee shall be required to
install toilets, showers and lavatories for both sexes, in sufficient number
with each building, service center, recreation area or amusement facility to
adequately care for the needs and requirements of those people whom it is
contemplated will make use of the facility.
   B.   Use Of Toilets: Toilets shall be for the exclusive use of the occupants
of the mobile home park.
   C.   Facilities For Males And Females Separated: Toilets and other
sanitation facilities for males and females shall be in separate buildings or
separated, if in the same building, by a sound proof wall. (1999 Code)
15.24.170: REFUSE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL:
   A.   Health Hazard Not Present: The storage, collection and disposal of
refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or
air pollution.
   B.   Containers: All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent
proof containers, which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet
(150') from any mobile home lot. Containers shall be provided in sufficient
number and capacity to properly store all refuse.
   C.   Collection Stands: Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all
refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent
containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration,
and to facilitate cleaning around them.
   D.   Frequency Of Collection: All refuse containing garbage shall be
collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not
available by private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this
service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or
covered containers. (1999 Code)
15.24.180: FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Rules And Regulations: The mobile home area shall be subject to the
rules and regulations as set up by the city or its designee.
   B.   Litter And Rubbish Not Present: Mobile home parks shall be kept free of
litter and rubbish.
   C.   Fire Extinguishers: Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by
the fire chief or his authorized representative shall be kept in service
buildings and at all other locations designated by the fire chief, and shall be
maintained in good operating condition.
   D.   Permitted Fires: Fires shall be made only in stoves and other equipment
intended for such purposes.
   E.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the
plans and in accordance with the requirements of the fire chief under city
ordinances. (1999 Code)
15.24.190: PARK MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES:
Park management shall have the responsibilities set forth as follows:
   A.   Operation Of Park: The person to whom a license for a mobile home park
is issued shall operate the park in compliance with the ordinances and
regulations issued under this chapter, and shall provide adequate supervision
to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a
clean and sanitary condition.
   B.   Notification Of Provisions To Occupants: The park management shall
notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter, and inform
them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder.
   C.   Supervise Placement Of Homes: The park management shall supervise the
placement of each mobile home on its mobile home space, which includes securing
its stability and installing any utility connections.
   D.   Register Required: The park management shall maintain a register
containing the names of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to
any authorized person inspecting the park.
   E.   Notification Of Health Risk: The park management shall notify the
director of health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious
disease within the park. (1999 Code)
15.24.200: OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Compliance With Requirements: The park occupant shall comply with all
applicable requirements of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder, and
shall maintain his mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition.
   B.   Proper Placement Of Home: The park occupant shall be responsible for
proper placement of his mobile home on its mobile home space and proper
installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of
the park management.
   C.   Animals At Large: No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, or other
pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the
limits of any mobile home lot. (1999 Code)
15.24.210: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Inspections Authorized: The community development director or his
representatives, is authorized and directed to make such inspections as are
necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter and the
regulations issued hereunder.
   B.   Entrance Authority: The community development director or his
representatives, shall have the power and authority to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   Free Access For Inspections: It shall be the duty of the owners or
occupants of the mobile home park, and mobile homes contained therein, or of
the person in charge thereof, to give the community development director free
access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
   D.   Access For Repairs: It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile
home park to give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any
part of the mobile home park or its premises, at reasonable times, for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder or with any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (1999 Code)
15.24.220: NOTICE, HEARING AND ORDER PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Content: Whenever the community development
director determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter or regulations issued
hereunder, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom
the permit or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
      1.   Be in writing;
      2.   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      3.   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it required;
      4.   Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may required;
provided, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly
served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered
mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by
any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and
      5.   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder.
   B.   Suspension Of License For Failure To Comply: If, at the end of the
period set forth in the notice, the community development director shall
reinspect such mobile home park and, if such conditions or practices have not
been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such
suspension to the person to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of notice
of such suspension, such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park
except as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Hearing May Be Requested: Any person whose license has been suspended
or is otherwise affected by the notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or any regulation issued
hereunder, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
mayor, by filing a written petition requesting a hearing and setting forth a
brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the date the
notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a
stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued
under subsection F of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the
community development director shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not
later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided,
that upon application of the petitioner, the community development director may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond the ten day
period when, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient
reasons for such postponement.
   D.   Findings: After such hearing, the mayor shall make findings as to
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder, and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in subsection A of
this section. Upon failure to comply with any other sustaining or modifying
notice, the license of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be
revoked.
   E.   Proceedings Public Record; Appeal: The proceedings at such a hearing,
including the findings and decision of the mayor, together with a copy of every
notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record
in the office of the city recorder, but the transcript of the proceedings need
not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought as provided
by this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of this state.
   F.   Emergency Action: Whenever the director of community development finds
that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence
of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may permit
or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such an order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the mayor shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsections C and D
of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued
thereafter. (1999 Code)
15.24.230: VIOLATION; LICENSE REVOCATION:
The community development director or any other officer charged with the
enforcement of this title, may revoke any license to maintain and operate a
mobile home park when the licensee is found to have violated any provision of
this code. After such violation, the license may, in the discretion of the
revoking official, be reissued if the violation has been remedied and the park
is in condition to be maintained and operated in full compliance with the law.
(1999 Code)
15.24.240: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Denial; Revocation: If for any reason application for a license has
been denied, or the officials have revoked a permit granted under this chapter,
the person to whom the revocation or license has been effectively withdrawn
may, upon application, be granted a hearing before the mayor as provided in
this chapter.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: Any person whose license has been suspended
or revoked, or who has received notice from the director of community
development that his license will be suspended unless certain conditions or
practices at the mobile home park are corrected, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the proper official under the procedure
provided by section
15.24.220 of this chapter; provided, that when no petition for such hearing
shall have been filed within ten (10) days following the day on which notice of
suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically
revoked at the expiration of such ten (10) day period. (1999 Code)
15.24.250: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In the event that any occupant or person in the management of a mobile home
park, as defined in this chapter, shall fail to do those things required of
such person, the person shall violate the provisions of this chapter or the
prohibitions as set forth, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 15.28
HIGHWAY DEDICATION
SECTION:
15.28.010: Dedication And Improvement Required
15.28.020: Exceptions
15.28.030: Dedication Procedure
15.28.040: Building Permit Issuance
15.28.050: Lots Affected By Dedication
15.28.060: Improvement Standards And Procedures
15.28.070: Appeal
15.28.080: Amendments To Highway Plan
15.28.010: DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in section
15.28.020 of this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected,
reconstructed, structurally altered or enlarged, and no building permit shall
be issued therefor, on any lot or parcel of land which abuts a major or
secondary highway within the city, as shown on the official major and secondary
highway plan from time to time adopted by the city (the "street plan") on file
with the community development director and made part of this chapter by
reference, or other public street which does not conform to current city width
standards, unless the portion of such lot or parcel within the right of way of
the highway to be widened or requiring additional street width has been
dedicated to the city and improved. The dedication and improvements shall meet
the standards for such highway or street as provided in section
15.28.060 of this chapter. (1999 Code)
15.28.020: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The maximum area required to be dedicated shall not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of any lot or parcel which was of record in the county recorder's
office on the effective date hereof. In determining the amount of area required
for dedication for purposes of this exception, any highway area which
previously has been dedicated to the public through public use shall not be
included.
   B.   Such required dedication shall not reduce the lot or parcel to less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   C.   Dedication shall not be required on those portions of a lot occupied by
a main building existing on the effective date hereof.
   D.   Additional improvements shall not be required on a lot where paved
surface, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements in good condition exist within
the present right of way, unless use is changed from agricultural or single-
family dwelling to a commercial, industrial, office or two-family dwelling or
more.
   E.   Dedication shall not be required for remodelings, additions and
accessory buildings incidental to a single-family dwelling, used as a
residence, existing on the lot as of the effective date hereof; provided, that
no additional dwelling units are created.
   F.   Dedication shall not be required for additions or accessory buildings
clearly incidental to a main building existing on the lot as of the effective
date hereof; provided, that the cumulative floor area of all such additions and
accessory buildings does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet or twenty
percent (20%) of existing square footage, whichever is greater. (1999 Code)
15.28.030: DEDICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Offer And Deed: Any person or other entity required to dedicate land
under the provisions of this chapter shall execute an offer to dedicate and a
warranty deed or other deed form acceptable to the city properly executed by
all parties of interest in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his/her
heirs, assigns or successor in interest. The offer to dedicate, deed, and a
title report shall be filed with the community development director. No title
report need be furnished in cases where the community development director
determines the property in question is within a street being maintained by the
city as dedicated to the public by use.
   B.   Review Of Offer: The community development director shall review the
offer to dedicate and deed for completeness and compliance with city
requirements which shall thereafter be promptly processed and submitted to the
mayor for final acceptance. The dedication shall be complete when the deed is
recorded in the office of the county recorder after its acceptance by the city.
   C.   Satisfactory Approval: For purposes of this chapter, dedication shall
be considered as satisfactorily assured when the offer to dedicate and deed
have been approved by the community development director. (1999 Code)
15.28.040: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
When all dedication and improvements required by this chapter have been
completed or assured as provided in this chapter, a building permit may be
issued. (1999 Code)
15.28.050: LOTS AFFECTED BY DEDICATION:
On a lot affected by the dedication required under the provisions of this
chapter, all required yards, setbacks, parking area, loading space and building
locations for new buildings or structures or additions to buildings or
structures shall be measured and calculated from the new lot lines created by
the dedication. However, in applying all other provisions of the land use
ordinances of the city, such lot shall be considered in an area as that which
existed immediately prior to dedication. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
15.28.060: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Major And Secondary Highways: Major and secondary highways within the
city shall be dedicated to the width indicated on the street plan with a cross
section as shown in the city highway standards, except as provided elsewhere by
appropriate authority. (1999 Code)
   B.   Improvements Defined: "Improvements" mean those improvements required
under the city subdivision regulations which shall be installed in accordance
with the standards required under the subdivision regulations. (1999 Code; amd.
Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   C.   Variations Require Approval: The community development director must
approve variations from the standards described in this section, as necessary,
considering the conditions of terrain and existing improvements contiguous
thereto.
   D.   Completion; Bond: Public Improvements required under the provisions of
this chapter shall be assured when they are completed to the satisfaction of
the city engineer as required in this chapter or a improvement assurance
warranty bond has been filed guaranteeing their completion within one year
according to the provisions of
13.01.100  of this Title.
   E.   Completion In Specified Sequence: If the city manager determines that
the required public improvements should be completed in a specified sequence
and/or in less than a one year period in order to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the city or its residents from traffic, flood, drainage or other
hazards, the city may require in approving the improvement assurance warranty
bond that the improvements be installed in a specified sequence and period
which may be less than one year and shall incorporate such requirements in the
bond. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2023-12, 9-21-2023)
15.28.070: APPEAL:
Any person may appeal to the mayor any determination in connection with the
administration, enforcement and other provisions of this chapter. The appeal
must be submitted in triplicate and must also provide sufficient information to
provide for a proper determination. (1999 Code)
15.28.080: AMENDMENTS TO HIGHWAY PLAN:
Amendments to the street plan may be made by the city after receiving
recommendations from the community development director. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 15.32
EXISTING NONOWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL HOUSING
SECTION:
15.32.010: Title
15.32.020: Purpose And Scope
15.32.030: Definitions
15.32.040: Authority
15.32.050: Minimum Standards
15.32.060: Right Of Entry
15.32.070: Violations, Notice And Order
15.32.080: Administrative Hearing And Appeal
15.32.090: Approval For Occupancy
15.32.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF HOLLADAY EXISTING NONOWNER OCCUPIED
RESIDENTIAL HOUSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.020: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health,
safety, and welfare of the city and its present and future inhabitants and
businesses, to protect the tax base, and to protect property values within the
city, as provided in Utah Code Annotated sections 10-11-1, 57-22-1 et seq., and
other applicable state statutes. This purpose shall be accomplished by
regulating the maintenance, repair and remodeling of nonowner occupied
residential buildings existing as of the date of enactment hereof by:
      1.   Establishing minimum housing standards for such buildings or
portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be used, for human
habitation;
      2.   Establishing minimum standards for safety from fire and other
hazards;
      3.   Promoting maintenance and improvement of structures by applying
standards of this chapter to renovations. This chapter allows distinctions in
the application of standards based on the year a structure was built, as long
as a reasonable level of safety is achieved;
      4.   Avoiding the closure or abandonment of housing and the displacement
of occupants where such can be done without sacrificing the public health,
safety and welfare;
      5.   Providing for the administration, enforcement and penalties for this
chapter.
   B.   Scope:
      1.   Application To Existing Buildings: This chapter encompasses fire
safety and structural integrity of existing nonowner occupied residential
buildings. Within the structures, the scope includes equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements,
space requirements, and for safe and sanitary maintenance.
      2.   Owner Occupied Versus Rental Properties: The standards of this
chapter apply to the interior and exterior of all buildings, dwelling units and
premises which are occupied on a rental basis. For buildings or dwelling units
which are occupied solely by the owner and the owner's family, all the
requirements defined as imminent danger or hazardous condition situations, and
those affecting the exterior of the building and premises shall apply. Other
interior standards do not apply to owner occupied dwelling units.
      3.   Application To Remodeling Of Existing Residential Buildings: This
chapter shall apply to remodeling or renovation of all nonowner occupied
residential buildings existing as of the date of enactment hereof as follows:
         a.   This chapter applies regardless of tenancy, regardless of the
valuation of the renovations, and regardless of the date of such remodeling or
renovation, unless otherwise noted in this chapter.
         b.   Those buildings or portions thereof which conform with all
applicable laws in effect at the time of their construction or whose fire
resistive integrity and fire extinguishing systems have been adequately
maintained and improved to accommodate any increase in occupant load,
alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy may continue in accordance
with the standards in effect at that time. This chapter shall not lessen such
requirements for residential buildings which were constructed in compliance
with the code in effect at the time of construction.
         c.   The requirements of this chapter are minimums. During a
renovation or remodeling project, the more stringent requirements of this
chapter or the codes then adopted by the city applicable to building or
construction shall apply.
         d.   When a construction standard is omitted from this chapter, the
applicable standard of the codes relating to building or construction then in
effect in the city shall apply.
         e.   When the purpose of the renovation is to create new dwelling
units, the applicable standard of the codes relating to building or
construction then in effect in the city shall apply.
      4.   Dangerous Buildings: If any conflict exists between this chapter and
the UCADB section 302, the UCADB shall control.
      5.   Change Of Use: Any building undergoing a change which intensifies
the use, as defined in codes relating to building or construction then in
effect in the city, shall comply with the most strict requirements of the
building or construction codes then in effect in the city.
      6.   Permits Required: Except as provided in this subsection, no building
or structure regulated by this chapter shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, moved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for
each building or structure has first been obtained from the building official.
Except where required by state law, permits are not required for the following:
         a.   Floor covering installation;
         b.   Interior and exterior painting;
         c.   Attaching interior finish wall coverings and similar interior
finish work;
         d.   Replacement of glazing except where safety glazing is required by
building or construction codes then in effect in the city;
         e.   Patching wall surfaces;
         f.   Installation of countertops and cabinets;
         g.   Replacement of interior and exterior light fixtures;
         h.   Replacement of electrical wall outlets and switches;
         i.   Replacement of kitchen or bathroom sinks, toilets or bidets where
the trap and trap arm are not replaced or extended;
         j.   Replacement of faucets, washers and traps (when the trap is
replaced with like installation and the trap arm and the existing vents and
drain lines are not disturbed);
         k.   Repair of irrigation pipelines where the backflow preventers
exist or are not being replaced;
         l.   Replacement of filters, belts and motors in mechanical systems;
         m.   Installation of battery operated smoke detectors or one hundred
twenty (120) volt smoke detector;
         n.   Replacement of sidewalks on private property;
         o.   Replacement of ventilation fans;
         p.   Seasonal weatherization, as long as it does not prevent emergency
egress.
   C.   Violations: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure
or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter.
      2.   Fail to obey a notice and order issued pursuant to this chapter.
      3.   Occupy, or rent for occupancy, a building that has been closed to
occupancy.
      4.   Fail to obey an interpretation, decision or requirement of the city
within thirty (30) days, unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.030: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Construction Of Terms: For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall be construed as specified in this
section. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular.
   B.   Whole Includes Part: Whenever the words "apartment house", "building",
"dormitory", "dwelling unit", "habitable room", "hotel", "housing unit" or
"structure" are used in this chapter, such words shall be construed as if
followed by the words "or any portion thereof", except for owner occupied areas
as specified in this chapter.
   C.   Referenced Documents: References to codes, ordinances, chapters,
sections, or subsections shall include any successor to such code, ordinance,
chapter, section or subsection that has been adopted by the city. (Ord. 06-10,
6-15-2006)
   D.   Defined Terms: The hereinafter defined terms are in addition to terms
defined in title 13 of this code, and are not intended to conflict with such
definitions. Terms having a commonly accepted legal definition are deemed to
have that definition. Where an apparent conflict with the hereinafter
enumerated definitions may exist, the more restrictive definition shall
control.
   ADDITION: An increase in floor area or height of a building or structure
outside of the existing building envelope.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: A person (who may be a member of the city's
community development staff) who has been authorized by the city manager to
conduct administrative hearings to establish a repair agreement between the
property owner and the building official to resolve the property's deficiencies
as defined by this code.
   AGENT: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, LLC, or
other entity acting for or on behalf of others with express written authority.
   APPROVED: As to given material, mode of construction or repair, piece of
equipment or device, means approved by the building official as the result of
investigation and/or tests conducted by the building official, or by reason of
accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities or technical or
scientific organizations.
   ATTIC: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
   BATHROOM: A room containing at least one of each of the following fixtures:
sink, toilet, bidet, tub or shower.
   BEDROOM: Any space designed or used for sleeping.
   BUILDING CLOSURE OR CLOSED TO ENTRY OR CLOSED TO UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY: A
building which has been closed to occupancy.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE: The space defined by existing floors, exterior walls,
roof, basement and attic, but not including attached garages.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR: A person designated by the building official to make
inspections of buildings and properties covered by this chapter.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The city's community development director, or his
designee.
   CEILING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the finished floor to finished
ceiling or to the lowest point of the ceiling framing members. Where
projections other than lighting fixtures exist below the ceiling, the height
shall be measured from the projection to the finished floor.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate issued by the building official
authorizing occupancy of a building.
   COMMON ROOM: A room available in congregate housing for the shared use of
occupants of two (2) or more housing units. This does not include common
corridors and exit passages, but does include kitchens and game rooms.
   CONGREGATE HOUSING: Any building which contains facilities for living,
sleeping and sanitation, as required by this chapter, and may include
facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than a family.
Congregate housing includes SROs, convents, monasteries, dormitories, boarding
and rooming houses, hostels, fraternity and sorority houses, but does not
include shelters, jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
   COOKING FACILITY: At a minimum, a range with stove top and oven, and a sink.
   CORRIDOR: A hallway that serves more than one dwelling unit.
   COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level and bounded on at least three (3) sides by walls of a building.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise,
between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank,
receptacle, equipment or device, through which unclean or polluted water or
other substances may contaminate such potable water supply system.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit containing only one habitable room
with a bath and/or kitchen in the unit.
   EXISTING: In existence at the time of adoption of this chapter.
   EXITWAY: A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and
includes any intervening aisles, doorways, gates, corridors, exterior exit
balconies, ramps, stairways, smokeproof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit
passageways, exit courts and yards as these terms are defined in the IBC.
   FIRE RESISTANCE OR FIRE RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION: Construction that resists
the spread of fire, as specified in the IBC.
   FLOOR AREA COMPUTATION: The floor area of a habitable room excluding
closets, cabinets, bathrooms, and kitchens when such kitchens are separated
from the habitable room by walls or other partitions.
   GLAZING: Light transmitting glass or plastic installed in windows, doors and
skylights, including safety glass, but not including glass block.
   HAAB: Building code board of appeals, as constituted in section 113 of the
international building code.
   HABITABLE ROOM: A room in a building for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and
similar areas are not habitable rooms.
   HALL: A space used for circulating between the rooms of a building within an
individual dwelling unit.
   HAZARDOUS CONDITION: A condition in a residential building or dwelling unit
where failure of a structural, electrical, mechanical or plumbing component
system or systems is determined by the building official upon information and
belief as likely to occur within the next ninety six (96) hours, but which is
not determined to be serious enough to constitute an "imminent danger".
Hazardous conditions include, but are not limited to:
      1.   All of the conditions listed under the definition of "imminent
danger" if those conditions can be repaired with safety while all or the
affected part of the building or unit remains occupied; or
      2.   "Imminent danger" conditions which have been partially secured
pursuant to this chapter;
      3.   Cracked, displaced or missing foundations resulting in settlement
and structural damage;
      4.   Improper, missing, misused or malfunctioning electrical service or
disconnect devices;
      5.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports;
      6.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety;
      7.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that crack,
split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration where
failure is determined likely to occur by the building official upon information
or belief within the next ninety six (96) hours, but is not likely to occur
immediately;
      8.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
      9.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal or vertical members which sag, split or buckle due to defective
material or deterioration;
      10.   Inoperable toilet, bathroom sink, or bathtub or shower in a
dwelling unit or congregate housing unit;
      11.   Lack of or inoperable kitchen sink in a dwelling unit or congregate
housing unit;
      12.   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength
to carry imposed loads with safety such that failure is determined by the
building official to be likely to occur within the next ninety six (96) hours
but is not likely to occur immediately;
      13.   Except as defined under "imminent danger" herein, conditions that
reduce the width, height or area of a required emergency exitway or required
escape window;
      14.   All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the
operable fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by city codes;
      15.   Buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping,
cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for
such occupancies;
      16.   Lack of a kitchen area equipped with a working stove, oven, sink
and refrigerator unless otherwise specified in this code.
   HISTORIC BUILDING: Any building or structure which has been included on the
city's historic site register or its historic landmark register, or has been
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or on the Utah State
Register of Historic Places, or is a contributory structure located in a
historic district designated pursuant to this code.
   HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM: A room or combination of rooms (suite) offered as a single
unit for lodging on a daily or weekly basis.
   IBC: The edition of the international building code currently adopted by the
city.
   IMMINENT DANGER: A condition in a building or dwelling unit subject to this
chapter where structural, electrical, mechanical or plumbing systems have
failed so that they may cause immediate death or serious injury to the
building's occupants or the public as determined by the building official.
Conditions of "imminent danger" are those that are so severe and dangerous that
either repairs cannot be completed immediately or it is appropriate to have the
residents or other occupants leave the building or unit before the repairs have
begun. "Imminent danger" consists of any of the following and other similarly
serious conditions:
      1.   Failed or missing foundations, beams, columns, or floor systems;
      2.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members which sag, split or buckle and failure is likely as
determined by the building official to occur at any moment;
      3.   Broken water lines causing flooding which is undermining structural
supports or otherwise endangering the building's integrity;
      4.   Leaking gas;
      5.   Missing flues or vent connectors resulting in exhaust gases entering
the building;
      6.   Lack of adequate heating facilities during the months of October
through April;
      7.   Overload of main and branch electrical distributions systems;
      8.   Exposed electrical wires, fuses and electrical current breakers
capable of producing electrical shock or fire and readily accessible to the
occupants or the public;
      9.   Stairs and stair components that cannot carry the loads intended and
which may collapse if so loaded;
      10.   Contaminated water systems;
      11.   A complete absence of toilet facilities;
      12.   A complete lack of water supply or sewage disposal facilities as a
result of a failure of a building's or dwelling unit's system;
      13.   Blocked emergency egress halls, corridors and/or doors, including
accumulation or storage of materials in stairways, corridors, doors or windows,
or other condition which blocks the means of egress.
   INFESTATION: The presence of insects, rodents or other pests in or around a
building in numbers that are or may be detrimental to the health, safety or
general welfare of the occupants as determined by the building official.
   KITCHEN: A space or room used, designed or intended to be used for the
preparation of food, which includes permanently installed cooking facilities.
   LISTED AND LISTING: Terms referring to equipment and materials which are
shown in a list published by an approved testing agency qualified and equipped
for experimental testing and maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of
current productions. The listing states that the material or equipment complies
with accepted national standards which are approved, or standards which have
been evaluated for conformity with approved industrial standards.
   MAINTENANCE: The repair, replacement and refinishing of any component of an
existing structure, but does not include alteration or modification to the
existing weight bearing structural components.
   MINOR DEFICIENCY: A structural, electrical, mechanical or plumbing code
violation that is minor in nature and is less severe or dangerous than a
"substandard condition". Minor deficiencies include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Interior finish wall covering missing or in disrepair;
      2.   Lack of paint;
      3.   Dripping or leaking kitchen or bathroom faucets;
      4.   Soffit and fascia trim of which more than twenty percent (20%) is
weathered, missing, or loose.
   MONUMENTAL STAIRS: A stairway, exceeding four feet (4') in width, at the
main entrance on the exterior of a building.
   NEC: The edition of the national electrical code currently adopted by the
city.
   NOTICE AND ORDER: A document which:
      1.   Provides notice of the existence of a condition covered by this
chapter;
      2.   Orders certain actions by the owner or owner's designee; and
      3.   Specifies subsequent processes.
   NOTIFIED PARTY: The person or persons to whom a notice and order is issued.
   OCCUPANT: A person occupying or having possession of a dwelling unit.
   OPENING: An exterior glazed opening capable of being closed to the weather,
consisting of a window, a glazed door, or an openable glazed skylight, which
opens upon a roof, yard, court, street, alley or recess from a court.
   PATTERN OF CIRCULATION: Any area in a room or group of rooms where the
occupant is likely to walk because of the location of doors, fixtures or
furniture placement when size of room restricts furniture placement. Fixtures,
pipes and ducts projecting from the ceiling which are located near the middle
of the room are within the pattern of circulation.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM: Any potable water distribution piping, and any drainage
piping within or below any building, including all plumbing fixtures, traps,
vents and devices appurtenant to such water distribution or drainage piping and
including potable water treating or using equipment, and any lawn sprinkling
system.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use and which has a
clear width of not less than ten feet (10').
   RISE: The vertical portion of a stair step.
   RUN: The horizontal portion of a stair step, measured from the leading edge
of the stair tread to a point directly beneath the leading edge of the step
directly above it.
   SRO (SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY): A congregate housing in which the dwelling
units have one combined sleeping and living room and may include a kitchen and/
or a separate private bathroom.
   SECURED BUILDING: A building where all windows and doors are intact and
lockable against unauthorized entry.
   SLOPING CEILING: Any ceiling with a slope greater than one-half inch (1/2")
per foot.
   SPACE, COMMON: "Common space" means shared areas available for use by the
occupants of the building.
   SPACE, PRIVATE: "Private space" means the portion of dwelling unit which is
for the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit.
   SUBSTANDARD CONDITION: A structural, electrical, mechanical or plumbing
system condition in a residential building or dwelling unit which violates
applicable codes but with maintenance or repair can be made fully safe and
which does not amount to an "imminent danger" or a "hazardous condition".
Substandard conditions include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations with cracking and evidence of
settlement;
      2.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports;
      3.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration;
      4.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
members that are of insufficient size to carry live and dead loads with safety;
      5.   Soffit and fascia trim more than twenty percent (20%) of which is
weathered, missing or loose;
      6.   Missing, decayed, buckling or worn out roof covering;
      7.   Roof having more than two (2) layers of shingle type covering;
      8.   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective
material or deterioration;
      9.   Parapet wall or parapet cap bricks that are loose or missing;
      10.   Stair risers, treads, jacks, stringers or supports that are cracked
or otherwise deteriorated or missing;
      11.   Plumbing which was not installed in accordance with the adopted
plumbing code in effect at the time of installation or with generally accepted
construction practices, has not been maintained in good condition, or is not
free of cross connections or siphonage;
      12.   Continuous running water in a toilet, bathroom sink or kitchen
sink;
      13.   Lack of hot or cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
dwelling unit or congregate housing structure;
      14.   Mechanical equipment which was not installed in accordance with
codes in effect at the time of installation, or with generally accepted
construction practices, or which has not been maintained in good and safe
condition as determined by the building official;
      15.   Inoperable heating systems during the months of September through
May;
      16.   Inoperable air conditioning systems, when the building is supplied
with such a system, and/or a lack of other adequate forms of ventilation and
air conditioning which will keep the air temperature below eighty five degrees
Fahrenheit (85°F);
      17.   Damaged or missing heat ducts or missing heat duct registers;
      18.   Electrical wiring which was not installed in accordance with codes
in effect at the time of installation or with generally accepted construction
practices, has not been maintained in good condition, or is not being used in a
safe manner;
      19.   Missing light fixtures, switches and outlet and switch cover
plates;
      20.   Overcurrent situations such as those caused by the use of
electrical extension cords and multiple light fixtures;
      21.   Lack of the minimum natural light and ventilation required by this
chapter;
      22.   Room and space dimensions less than that required by this chapter;
      23.   Dampness of habitable rooms as evidenced by condensation or mold on
ceilings, walls or floors;
      24.   Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster or stucco;
      25.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundation or floors, including broken windows or doors;
      26.   Deteriorated or lack of weather protection for exterior wall
coverings;
      27.   Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings;
      28.   Wood has been installed within six inches (6") of earth which is
not naturally decay resistant, treated wood or wood protected by an approved
barrier;
      29.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the
health department;
      30.   Lack of garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as
determined by the building official;
      31.   Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk,
dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water,
and similar materials or conditions constitute a violation of city regulations;
      32.   Any building, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible materials
or vegetation which, in the opinion of the city's fire and emergency services
provider or building official, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or
explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire
or explosion arising from any cause;
      33.   Any fire resistive requirement of this chapter which is not met;
      34.   Drainage of water from roofs or yards in a manner that creates
flooding or damage to a structure;
      35.   Any equipment or apparatus that causes excessive noise, pollution,
odor or light as defined by this code or health department regulations;
      36.   Guardrails or handrails in common areas that are missing or cannot
support required loads.
   TOILET ROOM: A room which contains a toilet.
   UCADB: The edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings currently adopted by the city.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: A condition of the premises which has been found
by the building official to be an "imminent danger" or "hazardous condition"
situation as defined in this section, or which fails to meet the sanitation
requirements of the health department.
   VENTILATION, NATURAL: "Natural ventilation" means any openable exterior
door, window or skylight which opens upon a roof, yard, court, street or alley.
(Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006; amd. Ord. 2010-12, 6-17-2010; Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
15.32.040: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Enforcement: The building official is authorized to enforce all the
provisions of this chapter. The building official may issue and deliver
citations under authority provided by state law.
   B.   Interpretation: The building official may render interpretations of
this chapter and adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations to
clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and
regulations shall conform to the intent and purpose of this chapter, and shall
be made available in writing for public inspection upon request.
   C.   Alternate Materials And Methods Of Construction: This chapter is not
intended to exclude any method of structural design or repair not specifically
provided for in this chapter or the IBC. The building official may approve any
alternate material or method of construction conforming to alternate design and
methods of construction sections of the IBC. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.050: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The following are minimum standards, against which the building official shall
measure any alleged violation constituting imminent danger, hazardous
conditions, substandard conditions or minor deficiencies:
   A.   Exterior Standards:
      1.   Structural Repair: All roofs, floors, walls, chimneys, foundations,
and other structural components shall be repaired when they no longer retain
their structural integrity. Loose bricks in chimneys shall be repaired and
missing chimney caps shall be replaced.
      2.   Exterior Surfaces: Exposed materials that require weather protection
and exterior surfaces that are deteriorating shall be repaired to the extent
necessary to stop damage from cold, wind, water, or dampness. The roof covering
and flashing shall form an impervious membrane.
      3.   Drainage: All surface water shall drain away from the structure
unless any potential adverse effect of the runoff is mitigated to the
reasonable satisfaction of the building official.
      4.   Windows And Doors: Windows that are required by this chapter for
light and ventilation shall be fully glazed. Window openings not required to
meet light, ventilation, and egress standards may be sealed with opaque
materials or removed. Broken or missing doors, doorframes, windows, and window
sashes shall be replaced or repaired.
      5.   Appendages: All awnings, fire escapes, exhaust ducts and similar
appendages shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored.
      6.   House Addressing: All residential buildings shall display a street
number in a prominent location on the street side of the building in such a
position that the number is easily visible to approaching emergency vehicles.
The numbers shall be no less than three inches (3") in height and shall be of a
contrasting color to the background to which they are attached. Each individual
unit within any multiple-family structure shall display a prominent
identification number, not less than two inches (2") in height, which is easily
visible.
      7.   Exterior Walkways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and
maintained free from hazardous conditions.
   B.   Interior Standards:
      1.   Showers/Tubs: Showers shall be finished to a height of seventy
inches (70") above the fixture drain outlet with nonabsorbent material.
Freestanding tubs with shower risers may utilize a shower curtain that totally
encloses all sides of the tub.
      2.   Floor Coverings: All floor and stair coverings shall be maintained
in a secure and substantially intact manner. This standard does not apply to
area or throw rugs within dwelling units.
      3.   Walls And Ceilings: All walls and ceilings shall be maintained so
that they are secure and intact. Surfaces shall be painted or covered with
wallpaper or paneling.
      4.   Finishes, Washable Surfaces: In kitchens and bathrooms of congregate
housing and SROs, floors and walls within fifteen inches (15") of sinks,
bidets, showers, toilets, and tubs shall be finished with a nonporous material
that is not adversely affected by moisture.
      5.   Operable Fixtures And Equipment: All fixtures, appliances, and
equipment required by this code shall be maintained in safe and operable
condition.
   C.   Doors, Trim And Hardware:
      1.   All doors, trim and hardware shall be kept in good working
condition.
      2.   Exterior doors which are required for ingress and egress shall have
locks which are keyed from the exterior and are operable from the interior
without the use of a key or other special equipment or knowledge. Original
locks in historic buildings are not required to be replaced if in good working
condition.
      3.   Hinges for outswinging doors shall be equipped with nonremovable
hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the
exterior by removing the hinge pins.
   D.   Environmental Or Sanitary Standards:
      1.   All premises shall be maintained clean, safe, sanitary and free from
an accumulation of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall keep that part
of the structure and exterior property which such occupant occupies, controls
or uses in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a boarding and rooming house, fraternity and sorority house,
dormitory, SRO or multiple-family dwelling units shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior
property.
      2.   Garbage and refuse storage and removal shall meet the requirements
of the health department regulations.
      3.   There shall be no insect or rodent infestation in violation of the
health department regulations.
      4.   Asbestos, regardless of the date of installation, shall meet the
requirements of the health department regulations.
      5.   A room in which a toilet is located shall be separated from food
preparation or storage rooms by a tightfitting door.
   E.   Space And Occupancy Standards:
      1.   Ceiling Heights:
         a.   Habitable Rooms: The minimum ceiling height for all habitable
rooms shall be seven feet six inches (7'6"), except for kitchens, which may be
seven feet zero inches (7'0") when the requirements of this chapter for
emergency egress, light and ventilation are met and a one hundred twenty (120)
volt electrical powered smoke detector is installed in the room. The only
exception is that a smoke detector is not required in a kitchen. Projections
shall be allowed to six feet four inches (6'4") when the projection is not in
the pattern of circulation and projections are not greater than twenty percent
(20%) of the floor area of the room.
         b.   Nonhabitable Rooms Except Bathrooms: All nonhabitable rooms,
except bathrooms, shall have no minimum ceiling height requirement.
         c.   Bathrooms And Toilet Rooms: Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have
a minimum ceiling height of six feet four inches (6'4") with no projections
below the six foot four inch (6'4") minimum. The bathroom ceiling height at the
back of a sink, toilet or tub without shower may be sloped to a minimum height
of five feet zero inches (5'0") at the wall when the ceiling height meets the
minimum required height at a point two feet zero inches (2'0") from the wall
adjacent to the bathroom plumbing fixture.
         d.   Sloping Ceilings: In any room with a sloping ceiling, at least
one-half (1/2) the floor area shall have a minimum ceiling height as required
by this section. No portion of the room with a ceiling height below five feet
zero inches (5'0") may be used in the floor area computation.
         e.   Corridors: A minimum ceiling height of six feet four inches
(6'4") shall be required in corridors.
      2.   Room And Corridor Size:
         a.   Floor Area And Room Dimensions: Dwelling units shall have at
least one habitable room with not less than one hundred twenty (120) square
feet of floor area. Habitable rooms other than a kitchen shall have an area not
less than seventy (70) square feet and shall not be less than seven feet (7')
in length or width.
         b.   Sleeping Room Dimensions: Every room used for sleeping shall have
at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area. Where more than two (2)
persons occupy a room used for sleeping, the required floor area shall be
increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of
two (2).
         c.   Corridors: The minimum width of corridors shall be thirty six
inches (36"). In dwelling units constructed prior to 1983, a minimum corridor
width of thirty inches (30") shall be permitted.
      3.   Special Dwellings:
         a.   Efficiency Dwelling Units: An efficiency dwelling unit shall:
            (1)   Have a living room of at least one hundred ninety (190)
square feet of floor area. An additional one hundred (100) square feet of floor
area shall be provided for each occupant in excess of two (2);
            (2)   Have a closet;
            (3)   Have a kitchen sink and cooking and refrigeration facilities,
each having a clear working space of at least thirty inches (30") in front of
the fixture or appliance;
            (4)   Have a bathroom containing a toilet, sink and bathtub or
shower.
         b.   Congregate Housing: Individual units in congregate housing shall
have at least one room with not less than seventy (70) square feet of floor
area per occupant. When individual rooms are less than one hundred twenty (120)
square feet, a separate common room shall be provided of at least one hundred
twenty (120) square feet for each ten (10) units, with a minimum of one common
room per floor. When separate rooms are not provided with cooking facilities,
the common room may be a common kitchen with a floor area as defined by the
floor area computation.
      4.   Cooking Facilities:
         a.   Cooking Facilities In Dwelling Units: Each dwelling unit shall
have a kitchen that supplies:
            (1)   A range with stove top and oven. Hot plates, pans, and
similar units shall not be considered as cooking facilities. All cooking
appliances shall be maintained in good working condition.
            (2)   An approved sink, with a minimum dimension of twelve inches
by twelve inches (12" x 12") by four inches (4") deep.
            (3)   A minimum of four (4) square feet of counter space.
            (4)   A refrigerator.
         b.   Cooking Facilities For Individual Units In Congregate Housing: As
long as such cooking facilities do not encroach into the required floor area,
required cooking facilities may be supplied in individual units, provided all
of the following items are supplied:
            (1)   A range with stove top and oven. Hot plates, pans and similar
units shall not be considered as cooking facilities and are not allowed.
Portable cooking devices are not allowed in individual rooms;
            (2)   An approved sink, with minimum dimensions of twelve inches by
twelve inches (12" x 12") by four inches (4") deep;
            (3)   A minimum of four (4) square feet of counter space;
            (4)   A refrigerator.
         c.   Common Kitchens In Congregate Housing: When cooking facilities
are not provided within individual units, congregate housing shall have a
common kitchen area which shall contain the following minimum facilities: a
sink for each twenty (20) tenants or portion thereof, a range for each twenty
(20) tenants or portion thereof, and a refrigerator for each ten (10) tenants
or portion thereof. The minimum kitchen area shall be one hundred twenty (120)
square feet based on the floor area computation for the first ten (10)
occupants or portion thereof, and an additional thirty (30) square feet for
each additional ten (10) persons or portion thereof.
         d.   Window Size Alterations: When window size modifications are
necessary to meet light, ventilation or emergency egress, the window shall meet
the most currently adopted IBC standard.
   F.   Light And Ventilation:
      1.   Natural Light In Habitable Rooms:
         a.   Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing
directly to the outdoors to provide natural light. The minimum total window
area shall equal one-twentieth (1/20) or more of the floor area of the room,
with a minimum of three and one-half (31/2) square feet. Special purpose rooms
such as home theaters and film processing rooms shall not be subject to this
requirement. Kitchens may be provided with artificial light, which shall be a
minimum of 1.5 watts incandescent or 0.8 watts fluorescent per square foot of
room.
         b.   The glazed area of an exterior door may be used for purposes of
computing window size for natural light.
         c.   For the purpose of meeting light or ventilation requirements, as
well as emergency egress, a room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining
room when one-half (1/2) of the area of the common wall is open and
unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the
floor area of the interior room or twenty five (25) square feet, whichever is
greater.
      2.   Ventilation:
         a.   Habitable Rooms:
            (1)   Except as provided in subsection F2a(2) of this section, all
habitable rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openings
to the exterior which have the capability of being closed to the weather. Total
openings shall have an area at least one-twentieth (1/20) of the floor area of
the room or three and one-half (31/2) square feet, whichever is greater.
            (2)   A mechanical ventilation system shall be allowed in lieu of
openings for natural ventilation. Such system shall create a positive pressure
in the room and the air intake shall be connected directly to the outside and
be capable of two (2) air exchanges per hour. In kitchens, the ventilation
system may create negative pressure. The air intake/exhaust source shall be
located at least three feet (3') above any opening which is within ten feet
(10') of the air intake/exhaust.
            (3)   Exterior doors may be used to meet natural ventilation
requirements.
         b.   Bathrooms, Laundry Rooms, And Other Nonhabitable Areas:
            (1)   Except as provided in subsection F2b(2) of this section, all
bathrooms and laundry rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means
of openings to the exterior which have the capability of being closed to the
weather. Such openings shall have a total area not less than one-twentieth (1/
20) of the floor area of the room, with a minimum of one and one-half (11/2)
square feet.
            (2)   A mechanical exhaust system connected directly to the outside
shall be allowed in lieu of natural ventilation. The system shall be capable of
providing five (5) air exchanges per hour. The exhaust air shall discharge at
least three feet (3') above or ten feet (10') away from any air intake source.
Toilet rooms may be ventilated with an approved recirculation fan or similar
device designed to remove odors from the air.
            (3)   Mechanical or convection venting of bathrooms into the attic
shall be acceptable. Recirculating fans may be used in toilet rooms only.
Bathrooms with tubs or showers shall have a convection or mechanical exhaust
system.
            (4)   Bathrooms constructed prior to 1970, which are vented with
convection vent openings extending to the outside shall meet the ventilation
requirement as long as the walls, ceiling and floor are not adversely affected
by moisture.
   G.   Fire Safety Egress:
      1.   Fire Safety: No hazard of fire or explosion shall be created or
allowed to exist in any building, premises, equipment or apparatus.
      2.   Exit And Emergency Egress:
         a.   Every dwelling unit shall have a safe, continuous and
unobstructed means of egress of a minimum height of six feet four inches (6'4")
and a minimum width as per this code. The exitway shall be kept in a proper
state of repair and maintained free of hazardous conditions and obstructions.
         b.   Every sleeping room located below the fourth story shall have at
least one openable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or
rescue. The opening shall have a minimum of three and one-half (31/2) square
feet of openable space and clear opening dimensions of at least twenty inches
(20") in one dimension and twenty four inches (24") in the other dimension. The
escape window must open directly into a yard or exit court, or into a public
street or alley. When windows are provided as a means of emergency egress or
rescue, they shall have a finished sill height of not more than forty eight
inches (48"), a permanent ladder or platform attached to the wall or floor may
be installed to meet the maximum height requirement. The ladder or platform
must be approved by the city.
Exception 1: Where two (2) approved emergency exit doors leading from the
sleeping room to separate exitways exist and minimum light and ventilation
requirements are met, this subsection does not apply. Emergency exit doors
shall open directly to a yard or court, or may exit through no more than one
adjoining room which has a door that leads directly to a yard or court.
Exception 2: Where minimum light and ventilation and emergency egress
requirements are met, there is no minimum sill height requirement in sleeping
rooms of dwelling units constructed before 1968, which have not been altered
from the original construction.
Exception 3: Sleeping rooms that fail to meet the sill height, window size or
net openable area for the emergency egress provisions of this code may have
their emergency egress deficiencies remedied, provided the rooms meet the
required natural light and ventilation requirements of the housing code, by the
installation of a smoke detector in each of the deficient sleeping rooms and in
the hall or space immediately adjacent to and leading into the sleeping room or
area. The smoke detectors shall be wired directly to the house electrical
system and be provided with a battery backup.
         c.   Bars, grills, grates or similar devices may be installed on
emergency escapes or rescue windows or doors, provided such devices are
equipped with approved release mechanisms which are operable from the inside of
the grate without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
      3.   Stairs And Handrails: Stairs and rails shall meet the requirements
of the means of egress section of the IBC or its successor with the following
modifications:
         a.   If there are four (4) or more risers, a handrail shall be
required. Two (2) handrails shall be required when the width of the stairs is
forty eight inches (48") or more. Stairways less than forty eight inches (48")
in width or stairways serving one individual dwelling unit, or a congregate
residence may have one handrail. Handrails are not required for monumental
stairs.
         b.   Handrails shall be placed not less than thirty inches (30") nor
more than thirty eight inches (38") above the outermost edge of the tread.
Handrails for existing stairs are not required to extend beyond the top or
bottom stair tread.
         c.   Stairs shall have a maximum riser height of eight inches (8") and
a minimum step run of nine inches (9"). Existing stair flights may have a
maximum variation in rise and run of two inches (2") at the top and bottom of
the flight. A maximum of one inch (1") variation of rise and run shall be
allowed for all intermediate risers and treads. Stairs shall be level and shall
comply with life safety standards as defined herein.
         d.   Winder, circular and spiral stairs shall comply with the IBC.
         e.   There shall be no minimum rise or run requirement nor maximum
variation in the rise and run for stairs leading only to mechanical, storage,
utility, and nonhabitable rooms in any residential structure and laundry rooms
in individual dwelling units provided the stairs are structurally sound.
         f.   Steps shall be maintained in a safe manner. Missing steps, steps
which are deteriorated to the point that the foothold is difficult to maintain,
staircases which have missing boards, and/or staircases which contain boards
that have lost their structural integrity shall be repaired to a safe
condition.
         g.   Interior and exterior stairs shall have a minimum headroom height
of six feet four inches (6'4"), except for stairs to mechanical or storage
rooms, utility and nonhabitable rooms in any residential structure and laundry
rooms in individual dwelling units, which have no minimum headroom height.
         h.   Stairs in the interior or exterior of an existing building where
stair jacks are replaced or fifty percent (50%) of the tread or risers are
replaced shall meet the requirements of the IBC, except that the minimum stair
width shall be thirty inches (30") and the minimum headroom height shall be six
feet four inches (6'4").
         i.   If because of the configuration of the horizontal and vertical
distances an alternate stair configuration is more practical than the IBC
requirement, or if the HAAB finds that the stair rhythm is safe, the HAAB may
allow other configurations which are less uniform but achieve comparable
safety, regardless of subsections G3c and G3d of this section.
         j.   A stair tread, stair support, stair riser, landing or railing
which is either missing or so severely in disrepair or damaged that it cannot
support its intended live and dead loads shall be repaired.
         k.   Interior stair landings shall have a minimum width of thirty
inches (30") and a minimum length in the direction of travel of thirty inches
(30").
      4.   Guardrails:
         a.   Guardrails shall be required for all balconies, porches, patios
and open stairs more than thirty inches (30") above or below grade. Guardrails
shall also be required for any grade change more than thirty inches (30") next
to a walking surface. Guardrails shall not be less than forty two inches (42")
in height, except for guardrails serving private dwelling units, which shall
have a minimum height of thirty six inches (36"). Guardrails may have a minimum
height of thirty six inches (36") if the building was built before 1970.
Guardrails having a height less than thirty six inches (36") shall be allowed
if they were installed as part of the building's original construction and are
not a replacement. For structures which are on the historic register or are
contributory structures located within a city historic district, height of
existing and replacement guardrails may be determined based upon standards
adopted by the Holladay historical commission.
         b.   Guardrails shall have intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern
such that there is no open area in excess of four inches (4") in diameter. The
diameter of such open space may be nine inches (9") for buildings built before
1985, and six inches (6") for those built between 1985 and 1991.
      5.   Smoke Detector Requirements:
         a.   When smoke detectors are required in dwelling units by the IBC,
the detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally
located in the hallway or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping. In
efficiency dwelling units, the detector shall be centrally located on the
ceiling or wall of the main room or sleeping room.
         b.   Where sleeping rooms are on an upper level, the detector shall be
placed at the ceiling or wall directly above the stairway immediately outside
the bedrooms. Wall mounted detectors shall be a minimum of four inches (4") and
a maximum of twelve inches (12") from the ceiling, but no detector shall be
mounted within twelve inches (12") of any corner formed by the meeting of
walls, ceilings or beams unless manufacturer's listing specifies otherwise.
When activated, the detector shall provide an alarm in the dwelling unit.
         c.   When one or more sleeping rooms are added to or created within a
structure, smoke detectors shall be installed in compliance with the
manufacturer's listing and shall receive their primary power from the building
wiring in compliance with the IBC.
         d.   All habitable rooms having a ceiling height of less than seven
feet six inches (7'6") shall have installed a one hundred twenty (120) volt
electrical powered smoke detector.
      6.   Fire Resistive Separations: Walls or ceilings separating dwelling
units from each other and from hazardous uses shall be maintained in their
original condition with all penetrations sealed or covered with an approved
material. These separations include walls and ceilings separating a garage from
a dwelling unit or common area and walls and ceilings separating furnace rooms
in structures containing three (3) or more dwelling units. When fifty percent
(50%) or more of a wall or ceiling is removed for any reason, the entire wall
or ceiling shall be reconstructed to meet the requirements of the IBC for one
hour occupancy separation.
   H.   Plumbing:
      1.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   Unless provided otherwise in this chapter, plumbing, piping and
fixtures shall be in accordance with the code in effect at the time of
installation.
         b.   Plumbing, piping and fixtures shall have no leaks and shall be
maintained in good condition. All waste lines shall be connected to an approved
sewer system.
         c.   The minimum plumbing fixtures required for dwelling units are a
bathroom sink, toilet, tub or shower, and kitchen sink.
         d.   Cold running water shall be plumbed to each toilet. Hot and cold
running water shall be plumbed to each bathroom sink, tub, shower and kitchen
sink.
         e.   Every sink, tub and shower shall be provided with hot water of at
least one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) and with cold water.
         f.   A space without obstruction from floor to ceiling of not less
than twelve inches (12") shall be in front of all toilets. Toilets shall be
located in a space without obstruction from floor to ceiling of not less than
twenty two inches (22") in width. No encroachments of these dimensions are
permitted.
         g.   Where vents do not exist for plumbing fixtures meeting the
applicable codes in effect at the time of their installation, vents need not be
installed when the plumbing fixture or trap and trap arm is replaced providing
the sewer line is not altered.
      2.   Water Heaters: Water heaters and boilers shall have a listed
combination temperature and pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge
pipe. All new installations of water heaters and boilers, when located above a
finished space, shall include a safe pan with the UPC approved drain piped to
an approved drainage system. Existing water heaters and boilers shall have a
temperature and pressure relief valve. The valve shall have a listed discharge
pipe which discharges no nearer than six inches (6") to the floor and no
further than two feet (2') from the floor. A temperature and pressure relief
valve shall be required for water heaters only when a water heater was designed
for such valve.
      3.   Cross Connections: In order to protect against contamination of the
water supply through cross connections, all water inlets for plumbing fixtures
shall be located above the flood level rim of the fixture as defined in the
UPC. Hoses or handheld showerheads shall not be attached in any manner that
would permit water contamination during reverse pressure. Water supply pipes
provided with an approved backflow preventer or antisiphon device as regulated
in the UPC shall be permitted. Handheld showerheads shall be permitted when
provided with a permanently mounted holder attached to the wall or shower pipe,
or when an antisiphon device is installed. Water faucet outlets below the
overflow rim of the fixture shall be permitted until the faucet is replaced. A
new fixture shall not be installed where it would create a cross connection.
      4.   Drains:
         a.   Drain traps shall meet standards of the UPC. Existing traps shall
be allowed as originally designed. If the trap has been modified it shall be
replaced with an approved trap, and a vent shall be added as required by the
UPC.
         b.   All open entrapped sewer lines and outlets shall be capped with
an approved cap.
      5.   Fixture Requirements: Every kitchen sink, tub, shower and toilet
shall be provided with a minimum of fifteen (15) psi of water pressure.
      6.   Bathrooms In Rental Dwelling Units: Each rental dwelling unit shall
have a bathroom within the dwelling unit. Every toilet and bathtub or shower
required by this code shall be in a room which will afford privacy to the
occupant.
      7.   Congregate Housing:
         a.   The minimum plumbing fixtures required for congregate housing are
a sink, toilet, and tub or shower for each ten (10) occupants or portion
thereof and a kitchen sink. Bathrooms shall have installed a door with privacy
lock.
         b.   Congregate housing that does not provide private toilets, sinks,
bathtubs or showers shall have on each floor, accessible from a public
corridor, at least one toilet, one sink, and one bathtub with shower or one
separate shower for each ten (10) occupants or portion thereof. For each
additional ten (10) occupants, or portion thereof, an additional one toilet,
one sink and one bathtub or shower accessible from a public corridor shall be
provided.
   I.   Mechanical:
      1.   Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   Existing Installations: Mechanical systems lawfully in existence
at the time of the adoption of this code may have their use, maintenance or
repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the
original design and location and no hazard to life, health or property has been
created by such mechanical system.
         b.   Compliance: All mechanical equipment shall be in accordance with
the code in effect at the time of installation.
         c.   Maintenance: All mechanical equipment shall be properly
maintained and shall be operated in a safe manner.
      2.   Heating:
         a.   Temperature: Heating shall be provided by a permanently installed
heating system capable of heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms to a
minimum of sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F), which shall be measured in
the center of the room at a height of three feet (3') from the floor.
         b.   Air Return: A return air duct which serves more than one dwelling
unit shall not be permitted. A duplex or multiple-dwelling unit legally
constructed before 1970 may have an existing common air return continued if the
furnace was original installation. Existing common air return installations
shall be allowed to continue when a listed smoke detector fan shutoff is
installed in the return air duct of units constructed before 1985. Common air
returns shall not be allowed in buildings constructed after 1985.
         c.   Fuel Burning Appliances:
            (1)   Except for direct vented appliances, gas furnaces and gas
water heaters shall not be permitted in bedrooms, in bathrooms or in closets
accessed only from a bedroom or a bathroom. Existing furnace rooms with access
only through an existing bedroom may continue to exist when a one hundred
twenty (120) volt smoke detector is installed in the bedroom and relayed to a
smoke detector installed in the furnace room. All combustion air is to be
supplied from outside air.
            (2)   Gas shutoff valves are required on all gas appliances.
Shutoff valves shall be installed in accordance with the UMC.
            (3)   All fireplaces, wood burning stoves, and all other appliances
producing combustible gas byproducts shall be connected to an operating chimney
or approved flue. All flues and vents shall be installed in compliance with EPA
requirements and the requirements of the UMC in effect at the time of
installation.
            (4)   All fuel burning appliances shall be provided with listed
clearances and maintained in good working condition and in accordance with
their listing.
            (5)   All ventilation fans shall be installed according to their
listing and maintained in good working condition.
            (6)   All ducts and vents shall be maintained according to original
installation requirements.
   J.   Electrical:
      1.   Safety: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed, maintained and used in a safe manner. Unless provided
otherwise in this chapter, all electrical wiring and equipment shall be in
accordance with the electrical code in effect at the time of installation. All
conductors shall be protected by fuses or circuit breakers that are adequately
sized.
      2.   Electrical Equipment: Electrical equipment shall not exceed the load
capacity of the service and branch circuits shall have adequately sized circuit
breakers or fuses.
      3.   Facilities Required: The following electric facilities must be
furnished at a minimum and must be operable:
         a.   Service: The minimum main service to any dwelling unit shall be
sixty (60) amperes. Existing dwelling units with electrical services less than
sixty (60) amps per dwelling unit which have no special electrical service
loads, such as air conditioners, ranges, heating units and clothes dryers may
continue to be operated without upgrading the service.
         b.   Branch Circuits: Circuits supplying air conditioners, ranges,
cooktops, stoves and heating appliances shall meet the requirements of the NEC.
Branch circuits shall not be overfused.
         c.   Receptacles: Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2)
electrical receptacles or one electrical light fixture and one electrical
receptacle. Grounding type receptacles shall only be used when connected to a
grounding system. Existing nongrounding type receptacles may be replaced with
grounding type receptacles where protected by a ground fault circuit
interrupter.
      4.   Upgrading Facilities:
         a.   Service: When remodeling work is done, the service must be
upgraded if required by the NEC.
         b.   Circuits: When new circuits, outlets, switches, wiring and
service panels are being installed, the installation shall meet the
requirements of the NEC.
         c.   Receptacles: Wiring, receptacles and switches may be replaced
without upgrading so long as circuits are not overloaded.
      5.   Lighting:
         a.   Dwelling Units: Every toilet room, bathroom, laundry room,
furnace room, interior stairway and hall shall contain at least one permanently
mounted electric light fixture.
         b.   Apartments, SROs And Congregate Housing:
            (1)   Lighting in the common areas shall be as follows: aisles,
passageways, stairwells, corridors, exitways and recesses related to and within
the building complex shall be illuminated with a minimum of a forty (40) watt
light bulb or equivalent for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area;
provided, that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than thirty feet
(30'). Structures containing three (3) dwelling units or less shall not be
required to provide exit lighting when no lighting outlet has been previously
provided.
            (2)   Every furnace room shall contain at least one electric
lighting fixture.
            (3)   Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a
minimum of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface during the hours of
darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather resistant covers and
shall not cast glare on neighboring properties.
      6.   General:
         a.   All electrical panels, boxes, outlets and lighting fixtures shall
have proper covers.
         b.   Flexible cords, as defined in the NEC, shall be used only
according to their listing and shall not be installed as permanent wiring or
strung across exitways.
   K.   Energy Conservation Requirements:
      1.   Upgrading: Existing residential units shall be upgraded whenever any
of the following events occur:
         a.   Whenever wallboard, plaster or other finish material is removed
which exposes wall cavities of foundations, exterior walls, floors or ceilings;
these spaces shall be insulated to the degree it is practical. Where attic and
crawl space areas are insulated, the space shall be ventilated as per the
currently adopted IBC.
         b.   Where insulation increases the accumulation of snow, and the snow
load capacity of the roof structure is exceeded, the roof members shall be
upgraded to withstand the additional loads.
         c.   When access is available to foundations of existing structures,
foundations shall be insulated to the standard required by the applicable Utah
energy code when remodeling of the structure is initiated.
         d.   When boarded structures are renovated for reoccupancy, the
structure shall be insulated to the following standards when wall, ceiling,
roof or floor cavities are open or accessible: wall, R-11; ceilings and roofs,
R-32; floors, R-7. Thermal resistance "R" shall have the meaning as defined in
the Utah energy code.
         e.   When new habitable space is created within an existing building
envelope, all such spaces shall be insulated to the current Utah energy code
standards.
         f.   All replacement windows shall be double pane. Replacement glass
for structures which are on the historic register or are contributory
structures located within a city historic district may be determined based upon
standards adopted by the Holladay historical commission. Replacement metal
windows shall have a thermal break. Single pane replacement glass may be
installed on windows not designed to accept double pane glass.
         g.   All exterior door replacements shall be weather stripped.
         h.   New mechanical equipment installed shall meet a minimum of eighty
percent (80%) efficiency.
         i.   Except for the other applicable requirements of this chapter,
when a new addition is made to an existing residential structure, only the
addition shall be made to comply with current Utah energy code standards.
      2.   Exterior Door And Window Seals:
         a.   Exterior doors and windows shall be weathertight. If broken, all
panes shall be replaced with glazing in compliance with the IBC.
         b.   All doors and windows shall be properly caulked and
weatherproofed. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.060: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Inspection: Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has
reasonable cause to believe a code violation exists in any building or upon any
premises which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous,
the building official may, upon obtaining permission of the owner or other
person having charge or control of the premises or dwelling unit, or upon
obtaining a warrant, enter a residential property or premises to inspect it or
to perform the duties imposed by this chapter. If such building or premises is
occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials and
request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the building
official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
If such entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every
remedy provided by law to secure entry. The building official shall establish
written policies which outline owner notification procedures for regular
inspections and establish handling of owner notification for tenant reports of
unsafe, dangerous and hazardous conditions.
   B.   Unoccupied Dwelling Unit: If an unoccupied dwelling unit is open and
unattended and the owner or other person having charge or control of the
building or premises cannot be located after reasonable effort, the building
official may enter the building. The building official shall issue a notice and
order that the dwelling unit be immediately secured or boarded against the
entry of unauthorized persons.
   C.   Inspection Notification: In imminent danger or hazardous condition
situations, or when authorization to enter has not previously been granted by a
tenant, the owner shall give the tenant a minimum of twenty four (24) hours'
notification of an inspection of the tenant's premises by the building
official. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.070: VIOLATIONS, NOTICE AND ORDER:
   A.   Violations: Whenever the building official has inspected a building and
found violations of this chapter, the building official has the authority to
commence action to cause the repair, rehabilitation or vacation of the
building. The building official shall issue a notice and order to the owner(s)
of the building, which shall list all violations, giving the section number and
a detailed description of each, and classified by severity according to the
following categories: imminent danger, hazardous condition, substandard
condition, and minor deficiency situations.
   B.   Notice: For each violation the notice shall state the following:
      1.   A list of the building's or unit's violations and the reason(s) that
the building official determines that such conditions constitute an imminent
danger, a hazardous condition, a substandard condition or a minor deficiency;
      2.   The corrective action necessary for the violation(s);
      3.   A time frame for compliance;
      4.   The appeals and administrative hearing officer process; and
      5.   Specific remedies the city may reasonably expect to take if the
violations are not corrected.
   C.   Order: For each violation, the order shall state and require the
following:
      1.   Immediate vacation of the building or dwelling unit; or
      2.   Closure of that portion or system within a specified time if the
building official determines that a portion or system of the building or unit
can be closed or otherwise secured so that the rest of the building or unit
remains occupiable; or
      3.   That the owner obtain all necessary permits and repair the hazardous
condition(s) within the times specified.
   D.   Notified Party Actions: Within the time specified for response to each
type of violation, the notified party shall take out all required permits and
cause the building or dwelling unit to be either repaired or, if repairs cannot
be or are not completed within the required time frame, secured from entry by
unauthorized persons.
   E.   Time Frame For Corrective Action:
      1.   Violations deemed to constitute imminent danger shall be corrected
within twenty four (24) hours of notification of the violation.
      2.   Violations deemed to constitute a hazardous condition shall be
corrected within three (3) days of notification of the violation.
      3.   Violations deemed to be a substandard condition shall be corrected
within thirty (30) days of notification of the violation.
      4.   Violations deemed to be minor deficiencies shall be corrected within
ninety (90) days of notification of the violation.
      5.   The building official may extend the time for completing the
required work upon a finding that substantial progress has been made within the
required time, and that the work can be completed within a reasonable time not
to exceed twice the required time for correction of the violation(s).
   F.   City Remedies For Noncompliance:
      1.   If the notified party fails to repair or secure the property as
required, the city may take all appropriate remedies authorized by law
including obtaining any necessary authorization to enter the property to secure
it from occupancy or, if the property conditions represent a threat to the
public, abating the deficiency as a public nuisance and assessing the costs of
abatement to the subject property or taking other appropriate actions; and
      2.   The city may record a notice of violation with the Salt Lake County
recorder's office specifying the deficiencies and the costs of abatement, if
any; and
      3.   Each day of continued violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor
subject to the maximum fine authorized by law. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.080: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING AND APPEAL:
   A.   Administrative Hearing:
      1.   If the notified party disagrees with the notice and order, the
notified party may appeal in writing within two (2) days of the issuance of the
notice and order.
      2.   The appeal shall be heard before an administrative hearing officer
within seven (7) days of receipt of the appeal.
      3.   In consideration of the appeal the administrative hearing officer
shall inspect the property and review the notice and order to determine if it
is accurate and shall maintain complete and permanent records of all
inspections and decisions.
      4.   The administrative hearing officer shall attempt to develop, in
consultation with the appellant, possible methods of complying with the code
consistent with the purposes of this chapter; and may prepare a stipulated
agreement for signature by the appellant and the city.
      5.   The administrative hearing officer shall issue a decision within
fourteen (14) days of the hearing.
      6.   If the notified party is dissatisfied with the decision of the
administrative hearing officer, the notified party may appeal by filing a
written notice with the HAAB within three (3) days of the decision by the
administrative hearing officer.
      7.   The HAAB shall consider the appeal on the record made before the
administrative hearing officer, and may take testimony in a hearing before the
HAAB within fourteen (14) days of receipt of appellant's request for appeal to
the HAAB.
      8.   The HAAB shall render its decision within fourteen (14) days of the
hearing on appeal.
      9.   Appeals under this subsection shall stay the enforcement of those
items appealed on the notice and order.
      10.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A7 of this section,
any fine assessed under subsection
15.32.070F3 of this chapter shall continue to run during the period of the
appeal, and shall be assessable against the subject property in the event of
the failure of the notified party's appeal.
   B.   Appeal: If the notified party disagrees with the decision on appeal to
the HAAB, it may appeal the decision of that body to a court of general
jurisdiction in Salt Lake County. (Ord. 06-10, 6-15-2006)
15.32.090: APPROVAL FOR OCCUPANCY:
Following the correction of the deficiencies and prior to persons reoccupying
any residential building or dwelling unit after it has been closed to
occupancy, the community development department shall issue an approval for
occupancy, upon payment of any outstanding fines. If a notice of deficiency has
been filed with the Salt Lake County recorder's office pursuant to this
chapter, a release of notice shall be recorded with that office. (Ord. 06-10,
6-15-2006)
TITLE 17
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 17.02
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
17.02.010: Administration Generally; Appeals
17.02.010: ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY; APPEALS:
The city community development department shall be responsible for the
administration and regulations provided for in this title. Subject to the
requirements of section
17.27.060 of this title regarding appeals concerning the payment of impact
fees, any person may appeal any decision of the department under the terms of
this title to the office of the mayor. The mayor may appoint a hearing officer
with respect to such matter. The hearing officer shall hear the matter and
prepare and submit written findings of fact and his recommendation regarding
the matter to the office of the mayor. Upon receiving the hearing officer's
findings of fact and recommendation, the office of the mayor shall enter an
order either sustaining, reversing, modifying or remanding the matter for
further resolution. (1999 Code)
CHAPTER 17.04
DRAINAGE OF SUBSURFACE WATER
SECTION:
17.04.010: Written Permission Required
17.04.020: Minimum Standards
17.04.010: WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to make any improvements in the city where
subsurface water exists within two feet (2') of the foundation level of the
improvements without obtaining the written permission of the director of
community development. This requirement shall include, but not be limited to,
subdividers, persons developing ground for industrial and/or commercial
purposes, and homeowners constructing improvements upon their own property.
(1999 Code)
17.04.020: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
Before written permission is issued, the director of community development
shall ensure that the following requirements are met:
   A.   Test Holes: Test holes shall be dug upon the properties to a depth
sufficient to determine the extent of the subsurface water table in the
proposed development to include the depth thereof and any other information
regarding same which may be required by the city.
   B.   High Water Table Elevations Data: All applicants must supply data as to
seasonal high water table elevations.
   C.   Footings: All footings shall be at least two feet (2') above the
highest water table elevations, and the type of house construction or other
development shall be governed by this standard, or by a satisfactory design
approved by a professional engineer which shall be submitted to the director of
community development for approval.
   D.   Water Table Inspection: In areas where soil conservation maps indicate
high water tables and in all other questionable areas that might be designated
as high water tables by the director of community development, no building
permits will be issued without water table inspection during high water table
season by a representative of the city or a review of similar inspections of
other properties in the same designated area.
   E.   Drainage Easements: The developer shall provide drainage easements to
the city along all rear, side and front lot lines for drainage purposes
whenever required to accommodate subsurface drainage facilities that are
constructed in order to lower groundwater levels. The size of the easement
shall be determined by the director of community development and shall in all
events be a minimum of ten feet (10'). The director shall recommend whether the
drainage easements shall be separate from other utility easements or shall be
used concurrently with such easements. (1999 Code)
   F.   Grading: All grading of any kind shall be done so as to ensure that the
drainage is away from the proposed improvements and in such a manner as to
prevent any conveying or trapping of water abutting the basement and foundation
walls of the improvement. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
CHAPTER 17.08
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17.08.010: Purpose And Intent
17.08.020: Definitions
17.08.030: Applicability
17.08.035: Prohibited Discharges
17.08.040: Owner And City Responsibility
17.08.050: Delineation Of Drainage Basins And Drainage Areas
17.08.060: Engineering Studies Of Drainage Areas
17.08.070: Control Of Development Excess Waters
17.08.080: Stormwater Management Plan
17.08.090: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
17.08.100: Permits
17.08.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to establish and provide means, rules and
regulations for the control, discharge, and removal of pollutants from
stormwater runoff generated or collected on real property located in the city.
It is the city's intent to control discharges to and from drainage systems over
which it has jurisdiction, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Controlling the contribution of pollutants by stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged
from sites of industrial activity (including construction activity);
   B.   Effectively prohibiting illicit and non-stormwater discharges through
ordinance, or other regulatory mechanism, and implementing appropriate
enforcement procedures and actions;
   C.   Controlling the discharge of spills and the dumping or disposal of
materials other than stormwater;
   D.   Enforcing and requiring compliance with this title and conditions in
permits, contracts or orders;
   E.   Conducting all inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities and
procedures necessary to determine compliance with conditions in this title and
Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) permits; and
   F.   Detecting, investigating, and eliminating non-stormwater discharges,
including illegal dumping. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.08.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): The schedule of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the state. BMPs also include treatment,
operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks,
waste disposal, or drainage from material storage. BMPs include structural and
nonstructural control.
BUILDING PERMIT: All permits except those issued solely for grading or for the
purpose of remodeling or repairing any preexisting building or structure;
provided, that no increase in impervious surface on the property results from
such permit.
DEPARTMENT: The city community development department or its designee.
DESIGN CAPACITY OR CAPACITY OF DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The maximum volume of water per
unit of time which can be carried or accommodated by each component of a
drainage system, based upon size of the line, slope and any other factors which
affect the carrying capacity of a line, or, in the case of detention and
retention facilities, the maximum amount of volume that can be stored in the
facility.
DETENTION: Temporary accumulation of excess waters and/or other storm waters,
and shall include the total or partial accumulation of such waters. In the case
of detention, the detention facilities shall include carriage of the released
storm water to an intermediate or major drainage system facility, trunk line,
natural tributary or final destination. Also, in the case of detention, the
detention facilities shall include provision for safely routing overflow in the
event that the amount of storm water exceeds the design capacity of the
detention facility.
DEVELOPMENT SITE, DEVELOPMENT OR SUBDIVISION: The total area of a subdivision
or the total area of the parcel of land on which a building permit is to be
issued or the total area of property being improved, including yard space in
the case of development of a part of land parcel.
DRAINAGE AREA: That portion of a drainage basin whose drainage or storm waters
drain or gravitate toward a natural or artificial channel, conduit, retention
or detention area; upon designation of a drainage area on a map referred to in
section
17.08.050 of this chapter, "drainage area" shall mean the area so designated.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All facilities used to conduct excess waters to, through and
from a drainage area to the point of final retention or destination, including,
but not limited to, any or all of the following: pipes, conduits, culverts,
curbs, gutters, waterways, inlets, swales, ditches, gulches, channels,
retention and detention areas, and appurtenant features, as well as easements
and rights of way necessary to accommodate the same. In ascending order of size
and capacity, components of the drainage system include the following: unit
drainage system, intermediate drainage system, major drainage system, trunk
line, natural tributary, final destination. A drainage system may, but need
not, contain all of the foregoing components.
EXCESS WATERS: An increase in stormwater runoff as a result of increasing
impervious surface creation by development, red-development, or those waters
flowing on or across a lot, subdivision, development or other area of real
property which are created because of alteration of, or building on, the
natural terrain or other increase in the impervious surface of the property,
which waters are additional to the waters which would flow on or across the
unaltered natural terrain.
GRADING PERMIT: Permit required in accordance to section 17.76.700 of this
code.
FINAL DESTINATION: A natural or artificial retention area which serves one or
more drainage basins into which excess waters are discharged, without
subsequent discharge into any other drainage system, facility or retention or
detention area or facility.
IMMEDIATE THREAT: A situation where pollutant discharge to state waters is
already occurring or is inevitable without urgent corrective action. This
refers to a present and active risk that requires immediate attention to
prevent or mitigate further contamination.
IMMINENT THREAT: A situation that poses a high likelihood of pollutant
discharge to state waters in the near future if corrective actions are not
taken. This refers to conditions that suggest a serious risk is developing but
has not yet resulted in an actual discharge.
INTERMEDIATE DRAINAGE SYSTEM FACILITY: That part of the drainage system which
serves one or more single units, subdivision or development drainage system
facilities, which conveys excess waters from a unit or subdivision, and which
is tributary to a major drainage system facility, a trunk line, natural
tributary or final destination. Facilities within this system will be designed
to fully accommodate a 10-year frequency flood.
LONG-TERM STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement between property owner
and city wherein the property owner(s) agrees to inspect and maintain a private
Drainage System. The agreement shall be kept on file with the City, which shall
be recorded against the property.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM FACILITY: That part of the drainage system within a
drainage area which is contributed to by one or more unit and intermediate
drainage systems. A major drainage system facility is tributary to a trunk
line, natural tributary or final destination.
MAYOR: The city mayor or the mayor's designee.
NATURAL TRIBUTARY: That part of the drainage system contributed to by one or
more trunk lines, major, intermediate and unit drainage systems that is a
natural channel or river which is a tributary solely to a final destination.
100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD: A flood flowrate of the magnitude which is expected
to occur on the average of a 100-year frequency or has a one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded during any one year. Similarly, 2-, 5-, 10-
and other year frequency floods bear like definition.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer licensed in the State of Utah and is
qualified to practice work in the area of practice in which he/she does.
RETENTION: The temporary or permanent accumulation of excess waters and/or
other storm waters, and shall include the total or partial accumulation of such
waters. In the case of partial retention, the retention facilities shall
include carriage of the portion not retained to an intermediate or major
drainage system facility, trunk line, natural tributary or final destination.
SITE GRADING MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT: Agreement referred to in section
17.24.020  of this title.
STORM WATERS: A storm or flood flow of the magnitude which is expected to occur
on the average of a 10-year frequency or has a ten percent (10%) chance of
being equaled or exceeded during any one year.
TRUNK LINE: That part of the drainage system contributed to by one or more
drainage areas and unit, intermediate and major drainage system facilities
within such drainage areas. A trunk line transports excess waters to a natural
tributary or final destination.
UNIT OR SUBDIVISION DRAINAGE SYSTEM FACILITIES: That drainage system which
drains a subdivision or other development area and which is tributary to an
intermediate or major drainage system facility, major drainage system facility,
trunk line, natural tributary or final destination. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-
05, 4-16-2020; Ord. 2025-02, 3-6-2025)
17.08.030: APPLICABILITY:
This title shall apply to all portions of the city drainage system constructed
or completed from and after the effective date hereof. (1999 Code)
17.08.035: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   Non-stormwater discharges into the city's drainage system, creeks,
canals and waterways is prohibited, including spills, illicit connections,
illegal dumping, landscape waste, pet or human waste, hazardous waste,
construction waste, unauthorized drains, sediment, and sanitary sewer
overflows. The responsible party is required to remediate such discharges in
accordance with Standard Operating Procedures adopted in the city's Stormwater
Management Program on file at the city.
   B.   The following non-storm water discharges are an exception to subsection
A, unless city or state identifies these discharges as significant sources or
pollutants to Waters of the State or as causing or contributing to a violation
of water quality standards:
      1.   Discharges from the following:
      (a)   Water line flushing;
      (b)   Landscape irrigation;
      (c)   Diverted stream flows;
      (d)   Rising ground waters;
      (e)   Springs;
      (f)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (g)   Residual street wash water;
      (h)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
      (i)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
      (j)   Discharges from potable water sources;
      (k)   Uncontaminated footing/foundation drains and crawl space pumps;
      (l)   Air conditioning condensate;
      (m)   Irrigation water;
      (n)   Individual residential car washing;
      (o)   Dechlorinated swimming pool and water reservoir discharges;
      (p)   Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activity.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 6-2-2022)
17.08.040: OWNER AND CITY RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Owner: It is the responsibility and obligation of the owner of real
property to control and contain, or to discharge into an acceptable drainage
system, excess waters from storm or floods caused by the construction of
improvements on real property in the city. Consistent with the terms and
provisions of this title, an owner's responsibility includes construction of
(at such owner's expense or in cooperation with other owners), or payment of
the city impact fees for, such: 1) unit drainage system facilities; 2)
intermediate drainage system facilities; 3) major drainage system facilities;
and 4) on-site detention system facility as may be required to retain excess
water onsite, or to convey excess waters originating in the unit or subdivision
to a trunk line, natural tributary or final destination.
   B.   City: The city shall maintain unit, intermediate and major drainage
system facilities dedicated to and accepted by the city. The owner of real
property shall maintain a unit, intermediate and major drainage system
facilities that are not dedicated to and accepted by the city. Additionally,
the city may, but is not obligated to, construct intermediate and/or major
drainage system facilities. The City Council, through its budget process,
including review of amounts received pursuant to the city impact fees, may
establish priority and determine each year which facilities will be constructed
by the city. (Ord. 2018-16, 10-11-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.08.050: DELINEATION OF DRAINAGE BASINS AND DRAINAGE AREAS:
Studies and maps showing the boundaries of drainage basins and drainage areas
made by the city or others acceptable to the city shall be considered in whole
or in part if applicable. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.08.060: ENGINEERING STUDIES OF DRAINAGE AREAS:
   A.   Required: Property owners and developers are responsible to manage
stormwater runoff and sediment whether in conduit systems or on the surface
that traverse or originate on their property, unless this responsibility is
relinquished through the terms and conditions of an easement. A hydrology and
hydraulic study (Stormwater Management Plan) is required for subdivision or
development permit applications in accordance with section 13.03.020 of this
code and section 17.08.080 of this chapter.
   B.   Professional Engineers Required: In conducting the studies referred to
herein, the analysis of storm drainage flows and facilities shall be performed
by professional engineers, acceptable to the city, competent in hydrology and
hydraulics and shall be in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Location of existing storm drainage facilities will be coordinated with the
department.
   C.   Considerations: In all cases, flows shall be based on present
conditions and potential for future development, taking into consideration the
current elements of the land use general plan of the city, relating to the
drainage area and other relevant factors, including changes in zoning or
development which are not reflected on the general plan. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.08.070: CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT EXCESS WATERS:
Subject to the city’s regulatory and approval functions specified in this
title, the owner or developer of land to be improved or developed shall
provide, at their own expense, the unit or subdivision drainage system
facilities within each development necessary for the control of excess waters
within the development. The developer also shall provide at their own expense:
   A.   Major Drainage System Facilities: The intermediate and/or major
drainage system facilities required to convey such excess waters to a trunk
line, natural tributary or final destination as may be indicated on the
drainage area map for the drainage area within which the development is
located.
   B.   Retention Facility: A facility that will retain such excess waters on
designated portions of the real property to be improved or development or
facilities upon other real property to which the excess waters may be conveyed
and upon which the owner or developer has legal rights that are acceptable to
the department to retain such excess waters in accordance with
chapter 17.24 of this title.
   C.   Temporary Facility: A temporary detention or retention facility to
allow runoff waters to absorb naturally until completion of intermediate or
major drainage systems, in which case the provisions of section
17.16.110 of this title shall apply. Said temporary area shall in no event be
less than one-half (1/2) of all the developed drainage area tributary to it.
   D.   Detention Facility: A detention facility, when determined applicable by
the department, for the controlled release of excess water into unit drainage
facilities, intermediate and major drainage facilities, trunk lines, natural
tributaries or final destination. The maximum allowable release rate from these
detention facilities shall be no greater than two-tenths (0.2) cubic feet per
second per developed acre.
   E.   Safe Routing: A safe routing of the 100-year frequency flood through
the development as provided for in the City flood hazard area regulations.
(Ord. 2018-16, 10-11-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.08.080:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
Management of excess stormwater is required for all development conditions. A
Stormwater Management Plan shall include sufficient information to allow the
city engineer to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project
site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both
present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and
acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the
project site.
Minimum design standards for a Stormwater Management Plan are specified in
section 17.20 of this title. (Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.08.090:  STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN:
   A.   Required: A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) is required
for:
      1.   Any land disturbance activity greater than 100 square feet within 50
feet of a stream, creek or canal, measured from the disturbance limit to the
edge of the normal water surface elevation;
      2.   Construction sites with a land disturbance of greater than or equal
to one acre, including projects that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale which collectively disturbs land greater than or equal to
one acre.
      3.   Land disturbance on a steep slope of 70% (35 degrees) or more with
an elevation change on the slope of 10 feet or more (at any point during the
time of construction, not including stock piles).
   B.   The SWPPP shall apply sediment and erosion control BMPs as necessary to
protect water quality, reduce the discharge of pollutants, and control waste
such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals,
litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse
impacts to water quality.
   C.   The SWPPP requirements for land disturbance greater than or equal to
one acre shall be in compliance with all requirements set forth in the most
current UPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Construction
Activities.
   D.   The SWPPP shall provide for access by city inspectors to inspect the
construction site as well as sediment and erosion control BMPs. (Ord. 2020-05,
4-16-2020)
17.08.100: PERMITS:
   Construction activity and improvements requiring permits from Salt Lake
County Flood Control, U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (for sections 404 and 10),
Utah State Engineer’s Office (for natural stream channels), and required
permits from any other jurisdiction having authority shall be submitted to the
city for verification prior to issuance of a building permit or grading permit.
   The City Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Floodplain Development
Permit for any habitable structure located in floodplain.
   The Utah State Administration Code, R317-8-3 prohibits point source
discharges of stormwater from construction activities to a water body(ies) of
the State without a Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) permit.
The owner and the general contractor of a construction activity that result in
land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, including projects that
are part of a larger common plan of development or sale which collectively
disturbs land greater than or equal to one acre must submit a Notice of Intent
(NOI) to obtain coverage under the UPDES Storm Water General Permit. All permit
coverages must remain active until terminated in accordance with the permit’s
conditions and instructions. The NOI is required to be submitted to the city
for verification prior to issuance of a building or grading permit.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 6-2-2022)
CHAPTER 17.12
CITY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
(Rep. by Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
CHAPTER 17.16
CONSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES
SECTION:
17.16.010: Generally
17.16.020: Removal Of Property From Benefited Area
17.16.030: Studies Of Needed Facilities
17.16.040: Design Criteria
17.16.050: Map Requirements
17.16.055: Responsibility Of Owner Or Developer
17.16.060: Plans And Specifications Required
17.16.070: Acquisition Of Easements And Rights Of Way
17.16.080: Construction Of Facilities
17.16.090: Inspection By Department
17.16.110: Temporary Facilities Permitted When
17.16.120: Connection To Facility Required
17.16.130: Performance Guaranties
17.16.010: GENERALLY:
The provisions of this chapter apply where the city constructs intermediate or
major drainage system facilities or requires a private owner or developer of
property to construct intermediate or major drainage system facilities that may
be used by owners or developers of other property. The provisions of this
chapter detail the manner in which such facilities may be constructed by a
private owner or developer and the manner and cost of connection of such system
by another owner or developer. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.020: REMOVAL OF PROPERTY FROM BENEFITED AREA:
Upon written request from the owner of any real property to have their real
property excluded from a drainage system on: a) showing that such real property
can be developed in a manner consistent with the retention plan designated in
chapter 17.24 of this title; and b) submitting written election acceptable to
the city in recordable form that the owner shall not make alterations or
improvements that will result in excess waters from storm or flood draining
into the drainage system, and that such election is binding on successors and
assigns, the owner's property shall be excluded by the city from the drainage
system benefited area. Requests for exclusion from the benefited area shall be
considered until final plans and specifications are approved by the department
pursuant to section
17.16.060 of this chapter or sixty (60) days prior to the letting of bids for
the construction of the intermediate and/or major drainage system facilities to
be constructed by an owner or developer, whichever is later. Unless excluded,
all real property within the drainage system benefited area will be subject to
payment of applicable fees as a condition precedent to issuance of a building
permit or construction of any improvements upon the real property. (1999 Code;
amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.030: STUDIES OF NEEDED FACILITIES:
   A.   Areas Determined: In connection with the studies contemplated under
section
17.08.060  of this title, the department may designate areas where the studies
shall determine the intermediate or major drainage system facilities to be
provided for the drainage and control of excess waters within the areas and to
convey such waters to acceptable trunk lines, natural tributaries or final
destinations. Previous studies made by the city or others shall be considered
in whole or in part, if applicable.
   B.   Included Studies: These studies shall be prepared in accordance to
chapter
17.20  of this title. These studies shall also include a current estimate of
the cost of providing an intermediate or major drainage system facilities, and
the computation of costs shall include the expense of the studies as well as
anticipated engineering design services, construction engineering and
inspection services, land acquisition and incidental costs required to install
the facilities. These studies may, from time to time, be updated or amended as
necessary to reflect changed conditions. Studies in individual drainage areas,
developments, proposed subdivisions, existing subdivisions or other property
shall be completed by professional engineers acceptable to the city for private
developers under the direction of the city if the city cannot complete the
studies as soon as required for development due to staff or budget constraints.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.040: DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Professional Engineer: In conducting the studies referred to in section
17.16.030  of this chapter, the analysis and design of storm drainage flows and
facilities shall be performed by professional engineers, acceptable to the
city, competent in hydrology and hydraulics and shall be in accordance with
sound engineer practices.
   B.   Promotion Of Economy: In developing the studies, every effort shall be
made to promote economy in the proposed drainage design by selection of
facilities for accommodating drainage flow and use of materials and methods of
construction which provide the most advantageous balance between the cost of
the facilities and the benefits received therefrom. Innovative approaches that
reduce the overall requirement or cost of capital construction shall be
encouraged.
   C.   Considerations: In all cases, flowrates shall be based upon conditions
of future development of the city, taking into consideration the general plan
of the city relating to the drainage area and other relevant factors, including
changes in zoning or development that are not reflected on the general plan.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.050: MAP REQUIREMENTS:
As studies and maps for individual drainage areas are completed in accordance
with sections
17.08.050  and
17.08.060  of this title in areas where a private developer may construct an
intermediate or major drainage system facilities to be used by others, the
necessary major and intermediate drainage system facilities, together with the
design capacity thereof, shall be shown on the map or maps. The map or maps
shall be approved by the department and shall serve as designations of the
respective drainage area boundaries and the drainage system requirements within
the area. The map or maps may be subject to revision from time to time to
conform with existing conditions, the results of additional studies and such
other information as may be obtained from time to time. The map or maps shall
be provided to the department in both paper and digital format for
incorporation into the city graphical information system. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.055  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR DEVELOPER:
   A.   Unit Or System: The owner or developer of real property to be improved
or developed shall provide, at their expense, the unit or subdivision drainage
system facilities within each development necessary for the drainage and
control of Excess Waters within the development consistent with the provisions
of section
17.08.070  of this title.
   B.   Construction By City: The City may undertake the construction of the
intermediate or major drainage system facilities required to convey any
drainage waters to a trunk line, natural tributary or final destination within
or at the boundary of the drainage area, as may be indicated on the drainage
area map for the drainage area within which the development is located.
   C.   Drainage Fee Study: The developer or owner shall be responsible for the
payment of a unit area drainage fee, which fee shall be applied toward the
payment of all or part of the cost of the intermediate or major drainage system
facilities constructed by the developer or to be constructed by the city in the
area in which the development is located. In those cases where the development
in question is traversed by or abutting intermediate or major drainage system
facilities, the unit area drainage fees may be applied toward the construction
of such facilities as provided in this title. If a study of the drainage area
has not been completed, then the developer shall be required to perform a study
of the needed drainage facilities for the drainage area where the development
is proposed. The department reserves the right to waive the requirement of the
drainage area study if the development size has been determined to be an
insignificant impact to the drainage area. In the case where no study has been
performed or will be required, payment of the drainage fee by the development
is not required. (Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.060: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Plans And Specifications: Prior to the final approval of a subdivision
or development plan or building permit associated with a subdivision or
development plan, or in the case of a single lot development, or a single
building permit, the owner or developer shall, at their expense, have prepared
by a professional engineer, acceptable to the city, detailed plans and
specifications for the construction and installation of all unit or subdivision
drainage system facilities for the control and drainage of excess water within
the development, or the part thereof, and the carriage of such water to an
acceptable intermediate or major drainage system facility or to a trunk line,
natural tributary, or a final destination as agreed to by the city, all in
conformance with the master plan of the drainage area or drainage basin as
approved by the city, together with the estimated total cost of these
facilities.
   B.   Assurance In Lieu Of Completion: In lieu of completion of the drainage
system prior to final approval of the subdivision or development plan by the
city, the developer or owner shall provide an acceptable financial assurance to
the city that the drainage system will be constructed and installed as
indicated and approved. Acceptable assurance shall consist of any one of the
types of performance guaranties described in section
17.16.130  of this title.
   C.   Final Approval: Upon completion of review and approval by the city, the
subdivision or development plan may be given final approval; provided, however,
that no certificate of occupancy for any on-site building may be given final
approval until installation of the drainage system facilities is complete.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.070: ACQUISITION OF EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Required: Easements or rights of way or property that must be acquired
for the installation of the intermediate or major drainage system facility
shall be provided by the owner or developer, at the expense of the owner or
developer. In the event the owner or developer is unable to acquire any
necessary easement, right of way or property, and upon owner's or developer's
written request, the city may negotiate to acquire the necessary easement,
right of way, or property, failing which, the city shall: 1) submit to owner or
developer a map showing an alternative route (in which event the owner or
developer will endeavor to acquire the necessary easements, rights of way or
property for such route); or 2) commence a condemnation action to acquire the
easement or right of way for the drainage system facilities.
   B.   City Condemnation; Written Request: Owner's or developer's written
request for city condemnation shall: 1) describe all prior efforts to acquire
the easement, right of way or property; and 2) state the amount offered the
owner of the property. Owner or developer shall pay the city all amounts to be
paid to an owner or occupant of the property for the acquisition of any
easements, rights of way or property, including all attorney fees incurred by
the city or otherwise chargeable to the city. (1999 Code)
17.16.080: CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES:
Upon completion of the plans and specifications by the professional engineer,
and acquisition of the necessary easements, rights of way or property, the
owner or developer shall then promptly proceed to cause that portion of the
intermediate or major drainage system facilities to be installed, at the
owner's or developer's sole expense, strictly in accordance with the plans and
specifications thus prepared and approved. No facilities will be covered or
backfilled until the same have been fully inspected and cover or backfill is
authorized by the department. If any facility, or portion thereof, is covered
without authorization, the department may require the facility to be reopened
for inspection at the owner's or developer's cost. No unit or subdivision or an
intermediate drainage system facility shall be connected to a major drainage
system facility until the department has fully approved the facilities as
constructed, and until satisfactory evidence has been presented to the
department showing that all bills for labor and material and all other costs of
constructing the line have been paid. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.16.090: INSPECTION BY DEPARTMENT:
   A.   The department, or its designee, shall inspect the installation and, if
the facilities meet the requirements of the plans and specifications, shall
give the owner or developer notice of acceptance. Upon completion of the
facilities, the owner or developer shall assign and convey to the city all of
the owner's or developer's right, title, estate and interest in the facilities.
The city shall thereafter be the owner thereof, and shall operate and maintain
the same, subject to the provisions of this title.
   B.   Where it is found that conditions substantially differ from those
stated or shown in the permit application, the city may stop further work until
and unless approval is obtained from the city for a revised grading plan and
stormwater management plan.
   C.   Civil design plans shall be maintained at the site during all phases of
construction. Until the final inspection is made, the permit shall be
prominently displayed near the front property line of the property involved so
as to be visible from the street on which the property fronts.
   D.   In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the city
twenty-four (24) hours before said inspection is to be made.
   E.   Construction field inspections shall be made:
      1.   Before commencement of excavation and after required construction
stakes have been set;
      2.   When excavation has reached the bottom of the trench;
      3.   When infrastructure is assembled and prior to backfilling;
      4.   The interconnection of a drainage facility to a city owned drainage
facility; and
      5.   Completion of site grading.
   F.   The owner or developer shall submit the following inspections and
material tests to the city for review prior to asphalt paving over a drainage
facility:
      1.   CCTV Inspection of storm drains;
      2.   Trench backfill compaction tests;
      3.   Base course compaction tests. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-
2020)
17.16.110: TEMPORARY FACILITIES PERMITTED WHEN:
The department may approve temporary drainage solutions providing for on site
detention and retention which will allow development to continue pending
completion of an intermediate or major drainage system facility. The temporary
solutions shall provide the same level of flood protection at all times that
will be provided by the completed systems. All costs of temporary solutions
shall be paid by the developer in addition to the other costs and fees provided
for in this title. (1999 Code)
17.16.120: CONNECTION TO FACILITY REQUIRED:
Except for the owner or developer constructing drainage system facility
pursuant to this chapter, without the department's approval no owner or
developer of real property in a drainage system benefited area shall
subsequently construct an intermediate or major drainage system facility to
serve land intended to be served by an intermediate and/or major drainage
system facility designed to serve such land and constructed pursuant to this
chapter. Any unit or intermediate drainage system facility shall be connected
to the intermediate or major drainage system facility constructed pursuant to
this chapter, and all owners or developers, except for the owner or developer
constructing a drainage system facility pursuant to this chapter, shall be
responsible for payment of the impact fees due to the city under this title.
(1999 Code)
17.16.130: PERFORMANCE GUARANTIES:
   A.   Authorized Guaranties: In lieu of actual completion of the contemplated
improvements, an owner or developer may file with the city a cash bond, an
escrow agreement, or a letter of credit that is acceptable to the city in an
amount specified by the department to assure actual construction of such
improvements within a two (2) year period. Ten percent (10%) of the bond amount
for public improvements shall extend for a one year period beyond the date the
improvements are completed to guaranty replacement of defective public
improvements.
   B.   Specified Sequence: If the city determines that the required
improvements should be completed in a specified sequence and/or in less than a
two (2) year period in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
city or its residents from flood hazards, it may require in approving the
development that the improvements be installed in a specified sequence and
period which may be less than two (2) years and shall incorporate such
requirements in the bond.
   C.   Inspections; Release: Inspections shall be made as soon as possible. If
inspection shows that the improvements are acceptable to the city, the bond
shall be released within seven (7) days from the time of inspection and filing
of the as built plan. If the bonds are not released, refusal to release and the
reasons therefor shall be given the developer in writing within seven (7) days
from the time of the inspection. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2023-12, 9-21-2023)
CHAPTER 17.20
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
17.20.010: Generally
17.20.020: Stormwater Management Plan Study Requirements
17.20.030: Design Standards
17.20.010:  GENERALLY:
   The provisions of this chapter apply where the owner or developer is
required to control excess waters within a development site. A Stormwater
Management Plan is required for all developments or redevelopment equal to or
greater than 1.0 acres.
   Developments or redevelopments less than 1.0 acres are required to submit
the simplified impervious calculations as required in the building permit
application and are required to retain excess water on-site when the impervious
surface is increased equal to or greater than 10%. All developments and
redevelopments subject to review under Chapter
13.08 (as they apply to multi-family, commercial, retail, and mixed-use) are
subject to meeting the onsite stormwater management requirements for the 100-yr
storm event. Design criteria within this chapter shall apply to all on-site
retention systems regardless of the acreage of the development or
redevelopments.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 6-2-2022)
17.20.020:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN STUDY REQUIREMENTS:
   At a minimum, the Stormwater Management Plan shall include the following:
   A.   Exhibits or plans showing basins for the existing and proposed
conditions showing:
      1.   Topographic base map;
      2.   Basin areas and drainage patterns;
      3.   Existing watercourses;
      4.   Drainage systems and facilities;
      5.   Wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas;
      6.   Irrigation systems and facilities
      7.   Basin peak flowrates;
      8.   Property lines;
      9.   Any FEMA floodplains and flood elevations;
      10.   Roads;
      11.   Easements;
      12.   Natural hazard areas as identified on city maps; and
      13.   All other existing significant natural and artificial features.
   B.   Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development
and post-development conditions for the design storms. These calculations must
show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of
controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this title. Such
calculations shall include, but are not limited to:
      1.   A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity
where applicable;
      2.   Time of concentration;
      3.   Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients;
      4.   Peak runoff rates for each watershed area;
      5.   Velocity of peak flowrates;
      6.   Infiltration rates, where applicable;
      7.   Culvert, storm drain, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance
capacities;
      8.   Facility sizing calculations; and
      9.   Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test
results.
   C.   Stormwater quality treatment.
17.20.030:  DESIGN STANDARDS:
   Design standards for controlling excess waters within the development site
are:
   A.   Runoff Analysis: Storm drainage designs are to be prepared using the
Rational Method or Hydrograph Method.
      1.   The Rational Method may only be used for design of systems with
contributing areas less than 20 acres.
      2.   Drainage designs using the Hydrograph Method require computer models
capable of modeling the hydrologic characteristics of the watershed, a series
of storms, and routing the hydrographs through the drainage pipe network,
channels and storage facilities.
   B.   Rainfall Data:
      1.   Rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curves are to be
obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center.
      2.   Historical Daily Rainfall data is to be obtained from the Salt Lake
Airport rainfall gauge.
   C.   Design Storms:
      1.   Redevelopment with an increase in imperviousness equal to or greater
than 10%, must manage rainfall onsite for the increased area of imperviousness
and prevent the off-site discharge of the precipitation from all rainfall
events less than or equal to the 24-hour 85th percentile rainfall event, being
equal to a depth of 0.52 inches.
      2.   New development of vacant land must manage rainfall on-site and
prevent the off-site discharge of the precipitation from all rainfall events
less than or equal to the 24-hour 85th percentile rainfall event, being equal
to a depth of 0.52 inches.
      3.   The maximum discharge may not exceed 0.2 cfs for the 100-yr 6-hr
storm event, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.
   D.   Rainfall Intensity:
      1.   The value of the design rainfall intensity (I) for the Rational
Formula is selected from the appropriate Intensity Duration Frequency (IDF)
curve, with a duration chosen to coincide with the time of concentration. The
time of concentration is the time required for stormwater runoff to become
established and reach the design location from the furthest point within the
contributing basin.
      2.   The time of concentration is the sum of two components, the "inlet
time" and the "travel time". The inlet time is the overland flow time for
stormwater runoff to enter the storm drain system. In developed urban areas
where paved surfaces drain directly to catchbasins, an inlet time of 10 minutes
shall be utilized for assessment of 10-yr storm events. An inlet time of 5
minutes is to be utilized for the 100-yr storm event. Appropriate formulas are
to be used when the surface overland route to a catchbasin is not paved or is
longer than 500-ft.
      3.   The travel time is the length of time required for stormwater to
travel within the storm drain system from the point of inflow to the location
being analyzed.
   E.   Runoff Coefficient:
      1.   C values should be established based on the proposed land uses,
proposed developments and hydrogeological information. Default C values shown
in the following table should be used unless otherwise justified.
Land Use C Value for ≤ 10-yr Storm*
Land Use                   C Value for ≤ 10-yr Storm*
Asphalt or Concrete        0.70 - 0.95
Roofs                      0.70 - 0.95
Lawns:
   sandy soil, flat, 2% 0.05 - 0.10
   sandy soil, avg., 2%-0.10 - 0.15
   sandy soil, steep, > 0.15 - 0.20
   heavy soil, flat, 2% 0.13 - 0.17
   heavy soil, avg., 2%-0.18 - 0.22
   heavy soil, steep, > 0.25 - 0.35
Unimproved                 0.10 - 0.30
 
*Notes:
1.   Lower values are for SCS soil group A; higher values are for SCS soil
group D.
2.   For 100-yr storm events, multiply coefficient by 1.25, not to exceed 1.0.
      2.   In a case of applying the Rational Method to a mixed land use in a
drainage area, a weighted average C value should be used.
   F.   Infiltration Rates:
      1.   Sites with land disturbance area equal to 1.0 acre or more and which
use an infiltration rate that depends on the hydrologic properties of soils
require an onsite infiltration test to determine the infiltration rate. The
infiltration test is to be conducted at the depth where the soils will be
receiving the water (i.e. bottom of the infiltration structure) and at a
distance of not more than 100-ft horizontally between the infiltration test and
the infiltration structure.
      2.   A borehead permeameter - cased (fixed) test method per ASTM 6391 /
USBR 7310 is required to determine the infiltration rate. Other constant head
permeability tests that utilize in-situ conditions and are accompanied by a
recognized published source reference may be approved by the city engineer.
      3.   Safety Factor: A safety factor of 2.0 is to be applied to an
infiltration rate determined by field or lab tests to account for decreased
infiltration rates over time.
      4.   Design Saturated Hydraulic Conductivity rates (Ksat Rate) shown in
the following table are to be used in the absence of a site specific
infiltration test:
Soil Textures K Hydraulic Conductivity Rate (ft/sec)
Soil Textures                     K Hydraulic Conductivity Rate (ft/sec)
Gravel, Sandy gravel, Coarse sand field testing is required
Sand                              5.77 x 10-4
Loamy                             5.13 x 10-4
Sandy Loam                        1.13 x 10-4
Silty Loam                        2.36 x 10-5
Loamy                             2.28 x 10-5
Sandy Clayey Loam                 2.07 x 10-5
Silty Clayey Loam                 5.57 x 10-6
Clay Loam                         8.04 x 10-6
Sandy Clayey Loam                 7.11 x 10-6
Silty Clay                        3.34 x 10-6
Clay                              4.21 x 10-6
 
   G.   Low Impact Development BMPs:
      1.   Onsite retention is to be accomplished by the use of Low Impact
Development (LID) BMP that are designed, constructed, and maintained to
infiltrate, evapotranspire and/or harvest and reuse rainwater. Allowable LID
BMPs are:
         a.   Rain Garden
         b.   Bioretention Cell
         c.   Bio Swale
         d.   Vegetative Strip
         e.   Pervious Surfaces
         f.   Infiltration Basin
         g.   Infiltration Trench
         h.   Dry Well
         i.   Infiltration Galleries
         j.   Harvest and Reuse
      2.   Design and sizing of the LID BMPs are as per the document “A Guide
to Low Impact Development within Utah” prepared for Utah Department of
Environmental Quality, dated December, 2018. Darcy’s Law may be used as an
alternate design method for dry wells.
      3.   Infiltration structures are to be located a minimum of 20-ft from a
building foundation or as otherwise recommended by a geotechnical engineer.
      4.   Surface ponding retention/infiltration systems are not permitted on
lots or parcels less than 0.5 acres in size unless the lot or parcel is part of
a collection of lots or parcels equal to or greater than 0.5 acres and is
limited to one residential dwelling structure. Measurements for parcel or lot
size calculations excludes any hard surface area used for a roadway or lane.
      5.   The bottom of an infiltration structure is to be greater than 2.0
feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
      6.   Void space ratio in drain rock used for storage calculations is not
to exceed 0.35.
   H.   Water Quality:
      1.   Stormwater runoff from roadways and parking surfaces with a surface
area of 0.25 acres or more must be routed through a stormwater quality
treatment system (i.e. hydrodynamic separator) prior to discharging into an
infiltration system, storm drain, canal or creek. Surface areas to be measured
from edge of pavement or an equivalent edge. The stormwater quality treatment
system must be designed to:
         a.   Treat all flows up to 50% of the 2 year (3-hour duration) post-
development flowrate; and
         b.   Reduce the average annual Total Suspended Solids loadings by a
minimum of 80%.
      2.   Facilities that contain fueling areas and chemical and hazardous
storage areas require containment systems designed by a professional engineer.
      3.   For sites with a disturbance area of 1.0 acres or more, a Stormwater
Quality Plan is required with the following minimum requirements:
         a.   Description of long-term stormwater BMPs and how they were
selected;
         b.   The pollutant removal expected;
         c.   The technical basis which supports the performance claims for the
selected BMPs; and
         d.   Design, installation, operation and maintenance standards.
   I.   Existing stormwater management and irrigation facilities must be
protected in place during construction. Changes or disturbance of these systems
require a design to be completed by a professional engineer and approval by the
city engineer.
   J.   Site Grading Requirements:
      1.   Sites are to be graded to route stormwater runoff to onsite BMPs.
      2.   Bare soil shall be planted in a manner that will prevent erosion of
the ground.
      3.   When bare soils are at risk of eroding, erosion control matting,
temporary mulches, or other stabilization is required to prevent the soil from
eroding.
      4.   Sags or low points in roads or subdivisions are to be designed with
a safe overland outlet flow route, designed for the 100-yr storm event.
      5.   The maximum depth of flooding in a roadway or parking lot during a
100-yr storm event is not to exceed 1.0-ft.
      6.   Site grading is to be designed and constructed to route stormwater
runoff from discharging onto neighboring properties with the following
exceptions:
         a.   A drainage easement is recorded on the property receiving the
stormwater discharge for the purpose of conveying the stormwater on the
receiving property.
         b.   The stormwater discharge maintains a historical drainage pattern
and the discharge does not raise the water surface elevation on the receiving
property.
      7.   Lots shall be graded to drain surface water away from the foundation
walls. The grade shall fall not fewer than 6 inches within the first 10 feet.
Where lot lines, walls, slopes or other physical barriers prohibit 6 inches of
fall within 10 feet, drain or swales shall be constructed to ensure drainage
away from the structure. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet of the building
foundation shall be sloped not less than 2 percent away from the building.
      8.   Driveways sloping from a perimeter street toward a structure must be
graded such that any stormwater runoff will be safely routed around the
structure without flooding the structure or causing any water damage to the
structure or contents within the structure. Properties utilizing this method
must have a professional engineer seal the design.
      9.   Swales shall have a minimum slope of 1 percent.
   K.   Catchbasins:
      1.   To ensure that the capture or inlet capacity matches the storm main
capacity, the spacing of catch basins on streets may be varied; however, they
shall generally meet the following criteria:
         a.   Spacing: Road grades less than or equal to 3%, space 500 feet
maximum or 7,000 square feet of paved area. Road grades greater than 3%, space
300 feet minimum or 5,000 square feet of paved area.
         b.   Space at intersection to not interfere with ADA ramps.
         c.   Side inlet catchbasins are required for all curbed roads.
      2.   Catchbasin outlets are to be a minimum diameter of 12 inches and
sized to convey the design inlet capacity.
      3.   Materials: Boxes with "knock outs" for out outlet connections are
not allowed for public catchbasins.
      4.   Water Quality: New catchbasins to be constructed with a minimum 3.0-
foot deep sump and a trapping hood cover (i.e. ACF Environmental Trash Guard
Hood) on the outlet pipe unless there is a downstream water quality treatment
unit (i.e. hydrodynamic separator).
   L.   Storm Mains:
      1.   Capacity: Hydraulic capacity shall be calculated using Manning's
formula. A roughness coefficient of 0.013 shall be used for concrete and 0.011
shall be used for smooth plastic pipe.
      2.   Velocity: Minimum velocity shall be 2.5 ft/s at the design flow
rate.
      3.   Minimum Size: 12 inches inside diameter.
      4.   Joints: Joints shall be water tight unless the storm drain is
designed as an infiltration or exfiltration pipe (wrapped in drain rock and
filter fabric) then joints may be soil tight.
      5.   Minimum Depth of Cover: Provide two (2) feet minimum cover.
      6.   Junctions: The crown elevations for each storm drain pipe should
match, where feasible.
      7.   Materials: Materials are to be approved by the city engineer.
Corrugated metal pipes are not acceptable.
   M.   Manholes:
      1.   Maximum Spacing:
         a.   12" to 24" diameter - 400 feet
         b.   over 24" diameter - 325 feet
      2.   Manholes are required at:
         a.   All grade or alignment changes
         b.   Pipe size changes
         c.   All intersection mains
         d.   All upstream end of mains
         e.   All catchbasin connections, unless otherwise approved by the city
engineer
         f.   Outfalls to creeks in order to isolate the upstream main to
facilitate cleaning. The manhole is to be located as close as possible to the
point of discharge.
   N.   Dry Well:
      1.   Where dry wells are used as means for infiltration, dry well wall
surface area (interface with receiving soils) shall be sized using Darcy's
empirical law:
         Q = A K i
         Where:    Q =   rate of flow (cfs)
            A =   cross section area of soil through which flow takes place
(consider wall area interfacing with receiving soils)
            K =   coefficient of permeability (see section
17.20.030 .F)
            I =   gradient of headloss over a given flow distance (assume 1.0
unless otherwise known)
         Upon determination of permeability factor, a safety factor of 2 shall
be applied.
         Hydraulic Gradient
            I = h/l
            Where:    h =   average available head
            L =   flow distance
         Depth of the dry well will vary in accordance with the requirements
derived from Darcy's law.
   O.   Floodplains:
      1.   The following is to be shown on a grading plan:
         a.   FEMA floodplain boundary
         b.   Floodplain zone
         c.   Floodplain Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
         d.   Firmette panel number and date
         e.   Lowest habitable floor elevation
      2.   The lowest habitable floor elevation of a structure must be 1.0 feet
above the mapped Base Flood Elevation. Exceptions may be allowed as per the
most current FEMA's guidelines and policies.
   P.   Maintenance Access:
      1.   All components for a drainage system must be designed to allow for
future maintenance, including inspections, cleaning, and replacement.
      2.   Where vehicular access is required to access manholes and outfalls,
the surface is to be designed to support maintenance vehicles in accordance to
AASHTO H20 loading.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 6-2-2022)
CHAPTER 17.24
RETENTION PLANS
SECTION:
17.24.010: Generally
17.24.020: Plans And Specifications
17.24.030: Rules And Regulations Adopted
17.24.040: City Review
17.24.050: Construction Approval
17.24.060: Temporary Retention System
17.24.070: Responsibility For Property And Facilities
17.24.010: GENERALLY:
The provisions of this chapter apply where the owner or developer elects to
control all or a portion of excess waters within a development site,
development or subdivision by a permanent or temporary retention system. (1999
Code)
17.24.020: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Required; Content: Prior to issuance of any final conditional use
permit, recordation of a subdivision, or issuance of a building permit, the
owner or developer shall, at his expense, have prepared by a professional
engineer acceptable to the City, engineering calculations including percolation
tests of the on site soils, detailed plans and specifications for the
construction and installation of all unit or subdivision drainage system
facility and retention system for the control of drainage of excess water
within the development, or the part thereof for which a building permit has
been requested, and the carriage of such water to a retention area. The plans
and specifications shall include provisions for overflow of stormwaters in
excess of a 10-year frequency flood.
   B.   Site Grading Management Agreement: Approved permits shall be issued
upon execution of an acknowledgement of "Site Grading Management Agreement"
kept on file with the City, which shall be recorded against the property.
   C.   Assurance In Lieu Of Completion: In lieu of completion of the drainage
system prior to final approval of the subdivision or development plan by the
department, the developer or owner shall provide an acceptable assurance to the
City that the retention plan will be constructed and installed as indicated and
approved. Acceptable assurance shall consist of any one of the types of
performance guarantees listed in section
17.16.130 of this title. (Ord. 2018-16, 10-11-2018)
17.24.030: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The department may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for design
requirements, review and approval of retention plans for developments or
subdivisions consisting of more than a single lot. Such rules and regulations
may address consolidation of, location of, access to and maintenance of
retention facilities. (1999 Code)
17.24.040: CITY REVIEW:
The engineering calculations and percolation test data, plans and
specifications shall be reviewed by the department to determine that the
retention system, as designed, will control the excess waters determined under
the engineering studies conducted pursuant to section
17.08.060 of this title and that provisions are made for overflow in excess of
a 10-year frequency flood. If the retention system, as designed, will control
the excess waters within the subdivision or development, the department shall
approve the system. If the system will not control the excess waters, the
department will specify, in writing, the deficiencies of the system as
designed. (1999 Code)
17.24.050: CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL:
Upon completion of such review and approval by the department and posting of a
cash bond, an escrow agreement or a letter of credit that is acceptable to the
City in an amount specified by the department, final approval of the
subdivision or development plan or building permits for construction of the
unit or subdivision drainage system facilities may be given. (1999 Code; amd.
Ord. 2023-12, 9-21-2023)
17.24.060: TEMPORARY RETENTION SYSTEM:
In the event the retention system is intended to be temporary, the property
that is drained by the drainage facilities to be connected shall be subject to
applicable fees. (1999 Code)
17.24.070: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY AND FACILITIES:
The City shall not own or have any responsibility or maintenance obligation for
drainage facilities or retention systems constructed pursuant to this title
unless: a) such facilities or systems are conveyed or dedicated to the City and
the City accepts such conveyance or dedication; or b) the City agrees by
ordinance to undertake such responsibility or maintenance obligation. (1999
Code)
CHAPTER 17.27
STORM WATER FACILITIES
SECTION:
17.27.010: Purpose
17.27.020: Impact Fees Imposed
17.27.030: Service Area
17.27.040: Accounting, Expenditure And Refund Of Impact Fees
17.27.050: Adjustment Of Impact Fee
17.27.060: Administrative Challenges And Appeals Procedure
17.27.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and equitable means of funding
the storm water facilities which will be necessary to service anticipated
future growth and development in the city. The impact fees for storm water
facilities implemented through this chapter will help achieve an equitable
allocation of the costs of providing such facilities which are reasonably
related to and necessary to service anticipated future growth. (1999 Code)
17.27.020: IMPACT FEES IMPOSED:
The owner or developer of property located in one of the drainage basins for
which storm water facilities improvements are necessary in order to accommodate
new development shall pay an impact fee to the city for that purpose. The
amount of the fees shall be as set in this section. The city council may adjust
the fee for inflation by resolution on an annual basis for each fiscal year
based on a report from the department utilizing the construction cost index
published by the engineering news record. The fee shall be paid as a condition
precedent to the issuance of a building permit or construction of improvements
upon the property in question. Where the development is a subdivision of a
conditional use, the fee shall be paid to and collected by the department prior
to the approval of the plat or plan by the department.
   Holladay (Big Cottonwood) Basin
   (Development Runoff ÷ 903.5) X $8,060,037 = Gross Fees
(1999 Code)
17.27.030: SERVICE AREA:
The city is established as a separate service area with respect to the
provision of storm water facilities. (1999 Code)
17.27.040: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND OF IMPACT FEES:
All of the impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited
into a separate interest bearing ledger account for storm water facilities and
may only be used for that purpose. The accounting, expenditure and refund of
all such impact fees collected shall be handled by the city in accordance with
the provisions of the Utah impact fees act. (1999 Code)
17.27.050: ADJUSTMENT OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Purposes: The city may adjust the impact fees imposed pursuant to this
chapter as necessary in order to:
      1.   Respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases;
      2.   Ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly;
      3.   Permit the adjustment of the amount of the fee based upon studies
and data submitted by an applicant as approved by the division in order to
ensure that the fee represents the proportionate share of the costs of
providing such facilities which are reasonably related to and necessary in
order to provide the services in question to anticipated future growth and
development activities; and
      4.   Allow credits against impact fees for dedication of land for,
improvement to or new construction of, any system improvements which are
identified in the capital facilities plan and required by the city as a
condition of approving the development activity. No credits shall be given for
"project improvements" as defined by the Utah impact fees act.
   B.   Mayor Authority: The mayor shall have the authority to make such
adjustments based upon information submitted by the applicant and the
recommendations from the department.
   C.   Adoption Of Policies: The city may adopt policies consistent with this
chapter and any resolutions passed by the city council to assist in the
implementation, administration and interpretation of this title related to
storm water facilities impact fees.
   D.   Appeal: If the applicant, person or entity is not satisfied with the
mayor's decision, a further appeal may be made to the city council under the
procedures specified in section
17.27.060 of this chapter. (1999 Code)
17.27.060: ADMINISTRATIVE CHALLENGES AND APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Request For Information: Any person or entity required to pay an impact
fee who believes the fee does not meet the requirements of law may file a
written request for information with the city as provided by the Utah impact
fees act. Within two (2) weeks of the receipt of the request for information,
the city shall provide the person or entity with the written analysis required
by the Utah impact fees act and any other relevant information relating to the
impact fee.
   B.   Written Appeal; Time Limit; Hearing; Decision: Any person or entity
residing in or owning property within the city who believes the fee does not
meet the requirements of the law or wishes to challenge the fee shall file a
written appeal within thirty (30) days after payment of any impact fee with the
city setting forth in detail all factual and legal grounds in support of the
appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal, the mayor promptly shall make a
recommendation to the city council and shall schedule a public hearing before
the city council for the purpose of receiving input from all persons interested
in the appeal. The city council shall thereafter render its decision on the
appeal no later than thirty (30) days after the date the appeal was filed. Any
person or entity who has failed to comply with these administrative remedies
may not file or join an action challenging the validity of any impact fee.
   C.   District Court Review: Any person or entity who was a party to an
appeal under this section who is adversely affected by the decision of the
mayor may petition the district court for a review of the decision within
ninety (90) days after a decision upholding an impact fee by the mayor or
within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date the challenge to the impact
fee was filed, whichever is earlier. Such a declaratory judgment action or
petition for review challenging the validity of the fee shall be filed in the
third judicial district court for Salt Lake County.
   D.   Record Transmitted To Court: In the event a petition is filed with the
court, the city shall transmit to the reviewing court the record of its
proceedings including its minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true
and correct transcript of its proceedings.
   E.   Tape Recording If Available: If the proceeding was tape recorded, a
transcript of that tape recording is a true and correct transcript for the
purposes of subsection D of this section.
   F.   Record; Scope Of Review: If there is a record:
      1.   The district court's review is limited to the record provided by the
city; and
      2.   The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the city's
record unless that evidence was offered to the city and the court determines
that it was improperly excluded by the city.
   G.   Inadequate Record: If there is an inadequate record, the court may call
witnesses and take evidence.
   H.   Affirmation Of City Decision: The court shall affirm the decision of
the city if the decision was supported by substantial evidence in the record.
   I.   Award Of Fees And Costs: The judge may award reasonable attorney fees
and costs to the prevailing party in any action brought under this section.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 17.29
MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION OF DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
SECTION:
17.29.010: Generally
17.29.020: Maintenance Easements
17.29.030: Maintenance And Protection
17.29.040: As-Built Drawings
17.29.010:  GENERALLY:
Where a private drainage system is installed on private property, the property
owner is required to permanently maintain the facility to ensure it functions
as per its intended purpose. Where a public drainage system is installed on
private property, the property owner is required to provide a maintenance
easement and protect the drainage facility. (Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.29.020:  MAINTENANCE EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easement: The owner/developer must ensure permanent or perpetual access
to the site for the purpose of inspection, maintenance and repair of new and
existing drainage systems by securing all the maintenance easements needed.
These easements must be binding on the current property owner and all
subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land
record.
   B.   Minimum Width: Minimum easement widths for a public drainage system
will be determined by the city engineer and shall be based on common
maintenance practices. In no case shall the width of an easement for the
purpose of maintaining subsurface drainage systems be less than 15 feet.
   C.   Restrictions: Easements are to restrict the placement of structures and
features that restrict access to the easement, including walls, poles with
foundations, pools, hot tubs, decks, and trees in the easement.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 6-2-2022)
17.29.030: MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION:
   A.   As applicable, the following agreements and protections are required
prior to issuance of a Building Permit or Grading Permit:
      1.   Construction activity on property that has on it or is adjacent to
an existing drainage or irrigation system must execute a Certification of
Protection of Existing Irrigation, Canal and Storm Drain Facility prepared by
the city.
      2.   Onsite drainage systems constructed on private property are to be
owned and maintained by the association or equivalent entity responsible for
maintenance of the common grounds (i.e. HOA). Maintenance responsibilities are
to be written into the Covenants, Conditions & Restrictions (CC&Rs) or
equivalent document. Where an association or equivalent entity does not exist,
the property owner must execute a Site Grading Management Agreement prepared by
the city that shall operate as a recorded deed restriction binding on the
current property owner and all subsequent property owners.
      3.   The owner of property to be served by a private on-site stormwater
quality facility must execute a Long-Term Stormwater Management Agreement
prepared by the city that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the
current and subsequent property owners.
   B.   Canal Bank Protection: Property owners of private property that
encompass the bank of a canal structure are required to protect the stability
of that bank. Bank improvements that have been constructed for the benefit of
the private property owner or historical property owners are the responsibility
of the property owner to maintain in good shape in such a manner that it does
not pose a risk to the functional operation of the canal. This includes, but
not limited to, protection and maintenance of:
      1.   All types of retaining walls;
      2.   Erosion prevention from drain pipe outfalls;
      3.   Earthen fill on top of a canal bank placed for the purpose of
raising the grade elevation of the property;
      4.   Stone slopes;
      5.   Over steepened slopes;
      6.   Fencing;
      7.   Decking;
      8.   Removal of fallen trees and stumps; and
      9.   Erosion prevention from loss of stabilizing ground cover vegetation.
   C.   Canal Retaining Wall Protection: To prevent retaining wall failure
caused by trees, no tree shall be planted within 10-ft from the face of a
retaining wall supporting a canal bank.
   D.   Property owners of private property where a public storm drain manhole
has been buried, shall not be responsible to uncover the manhole and raise the
grade of the manhole unless:
      1.   the manhole is located within an easement of record; or
      2.   It can be demonstrated that the property owner was responsible for
burying the manhole.
   E.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter to bury any
manhole within the City without the permission of the City’s Public Work’s
Director.
(Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 6-2-2022)
17.29.040: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS:
   A.   Drainage Facility As-built: As-built drawings of new drainage
facilities, including long-term BMPs, are to be prepared by the owner or
developer and submitted to the city and approved prior to the city releasing a
bond being held for said drainage facility.
   B.   Detention As-builts: Drainage facilities with detention structures
shall be field surveyed and stamped and signed by a professional engineer and
submitted to the city. (Ord 2020-05, 4-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-12, 9-21-2023)
CHAPTER 17.30
GROUNDWATER SOURCE PROTECTION
SECTION:
17.30.010: Title, Applicability And Authority
17.30.020: Purpose And Intent
17.30.030: Definitions
17.30.040: Extent Of Recharge Areas And Protection Zones
17.30.050: Designation Of Recharge Areas And Protection Zones
17.30.060: Review Of Recharge Area And Protection Zone Map
17.30.070: Uses And Restrictions Within Recharge Areas And Protection Zones
17.30.080: Review Of Development Plans; Permits
17.30.090: Disputes And Appeals
17.30.100: Management Strategies; Best Management Practices
17.30.110: Exclusions And Exemptions
17.30.120: Enforcement, Violation And Penalties; Civil
17.30.130: Inspection Authority
17.30.140: Criminal Penalty
17.30.150: Appendices
17.30.010: TITLE, APPLICABILITY AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as the GROUNDWATER SOURCE PROTECTION
ORDINANCE.
   B.   Applicability: This chapter shall be effective within the corporate
boundaries of the city with respect to both city owned and noncity owned
groundwater sources, and, to the fullest extent permitted by law, outside the
corporate boundaries of the city with respect to city owned groundwater
sources. This chapter establishes certain standards and restrictions intended
to prevent contamination of the public drinking water supply as a result of
toxic substances entering the groundwater. It shall be the responsibility of
any person owning real property and/or owning or operating a business within
the protective zones or recharge areas established pursuant to this chapter.
Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this chapter apply only to new
development or a change in property use; a change or expansion of an existing
legal nonconforming use; and the handling, movement, and storage of hazardous
waste, petroleum products and regulated substances, which occur or commence
after the effective date hereof.
   C.   Authority: This is adopted pursuant to the authority provided in the
Utah municipal land use development and management act section 10-8-15, Utah
code, R309-113 of the Utah administrative code, and other applicable statutory
and common law of the state of Utah. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve, and maintain
existing and potential public drinking water sources in order to safeguard the
public health, safety and welfare of customers and other users of the city's
public drinking water supply, distribution and delivery system. The intent of
this chapter is to establish and designate drinking water source protection
zones and groundwater recharge areas for all underground sources of public
drinking water which enter the public's culinary drinking water supply,
distribution and delivery system, whether such sources are located within, or
outside of, the city's corporate boundaries. This chapter establishes criteria
for regulating the storage, handling, use or production of hazardous waste,
petroleum products and regulated substances within identified areas where
groundwater is, or could be affected by the potential contaminant source. This
shall be accomplished by the designation and regulation of property uses and
conditions that may be maintained within such zones or areas. (Ord. 06-07, 4-
20-2006)
   B.   This chapter shall not be construed to allow a permitted or a
conditional use except as that use may be provided in the land use ordinance of
this code. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and/or prohibit
certain land uses which may be otherwise classified as permitted or conditional
uses under the land use ordinance, and if the provisions of this chapter
conflict with the land use ordinance in this regard, the more strict provisions
of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-
2012)
   C.   The degree of protection afforded by this chapter is considered
adequate for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not ensure that public
drinking water sources will not be subject to accidental or intentional
contamination, nor does it create liability on the part of the city, or an
officer or employee thereof, for any damages to the public water supplies from
reliance on this chapter nor any administrative order lawfully made hereunder.
   D.   Compliance with the terms of this chapter shall not relieve the person
subject to the terms hereof of the obligation to comply with any other
applicable federal, state, regional or local regulation, rule, ordinance or
requirement. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.030: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
ABANDONED WELL: A well, the use of which has been permanently discontinued or
is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used for its intended purpose
or for observation purposes.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A practice or combination of practices
determined to be the most effective practicable (including technological,
economic, and institutional considerations) means of preventing or reducing the
amount of pollution to a level compatible with water, soil, and air quality
goals.
CITY: The city of Holladay.
CLOSURE: The cessation of operation of a facility, or any portion thereof, and
the act of securing such facility or portion thereof to ensure protection of
groundwater in accordance with the appropriate state, federal and local
regulations applicable to the specific facility and with the provisions of this
chapter.
CONTINUOUS TRANSIT: The nonstop movement of a mobile vehicle except for stops
required by traffic laws.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Holladay community development department or designee.
DIRECTOR: The city manager or his designee.
DISCHARGE: Means and includes, without limitation, spilling, leaking, seeping,
pouring, injecting, emitting, emptying, disposing, releasing, or dumping
regulated substances, hazardous waste or petroleum products to the soils, air,
groundwaters, or surface waters of the city. Discharge does not include the use
of a regulated substance in accordance with the appropriate use intended or
specified by the manufacturer of the substance, provided that such use is not
prohibited by federal, state, or local regulations. Discharge does not include
discharges specifically authorized by federal or state permits.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE: A drinking water spring or well supplying water which
has been permitted or intended for consumptive use.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE (DWSP) OR PROTECTION ZONE: An area within
which best management practices are mandated for restricted uses, or certain
uses are prohibited, in order to protect groundwater flowing to public drinking
water sources, and designated as a protection zone, level 1, 2, 3, or 4,
pursuant to section
17.30.050 of this chapter.
GROUNDWATER: Any water which may be drawn from the ground.
GROUNDWATER DISCHARGE AREA: An area where the direction of groundwater movement
is upward from the principal aquifer to the shallow unconfined aquifer.
Discharge areas, determined by the United States geological survey (USGS), are
shown on appendix C in section
17.30.150 of this chapter.
GROUNDWATER DIVIDE: A line on a water table on each side of which the water
table slopes downward in a direction away from the line.
GROUNDWATER TOT: Time of travel for groundwater to reach a drinking water
source.
HANDLE: To use, generate, process, produce, package, treat, store or transport
a regulated substance, hazardous waste or petroleum product in any fashion.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: All waste regulated under the following federal acts: the
reserve conservation and recovery act, the toxic substance control act, the
clean water act, the clean air act, the solid waste disposal act and the atomic
energy act of 1954.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake City/County health department.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL: The municipal council, city of Holladay, Utah.
OPERATING PERMIT: A permit to operate a facility handling regulated substances,
hazardous waste or petroleum products under this chapter. The permit will be
issued by the city of Holladay public services department.
PCS: Potential contaminant source.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT: Includes fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, and
mixtures of these products), lubricating oils, motor oils (new and used),
hydraulic fluids, and other similar petroleum based products.
RECHARGE AREA: Either a primary or secondary recharge area.
RECHARGE AREA AND PROTECTION ZONE MAP: The map by that name designated in
section
17.30.040 of this chapter.
REGULATED PERSON: A person, corporation, partnership, association or other
legal entity subject to this chapter.
REGULATED SUBSTANCES: Substances (including degradation and interaction
products) which because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical
(including ignitability, corrosivity, reactiveness and toxicity), infectious
characteristics, radiomutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity,
bioaccumulative effect, persistence (nondegradability) in nature, or any other
characteristics relevant to a particular material that may cause significant
harm to human health and/or the environment (including surface and ground
water, plants, and animals), including, without limitation, those substances
set forth in the generic regulated substances list which is included as
appendix A in section
17.30.150 of this chapter; and the substances set forth in the following lists,
as the same may be amended from time to time; identification and listing of
hazardous materials (40 CFR part 261, subpart D) and list of extremely
hazardous substances (40 CFR part 355, appendices A and B) and which are in a
form capable of entering groundwater.
RESIDENTIAL USE: Any building or structure or portion thereof that is
designated for or used for residential purposes and any activity involving the
use or occupancy of a lot for residential purposes. Residential use shall
include those customary and accessory residential activities associated with
the principal permitted use of a lot for residential purposes as provided in
the city of Holladay land use ordinance.
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT: Any system that is used to provide release detection and
release prevention, such as trays under containers, floor curbing or other
systems designed to hold materials or liquids that may discharge from
containers holding regulated substances, petroleum products or hazardous
substances. Examples include a double walled tank, a double walled integral
piping system, or single walled tank or integral piping system that is
protected by an enclosed concrete vault, liner or an impervious containment
area.
SEPTIC HOLDING TANK: A watertight receptacle, used to contain septic waste, the
contents of which are removed and disposed of at a waste disposal facility.
SEPTIC TANK SYSTEM: A generally watertight receptacle connected to a drain
field that allows liquid from the tank to enter the soil. The system is
constructed to promote separation of solid and liquid components of domestic
wastewater, to provide decomposition of organic matter, to store solids and to
allow clarified liquid to discharge for further treatment and disposal in a
soil absorption system.
SLUDGE OR BIOSOLIDS: The solids separated from wastewater during the wastewater
treatment process.
TRAVEL TIME CONTOUR: The locus of points that form a line of any configuration
in space from which groundwater particles on that line theoretically take an
equal amount of time to reach a given destination, such as a well or a well
field, as predicted by the refined Salt Lake Valley mod flow/mod path model.
USGS: The United States geological survey.
WELL: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted
or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the
location, acquisition, development or artificial recharge of groundwater.
WELL FIELD: An area of land which contains one or more drinking water supply
wells. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
17.30.040: EXTENT OF RECHARGE AREAS AND PROTECTION ZONES:
   A.   Recharge Area And Protection Zone Map: The extent of the recharge areas
and the protection zones may be seen on the recharge area and protection zone
map, appendix C in section
17.30.150 of this chapter. The recharge area and protection zone map is
incorporated and made a part of this chapter. The recharge area boundary lines
have been located along streets and/or section lines for convenience of
assessing which prohibition and restrictions apply to a specific property.
Amendments, additions, or deletions to this map may be made by the municipal
council following public notice and upon the recommendation of the department.
Notice shall be published one time at least thirty (30) days prior to
consideration of the proposed changes. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.050: DESIGNATION OF RECHARGE AREAS AND PROTECTION ZONES:
   A.   Recharge Areas And Protection Zones: The following recharge areas and
protection zones are hereby designated within the city:
      1.   Primary recharge area, as determined by the USGS (see appendix C in
section
17.30.150 of this chapter).
      2.   Secondary recharge, as determined by the USGS (see appendix C in
section
17.30.150 of this chapter).
      3.   Protection zone 1 shall be the area within a one hundred foot (100')
radius from the well or margin of the collection area.
      4.   Protection zone 2 shall be the area within a two hundred fifty (250)
day groundwater TOT to the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the
aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source or the groundwater
divide, whichever is closer.
      5.   Protection zone 3 shall be the area within a three (3) year
groundwater TOT to the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the
aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source or the groundwater
divide, whichever is closer.
      6.   Protection zone 4 shall be the area within a fifteen (15) year
groundwater TOT to the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the
aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source or the groundwater
divide, whichever is closer.
   B.   Location Determination: In determining the location of properties and
facilities within the areas and zones depicted on the recharge area and
protection zone map, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Property located wholly or partially in a recharge area or a
protection zone on the overlay map shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to that recharge area or protection zone.
      2.   Properties located within more than one recharge area or protection
zone as shown on the overlay map shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to the most restrictive protection zone. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.060: REVIEW OF RECHARGE AREA AND PROTECTION ZONE MAP:
The community development department shall review the recharge area and
protection zone map at least once every five (5) years or more frequently as
determined appropriate by the director. Failure to conduct this review shall
not affect the validity of the existing approved map. The basis for updating
the map may include, but is not limited to, the following:
   A.   Changes in technical or scientific knowledge in the areas of
geohydrology, hydraulics and geology.
   B.   Changes in well field configuration.
   C.   Changes in pumping rates for the well field.
   D.   Development of new wells, well fields, and/or springs.
   E.   Changes in water quality. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.070: USES AND RESTRICTIONS WITHIN RECHARGE AREAS AND PROTECTION ZONES:
   A.   Prohibitions And Restrictions: A list of uses which may constitute
potential contamination sources is found in appendix B in section
17.30.150 of this chapter. The list categorizes each use as either permitted,
restricted or prohibited within protection zones referenced in appendix C in
section
17.30.150 of this chapter, and includes BMPs, if available, for each use.
Permit requests for restricted uses shall be processed as provided in section
17.30.080 of this chapter. The department shall update and/or revise appendix B
in section
17.30.150 of this chapter from time to time as uses, technology, and BMPs
evolve over time. Appendices B and C in section
17.30.150 of this chapter shall not be construed to allow a permitted or a
conditional use except as that use may be provided in the land use ordinance of
the city of Holladay. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and/or
prohibit certain land uses which may be otherwise classified as permitted or
conditional uses under the land use ordinance, and if the provisions of this
chapter conflict with the land use ordinance in this regard, the more strict
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006; amd. Ord. 2012-
15, 9-20-2012)
   B.   Discharge: A person may not discharge, or permit the discharge, of any
regulated substance, hazardous waste or petroleum product, whether treated or
untreated, to soils, air, groundwater, or surface water in any recharge area or
protection zone, that may have a deleterious effect upon the groundwater in the
city, unless the discharge is in compliance with federal, state, and local
regulations. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.080: REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS; PERMITS:
   A.   Application: Permit applications for all new restricted uses, or
expansion of an existing restricted use shall be submitted to the public
services department for review, issuance of building permits (if applicable)
and issuance of an operating permit.
   B.   Approval Of Permit: If the public services department finds that the
proposed use will not have an adverse impact on groundwater quality, the
director or the director's designee may approve the issuance of the permit. If
the department finds that the potential adverse impacts can be mitigated by
implementing best management practices or other conditions and regulations, the
permit may be approved by the director or the director's designee and referred
to the planning commission for its further action. If approved, all
recommendations of the department shall be attached to the permit as conditions
of approval.
   C.   Denial Of Permit: If the public services department determines that the
proposed use may have an adverse effect upon groundwater quality, and that the
adverse effect cannot be adequately mitigated through use of BMPs or other
methods the permit shall be denied. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.090: DISPUTES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Disputes: Persons objecting to the configuration of the recharge area
and protection zone map, or the inclusion of specific property within any
recharge areas or protection zones, or the denial of a permit or the conditions
attached thereto, or any rulings of the department under this section, may
appeal to the department by filing a written notice of appeal not later than
thirty (30) days following the department's action.
   B.   Appeal: The written appeal shall contain:
      1.   Documentation of compliance; or
      2.   Response to specific violations cited in the cease and desist order
and the remedial actions planned to bring the facility into compliance.
   C.   Review: Upon receipt of the written appeal, the city manager shall
review the appeal within ten (10) days of its receipt and respond to the
appellant. If the director determines that the written response from the
appellant is adequate and noncompliance issues are addressed, the appellant
will be notified by mail and no further action is required. If the city manager
determines that the appeals response is inadequate, the appellant may request a
hearing before the city manager. This hearing shall be held within thirty (30)
days of receiving the request for hearing. The order being appealed from shall
remain in effect until the hearing is conducted. Within ten (10) days after the
hearing, the city manager shall enter findings, conclusions and a final
decision within ten (10) days of a final written decision in the matter and
shall notify the appellant by mail.
   D.   Method Of Notice: A notice under this section shall be deemed
sufficient if given personally, or if given by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
   E.   Petition For Review: Any person adversely affected by the final
decision of the city manager may file a petition for review of the decision
with the district court within thirty (30) days after the decision is final.
The final decision of the city manager shall be valid if the decision is
supported by substantial evidence in the record and is not arbitrary,
capricious or illegal. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.100: MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES; BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   Toxic, Hazardous And Other Materials Handling Regulations:
      1.   Storage Containers: All regulated substances, hazardous waste, and
petroleum products shall be stored in suitable containers to reduce the chance
for accidental introduction into the environment. These storage containers
shall be product tight and, except where provided elsewhere in this chapter,
shall be provided with a means to control spillage and to contain or drain off
spillage and fire protection water discharged in the storage area. Storage
containers and secondary containment areas must be covered and/or elevated to
prevent the accumulation of rain or other water. Defective storage containers
shall be removed from service for repair or disposal in accordance with local,
state, and federal standards.
      2.   Secondary Containment: Secondary containment shall be constructed of
a material of sufficient structural integrity and composition to contain the
required capacity of liquids and not be structurally weakened as a result of
contact with the discharge of the regulated substance, hazardous waste or
petroleum product to be contained. The material shall be free of cracks,
joints, gaps, or other imperfections which would allow leakage through the
containment material.
The secondary containment system shall have sufficient capacity to contain: a)
ten percent (10%) of the volume of all containers and one hundred percent
(100%) of the volume of the largest single container, whichever is greater,
plus b) the design flow rate of the automatic fire extinguishing system (for 20
minutes) for the area or room in which the storage is located. If the storage
area and/or containment area are open to rainfall, the secondary containment
system must also accommodate the volume of a twenty four (24) hour rainfall as
determined by a 25-year storm frequency. Liquid that accumulates in the
secondary containment system shall be removed in as timely a manner as
necessary to prevent overflow of the system. Nonhazardous liquids may be
drained in accordance with applicable local regulations. If the collected
material is a hazardous waste under title 40, part 261 of the code of federal
regulations, it must be managed as a hazardous waste in accordance with all
applicable requirements of parts 262 through 266 of that regulation.
Vacuum suction devices, absorbent scavenger materials or other devices approved
by the department, shall be present on site or available to facilitate the
removal or further containment of a spill. Devices or materials shall be
available in sufficient magnitude so as to at least control and collect the
total quantity of regulated substances, hazardous waste and petroleum products
that the containment system is designed to contain. Emergency containers shall
be present and of such capacity as to hold the total quantity of regulated
substances plus absorbent material.
      3.   Emergency Management Plan: An emergency plan shall be prepared and
filed with the health department, the city of Holladay fire and police
departments and the community development department indicating the procedures
that will be followed in the event of the release of a regulated substance,
hazardous waste or petroleum product so as to control and collect all such
spilled material in such a manner as to prevent it from discharging into any
storm or sanitary drains or the ground. A facility or property which has had,
or appears to have had, unauthorized discharges to soil or ground water shall
submit a regulated substances management plan for the facility if required by
the department. The written plan will be used to demonstrate to the department
that the facility owner or operator understands the procedures and has the
proper equipment to handle regulated substances, hazardous waste and petroleum
products within the guidelines of this chapter. The plan may not be implemented
without the approval of the department.
      4.   Reporting Of Spills: Any spill of a regulated substance in excess of
the nonaggregate quantity thresholds established by the list of hazardous waste
(40 CFR part 261, subpart D), and 40 CFR appendix VII-hazardous constituents
and EPA designation reportable quantities and notification requirements for
hazardous substances under CERCLA (40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986), shall
be reported by telephone to the city and designated water utility within one
hour of discovery of the spill. Cleanup shall commence immediately upon
discovery of the spill. A full written report shall be submitted to the public
services department and the health department within fifteen (15) days of
discovery of the spill.
   B.   Best Management Practices: Under the provisions of this chapter, all
persons having control or ownership of potential contamination sources within
the city's boundaries shall incorporate and utilize best management practices
(BMPs) in their operations. BMPs that reduce the potential for spills and leaks
at a site to occur and enter ground water shall be construed within the context
of this chapter to include, but not be limited to, structural and nonstructural
practices, conservation practices, and operation and maintenance procedures as
specified by the Utah department of environmental quality and the U.S.
environmental protection agency. BMPs outlined in appendix B in section
17.30.150 of this chapter supplement those provided in this subsection. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to comply with the most recent, updated
version of BMP provisions.
      1.   Underground Storage Tanks: Installation of any new underground
storage tanks (USTs) used to store regulated substances, hazardous waste or
petroleum products for either residential or nonresidential activities in
recharge areas and protection zones designated pursuant to this chapter, shall
require a secondary containment system for the tank and associated underground
piping, and an automatic leak detection system. A permit from the Utah state
division of environmental remediation and response shall be required for the
removal or closure of USTs. The permit shall require that leaking tanks be
pumped dry and removed from the ground by a state licensed company. If removal
of the UST(s) is not feasible, the lines shall be disconnected and capped and
the tank shall be filled with an inert substance such as washed sand. Best
management practices implementation is required for all USTs.
      2.   Septic Tank Systems: No person may place, maintain or operate on
site sewage disposal from a septic tank within the primary recharge area, zone
1, zone 2, or within three hundred feet (300') of any public street in which a
public sewer is laid. Septic systems in zones 3 and 4 shall comply with the
Utah state department of health "care of waste disposal regulations", part IV
and part V. Nonresidential activities which have septic tank systems shall have
installed a four inch (4") diameter vertical pipe and shall be located in a
manner which will permit ready access by department personnel to extract
representative samples to check for improper or unauthorized disposal of
regulated substances, hazardous waste or petroleum products. A septic holding
tank that does not discharge into the soil is preferred. The contents of a
septic holding tank are removed, and can be treated or disposed of at an
appropriate facility. No new septic tank may be installed within the corporate
limits of the city after May 1, 2006. All septic tanks located within three
hundred feet (300') of a public sewer must connect to the public sewer by July
1, 2008.
      3.   Sewage Collection, Transmission And Disposal: No person may
discharge treated or untreated sewage in any area not specifically designated
for that purpose by the department. The owner or operators of any wastewater
treatment plant, sanitary sewer, force main, gravity sewer, or lateral shall
notify the department within twenty four (24) hours of discovering a break that
may or does result in the leakage of sewage. Emergency telephone numbers will
be prominently displayed on all sewage lift stations within zones 1, 2, 3, 4,
and the primary recharging area. All leaking sewage collection and transmission
pipes shall be promptly repaired or replaced. New sewage collection and
transmission pipes shall be installed according to acceptable construction
standards, as determined by the Utah department of environmental quality and
the city, and shall have routine inspections during and after construction. The
placement or operation of a wastewater treatment plant within zone 1 or 2 is
strictly forbidden.
      4.   General Stormwater Management: All stormwater management systems to
be constructed and implemented for facilities within the protection zones and
recharge areas shall obtain permits in accordance with applicable local, state,
and federal laws and regulations.
      5.   Deicing Salt Storage And Application: Deicing salt shall be stored
on an impermeable pad and shall be covered. Deicing salt application shall use
best management practices and shall evaluate substitute products and
technologies.
      6.   Landfills: Expansion or creation of new landfills is prohibited in
the primary recharge area and zone 1 and zone 2. Existing landfills in the
primary recharge area or in protection zone 1 shall be required to comply with
the provisions of Utah administrative code R315-301-1 through 301-5. Landfills
shall develop and implement a landfill monitoring program. The monitoring shall
include the vadose zone and groundwater. If the monitoring detects
contamination, the following corrective measures may be required:
         a.   Landfill: Cover the landfill with suitable low permeability
materials and minimize the application of supplemental water to reduce
infiltration of moisture.
         b.   Groundwater Containment: Install groundwater containment and
treatment actions, additional monitoring and erosion controls as required.
(Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
         c.   Environmental Quality Monitoring: Facilities which have had, or
appear to have had, unauthorized releases to soil or groundwater shall be
required by the department to monitor soil and groundwater in and adjacent to
the facility. At the request of the department, the facility shall submit a
monitoring plan for department review. The plan shall be implemented with the
approval of the department. Facilities that undergo closure may be required to
monitor soil and groundwater in and abutting the facility subject to closure.
All costs associated with the closing and monitoring of the site will be paid
for by the operator of the facility. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-5-2015)
17.30.110: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Qualifying Statement: The exclusions and exemptions contained in this
section shall not apply to protection zone 1, i.e., sites within a one hundred
foot (100') radius from a well.
   B.   Exclusions And Exemptions: The following substances are not subject to
the provisions of this chapter, provided that these substances are handled,
stored and disposed of in a manner that does not result in an unauthorized
release or cause contamination of the groundwater:
      1.   Regulated substances stored at residences that do not exceed ten
(10) pounds (dry) or five (5) gallons (liquid) (except as allowed in subsection
B3 of this section) and used for personal, family or household purposes;
      2.   Commercial products limited to use at the site solely for office or
janitorial purposes when stored in total quantities of less than fifty (50)
pounds (dry) or fifty five (55) gallons (liquid);
      3.   Prepackaged consumer products available through retail sale to
individuals for personal, family or household use, that are properly stored;
      4.   Water based latex paint;
      5.   Fertilizers, treated seed (except as noted in this chapter),
pesticides, herbicides, erosion control products and soil amendment, quantities
normally available at retail outlets, when stored, handled and applied in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, label directions and
nationally recognized standards;
      6.   Compressed gases;
      7.   Substances or mixtures which may pose a hazard but are labeled
pursuant to the federal food, drug and cosmetic act; and
      8.   Substances which, in the judgment of the director, pose no hazard to
groundwater.
   C.   Continuous Transit: The transportation of any regulated substance(s)
through any protection zone or recharge area is allowed, provided that the
transporting vehicle is in continuous transit.
   D.   Vehicular And Lawn Maintenance Fuel And Lubricant Use: The use of any
petroleum product solely as an operational fuel in the vehicle or lawn
maintenance fuel tank or as a lubricant in such a vehicle shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter. These spent products shall be properly disposed
of in compliance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. (Ord.
06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.120: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES; CIVIL:
   A.   Notification Of Violation: If the director finds that any regulated
person has violated or is violating any provision of this chapter, or any
order, rule or regulation issued or promulgated hereunder, the director may
serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Such written notice shall
be served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within five
(5) days after the receipt of such notice, an explanation for the violation and
a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, which shall
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the regulated person
to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the regulated
person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
city to take any action including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   B.   Consent Orders: The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any regulated person responsible for
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the
regulated person. Consent orders shall be judicially enforceable.
   C.   Order To Show Cause Hearing: The director may order any regulated
person which causes or contributes to violation(s) of any provisions of this
chapter, or any order, rule or regulation issued or promulgated hereunder, to
appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the regulated person, which
notice shall specify the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
regulated person show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Such written notice shall be served in person on any authorized
representative of the regulated person, or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Whether or not the
regulated person appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be
pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a
prerequisite for taking any other actions against the regulated person.
   D.   Compliance Orders: If the director finds that a regulated person has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation issued or promulgated hereunder, the director may issue an order to
the regulated person responsible for the violation directing that the regulated
person come into compliance within thirty (30) days. If the regulated person
does not come into compliance within thirty (30) days, any and all available
remedies may be pursued, including, if necessary to prevent an actual or
imminent discharge which may contaminate the ground water, discontinuing water
and/or water service to the regulated person as provided in subsection F of
this section. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address
noncompliance, including additional self- monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants released. A compliance order may
not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the regulated person of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against
the regulated person.
   E.   Cease And Desist Orders: If the director finds that a regulated person
is violating any provision of this chapter, any rule or regulation issued or
promulgated hereunder, or that the regulated person's past violations are
likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the regulated person
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
regulated person to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation. Issuance of a cease
and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against
the regulated person.
   F.   Emergency Suspension Of Utility Service: The director may order the
immediate shutoff of affected utilities and suspension of a regulated person's
actions (after informal notice to the regulated person), whenever such
suspension or shutoff is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause a risk of an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the ground water or the health or welfare of the
city's culinary water customers. Any regulated person notified of a suspension
of its activities shall immediately stop conducting such activities. If a
regulated person fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary to enforce such
order. The director shall allow the regulated person to recommence operations
when the regulated person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director
that the period of endangerment has passed. A regulated person that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment, shall submit to the director a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, prior to the date of any show cause hearing
under this section, if applicable. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted
as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   G.   Injunctive Relief: If a regulated person has violated or continues to
violate a provision of this chapter or continues to violate any order, rule or
regulation issued or promulgated hereunder, the city may petition any court of
competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction,
as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
ordinance provision, order, rule, regulation or other requirement. In addition,
the city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses
of litigation by appropriate legal action against the regulated person found to
have violated any provision hereof, or of any order, or any other rule or
regulation issued or promulgated hereunder. Such other action as appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition
for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other
action against a regulated person.
   H.   Civil Fine Pass Through Recovery: If a regulated person releases such
pollutants which cause the city to violate any applicable laws, rules or
regulations to which the city is subject, and the city is fined or held liable
regarding such violations, the regulated person shall be fully liable for the
total amount of the fines and civil penalties assessed against the city and any
administrative costs incurred. The city may commence a civil proceeding to
collect amounts due the city under this subsection.
   I.   Public Nuisances: A violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of
any order, rule or regulation issued or promulgated hereunder, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
director. A person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of applicable laws governing nuisances, including reimbursement to
the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying the nuisance.
   J.   Enforcement By Other Agencies: The city may request the health
department, and the health department is hereby granted the authority upon such
request, to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter and to
prosecute any violations thereof. To the extent of any such request, references
in this chapter to the department and the city shall be deemed to mean the
health department, and references in this chapter to the director shall be
deemed to mean the director of the health department. In addition, the city may
refer to the state of Utah or the federal government, for civil or criminal
prosecution, any violations of this chapter which also violate applicable
provisions of state or federal law, orders, administrative rules or permits. It
is the intent of the city that this chapter shall be construed to the greatest
extent possible to be consistent with the provisions of applicable county,
state and federal laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and permits. In the
event of a conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
   K.   Nonexclusive Remedies: The provisions of subsections A through J of
this section are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take
any, all, or any combination of these actions against a regulated person as
circumstances warrant. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against a regulated person for each separate violation of this chapter,
which actions may be taken concurrently. Each day a violation of this chapter
continues is deemed to be a separate violation. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.130: INSPECTION AUTHORITY:
When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this
chapter, or when the director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists
upon any property or on or in any facility located thereon any condition which
violates this chapter, the director is authorized to enter such property or
facility during normal business hours in the case of a business or commercial
use, or in the case of a residential property or facility, during daylight
hours, to inspect the same or to perform any duty authorized by this chapter;
provided that if such property or facility is occupied, the director shall
first present credentials and demand entry; and if such property or facility is
unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of the property or facilities
and demand entry. If entry is denied, the director shall have recourse to every
remedy provided by law to obtain entry.
If the owner or occupant denies entry, the director is authorized to obtain an
administrative search warrant or other warrant provided by law to obtain entry.
Owners, occupants or any other persons having the charge, care or control of
property or facilities shall, after proper request is made as provided herein,
promptly admit the director for the purpose of inspection pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.140: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
A regulated person who fails to do an act required by this chapter or who
commits an act which is prohibited by this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue
constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
17.30.150: APPENDICES:
   A.   Appendix A; Generic Regulated Substance List:
      Acid and basic cleaning solutions
      Animal dips
      Antifreeze and coolants
      Arsenic and arsenic compounds
      Battery acids
      Bleaches and peroxide
      Brake and transmission fluid
      Brine solution
      Casting and foundry chemicals
      Caulking agents and sealants
      Cleaning solvents
      Corrosion and rust preventatives
      Cutting fluids
      Degreasing solvents
      Disinfectants
      Dyes
      Electroplating solutions
      Engraving and etching solutions
      Explosives
      Fertilizers
      Fire extinguishing chemicals
      Food processing wastes
      Formaldehyde
      Fuels and additives
      Glues, adhesives and resins
      Greases
      Hydraulic fluid
      Indicators
      Industrial and commercial janitorial supplies
      Industrial sludges and stillbottoms
      Inks, printing, and photocopying chemicals
      Laboratory chemicals
      Liquid storage batteries
      Medical, pharmaceutical, dental, veterinary, and hospital solutions
      Mercury and mercury compounds
      Metal finishing solutions
      Oils
      Painting solvents
      Paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, varnishing
and cleaning compounds
      Pesticides and herbicides
      Photo development chemicals
      Plastic resins, plasticizers and catalysts
      Poisons
      Polishes
      Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
      Pool chemicals
      Processed dust and particulates
      Radioactive sources
      Reagents and standards
      Refrigerants
      Roofing chemicals and sealers
      Sanitizers, disinfectants, bactericides, and algaecides
      Soaps, detergents and surfactants
      Solders and fluxes
      Stripping compounds
      Tanning industry chemicals
      Transformer and capacitor oils and fluids
      Wastewater
      Water and wastewater treatment chemicals
   B.   Appendix B; List Of Potential Contamination Sources And Best Management
Practices: The following table identifies uses which have varying potentials to
contaminate groundwater sources. These uses have been classified according to
the risk of contamination in each protection zone as follows: (Ord. 06-07, 4-
20-2006)
      Permitted Uses (P): The risk of contamination is considered relatively
low in the specified zone if regulatory requirements and best management
practices are implemented and, therefore, the use is permitted if it otherwise
conforms to the land use ordinance, title 13 of this code.
      Restricted Uses (R): The risk of contamination is moderate in the
specified zone. The Utah division of drinking water quality shall first review
all conditional use requests. The use may then be permitted only after
conditional use review and approval by the planning commission if the use
otherwise conforms to the land use ordinance, title 13 of this code. Approval
is subject to implementation of best management practices and compliance with
other reasonable conditions as may be established by the planning commission.
      Prohibited Uses (X): The risk of contamination is very high in the
specified zone. The use is not permitted regardless of any other provision of
the land use ordinance, title 13 of this code. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006; amd.
Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
      Stormwater: R-317-8-3.8(1)(a) Pretreatment: Contact local municipal
wastewater plant, Central Valley water reclamation facility.
TABLE 1
MATRIX FOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCES
                                Protection Zone
Potential Contamination Sources Primary  Secondary Zone 1 Zone 2 Zones 3 And 4
                                Recharge Recharge
                                 Protection Zone
Potential Contamination Sources  Primary  Secondary Zone 1 Zone 2 Zones 3 And 4
                                 Recharge Recharge
Abandoned wells (state rule
R655-4, 12.1 to 12.2 for         X        X         X      X      X
requirements to abandoned wells)
Agricultural pesticide,
herbicide, and fertilizer
storage, use, filling, and
mixing areas FIFRA - 40 CFR 152- R        R         X      R      R
156, 157/RCRA subtitle C/Utah
pesticide control act BMP -
department of agriculture
Airport maintenance and fueling  R        R         X      R      R
sites (stormwater UST)
Appliance repair (RCRA subtitle  R        R         X      R      R
C)
Auto operations and fleet
vehicle maintenance facilities   R        R         X      R      R
(commercial)(BMP - SL Co.
health)
Beauty salons                    R        P         X      R      P
Boat building and refinishing    R        P         X      R      R
(RCRA subtitle C)
Car washes pretreatment contact  R        P         X      P      P
local planning department
Cemeteries, golf courses, parks, R        R         X      R      R
and plant nurseries (FIFRA)
Chemical reclamation facilities  R        R         X      R      R
(RCRA subtitle G)
Chemigation wells (UIC)          R        R         X      X      R
Concrete, asphalt, and tar       R        R         X      R      R
companies
Dairy farms and animal feedlots
(more than 10 animal units)      R        R         X      X      P
(UPDES, R-317-8)
Dealership maintenance
departments:
(RCRA - C/UST pretreatment)
Auto body
Engine repair                    R        R         X      R      R
Oil and lube shops
(used oil UAC R315-5)
Rustproofing
Tire
Vehicle rental with maintenance
Dry cleaners (with on site
chemicals) (RCRA subtitle C,     R        R         X      X      P
pretreatment/SL Co. BMP)
Dry cleaners (without on site    P        P         X      P      P
chemicals)
Dump sites (used oil R315-15,
solid and hazardous - RCRA       X        R         X      R      R
subtitle C)
Embalming services               R        R         X      R      R
(pretreatment)
Farm operations                  R        R         X      R      R
Food processing, meatpacking,
and slaughterhouses (UPDES, R-   R        R         X      X      P
317-8, pretreatment)
Fuel, oil, and heating oil
distribution and storage         X        R         X      R      R
facilities (section
17.30.100 of this chapter)
Furniture stripping, painting,
and finishing businesses (RCRA,  R        R         X      R      R
subtitle C)
Gasoline service stations
(including underground storage   R        R         X      R      R
tanks) (local land use
regulations; UST guidelines)
Hospitals and medical, dental,
and veterinary offices (solid    R        R         X      R      R
and hazardous)
Industrial manufacturers of:
chemicals, pesticides,
herbicides, paper products,
leather products, textiles,
rubber, plastic, fiberglass,     X        R         X      R      R
silicone, glass,
pharmaceuticals, and electrical
equipment, etc. (section
17.30.100 of this chapter -
FIFRA + RCRA subtitle C)
Industrial waste disposal
impoundment areas (GWR-317-6,    X        R         X      X      R
RCRA subtitle C)
Junk and salvage yards (SL Co.   X        R         X      R      R
BMP)
Landfills and transfer stations
(UDSW, solid waste rules R315-
301-320; section                 X        R         X      R      P
17.30.100 of this chapter; RCRA
subtitle D)
Laundromats (pretreatment)       R        P         X      P      P
Machine shops, metal plating,
heat treating (pretreatment,     X        R         X      R      R
RCRA)
Maintenance garages (used oil,   R        R         X      R      R
RCRA subtitle C)
Manure piles (<<cubic feet)      R        R         X      X      P
(UPDES, R-317-8, GW R-317-6)
Mining operations radiological   R        R         X      P      P
(UAC GW R317-6, UAC R313-25)
Municipal wastewater treatment
plants (UDWQ, design
requirements for wastewater      R        R         X      X      P
collection, treatment, and
disposal systems, UAC, R317-3)
Photo processing and print shops R        R         X      R      R
(pretreatment)
Railroad yards (used oil)        R        P         X      P      P
Residential pesticide,
herbicide, and fertilizer
storage, use, filling, and       R        P         X      R      R
mixing areas (follow
manufacturer's directions for
use and storage)
Residential underground storage  X        R         X      R      P
tanks (UAC R311-203, 205, 206)
RV waste disposal stations (UAC  R        R         X      X      P
R392)
Salt and salt-sand piles
(section                         R        R         X      R      R
17.30.100 of this chapter, DEQ/
UDOT BMP)
Sand and gravel excavation and   R        P         X      P      P
processing (const UAC R317-1)
Septic tank drain field systems
(UDWQ, design requirements for
wastewater collection,           X        R         X      X      R
treatment, and disposal system,
UAC, R317-3)
Stormwater detention basin and   R        R         X      R      P
snow storage sites
Toxic chemical storage and oil
pipelines (section               X        X         X      X      X
17.30.100 of this chapter)
Wood preservative treatment      X        R         X      R      R
facilities
 
Notes:
    UAC:   Utah administrative code
    UDDWQ:   Utah division of drinking water quality
    UDOGM:   Utah division of oil, gas, and mining
    UDSW:   Utah division of solid waste
    RCRA:   Resource conservation and recovery act
(Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006; amd. Ord. 2012-15, 9-20-2012)
   C.   Appendix C; Recharge Area And Protection Map: See map on file in the
offices of city hall. (Ord. 06-07, 4-20-2006)
CHAPTER 17.32
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
17.32.010: Generally
17.32.020: Administrative Enforcement Program
17.32.025: Additional Actions Against Construction Activity
17.32.030: Additional Sanctions Against Business Entity
17.32.040: Removal Of Obstruction
17.32.010: GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, association, partnership or
governmental instrumentality to violate any of the provisions of this title, or
to aid or cause the violation of any of said provisions. Any violations shall
be subject to a minimum fine of not less than $500 per day occurrence. (1999
Code; amd. Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.32.020: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM:
   A.   Escalating enforcement procedures are intended to minimize the
occurrence of and obtain compliance from any person, corporation, association,
partnership or governmental instrumentality that release or discharge
pollutants, contaminants or wastes into the waterways or drainage system.
Enforcement and appeal procedures for releasing or discharging pollutants,
contaminants or wastes into the waterways or drainage systems are as set forth
in Title 7 of this code. Any violation shall be subject to a minimum
administrative penalty of not less than $500 per day or per occurrence.
   B.   The Salt Lake County Health Department (SLCHD) is to be contacted for
any incidents involving spills, releases or the discharge of pollutants,
contaminants, or wastes into the waterways or drainage system. SLCHD will
respond and investigate the incident, work with the responsible party to ensure
the spill and/or discharge is remediated, and initiate appropriate enforcement
actions as needed. (Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.32.025:  ADDITIONAL ACTIONS AGAINST CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY:
   A.   Notice of Violation: A formal notice using the Oversight Construction
Inspection Form that informs a contractor of the status of compliance with
state permit regulation or city ordinance/code is to be used to inform the
contractor of any violations and demands items be corrected according to a
schedule defined by the inspector. The inspector is to communicate (verbal,
email, and using Oversight Construction Inspection Form) with the contractor
regularly through the permit term to achieve understanding of the state permit
regulation and city ordinance/code requirements. Generally, all communication
is to be recorded in the “Comments” Section of the Oversight Construction
Inspection Form in Utilisync. The Notice of Violation is provided to the
contractor using the Oversight Construction Inspection Form in Utilisync. The
notice should include correction deadlines. The notice can include language
that informs and educates if it is effective at correcting the violation(s).
   B.   The inspector is to follow up and communicate with the contractor to
confirm that Notice of Violation items have been addressed. The inspector
should evaluate understanding or expected understanding and issue a Notice of
Violation (via email using Utilisync Enforcement form) as necessary. The Notice
of Violation should include correction deadlines and a warning that if not
addressed adequately, further enforcement may be required including but not
limited to a Stop Work Order. The contractor shall have no less than twenty-
four (24) hours (immediate threats to water quality) and no more than seven (7)
days (imminent threats to water quality) to correct the violation.
   C.   If the violation continues on the eighth day after the first Notice of
Violation, a second Notice of Violation will be issued with a warning that a
Stop Work Order can be issued if the violation is not corrected within the new
time period (at minimum, another 24 hours). Enforcement, appeals, content of
citation and fees are as per title 7 of this code. (Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020;
amd. Ord. 2025-02, 3-6-2025)
17.32.030: ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS AGAINST BUSINESS ENTITY:
   A.   When a corporation, limited partnership, limited liability company,
trust or other business entity or association is convicted of violating any of
the provisions of this title, the court may, in addition to or in lieu of
imposing other authorized penalties, require the entity to give appropriate
publicity of the conviction by notice to the class or classes of persons or
sections of the public interested in or affected by the conviction, by
advertising in designated areas, or by designated media or otherwise.
   B.   When an executive or high managerial officer of a business entity is
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this title, committed in
furtherance of the affairs of the entity, the court may include in the sentence
an order disqualifying that person from exercising similar functions in the
same or other business entities for a period not exceeding five (5) years if it
finds the scope or wilfulness of their illegal actions make it dangerous or
inadvisable for such functions to be entrusted to him. (1999 Code; amd. Ord.
2020-05, 4-16-2020)
17.32.040: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTION:
In addition to any penalties which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the
department may do the following:
   A.   Removal Of Obstruction: Remove any obstructions, pipelines or other
devices installed in violation thereof; and/or
   B.   Notice Of Violation: Give written notice to persons in violation of the
provisions of this title requiring the removal of offending installations from
natural channels or other storm drainage facilities. Notices may be personally
served or may be mailed to violators by certified mail provided that a copy is
also posted on offending installations for a period of ten (10) days. If such
installations are not removed within ten (10) days after notice is given, the
department may effect removal at the expense of the person in violation and may
recover its costs and expenses (including attorney fees) therefor; and/or
   C.   Abatement: Bring an action for the abatement of the nuisance caused by
the offending installation, or for the recovery of the city's costs and
expenses (including attorney fees) incurred in removing the offending
installation pursuant to subsection A or B of this section. (1999 Code; amd.
Ord. 2020-05, 4-16-2020)
CHAPTER 17.40
STORMWATER UTILITY FEE
SECTION:
17.40.010: Purpose
17.40.020: Definitions
17.40.030: Storm Sewer Utility
17.40.040: Storm Water Utility User Fee
17.40.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the city and its inhabitants by efficiently operating the storm water system,
managing and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing
polluted waters from entering the water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and equitable method of financing the storm water
system’s long-term improvement, operation, and maintenance. (Ord, 2020-17, 12-
3-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 2-18-2021)
17.40.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Words used
in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The
word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.
Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given
by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster’s
Dictionary.
CITY:        City of Holladay, a Utah municipality.
             (1) Residential Area A with a mean impervious area of 5,200 square feet,
CLASS:       (2) Residential Area B with a mean impervious area of 2.5 times the mean
             impervious area in Residential Area A, or 13,000 square feet, and (3) Non-
             Residential to capture all other property types. See exhibit A.
COUNTY:      Salt Lake County.
COUNCIL:     The City of Holladay City Council.
             Any individual; public or private corporation and its officers;
CUSTOMER OR  partnership; association; firm; trustee; executor of an estate; the State
PERSON:      or its departments, institutions, bureaus, agencies; county; city;
             political subdivision; or any other governmental or legal entity
             recognized by law.
CITY         The Holladay City Engineer or Engineer’s designee.
ENGINEER:
EQUIVALENT   A unit equal to the square footage of impervious surface area. This is
RESIDENTIAL  based on an average single-family residential parcel, which has an
UNIT (ERU):  impervious surface area of 5,200 square feet.
HOLLADAY
STORM WATER
FEE POLICY   Policies and procedures for the administration of the user fees maintained
MANUAL OR    by the City and is hereby adopted in their entirety by this reference.
POLICY
MANUAL:
             A parcel’s hard surface area that causes water to run off its surface in
             quantities or speeds greater than under natural conditions and discharge
IMPERVIOUS   directly into the City’s storm sewer system. Some examples of impervious
SURFACE:     surfaces are rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways, patios,
             driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and gravel that has been subject
             to surface traffic, including compacted gravel surfaces.
MITIGATION:  On-site facilities or practices which reduce storm water quantity or
             improve storm water quality.
             The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner. A parcel
PARCEL:      has boundaries and surface area and is documented with a property number
             by the county.
DEVELOPED    Any parcel whose surface has been altered by grading, filling, or
PARCEL:      construction of any improvement.
NATIONAL
POLLUTANT
DISCHARGE
ELIMINATION  The provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act establishing specific permit
SYSTEM       requirements for the control of storm Water discharge.
(NPDES)
STORM WATER
REGULATIONS:
SINGLE-
FAMILY       Any parcel of land containing a single-family dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL
PARCEL:
STANDARD
PLANS FOR    The Holladay Standard Plans Design Manual maintained by the City and is
PUBLIC WORKS hereby adopted in their entirety by this reference.
MANUAL:
STORM WATER: Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and other
             water handled by the storm water drainage system.
STORM WATER  Any facility, improvement, development, or property made for controlling
FACILITIES:  stormwater quantity and quality.
STORM WATER  All man-made storm water facilities and conveyances, and natural storm
SYSTEM:      water systems owned or maintained by the City that store, control, treat,
             and/or convey storm water.
STORMWATER   The utility created by this Ordinance, which operates, maintains,
UTILITY OR   regulates, and improves storm water facilities and programs within
UTILITY:     Holladay.
USER FEE:    The fee charged to use the Storm Drainage System and is imposed by this
             chapter.
UNDEVELOPED  means any parcel that has not been altered by grading, filling, or
PARCEL:      construction. (Ord, 2020-17, 12-3-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 2-18-2021)
 
17.40.030: STORM SEWER UTILITY:
   A.   Creation. There is hereby created and established a storm water utility
operated by the city that includes a user fee rate structure.
   B.   Enterprise Fund. There is hereby established a storm water utility
enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses, and other financial
transactions related to the storm water utility. All fees collected with
respect to the storm water utility shall be deposited in the storm water
utility enterprise fund. Money in the storm water utility enterprise fund shall
not be commingled with other city funds and may only be transferred to other
city funds as allowed by the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities.
   C.   Facilities and Assets. The city shall determine which storm water
facility assets will be transferred to the storm water utility. Until such
transfer, the utility shall operate, maintain, and improve all existing storm
drain facilities.
   D.   Administration. The storm water utility shall be administered by the
City Manager and the City Engineer. (Ord, 2020-17, 12-3-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-
03, 2-18-2021)
17.40.040: STORM WATER UTILITY USER FEE:
   A.   Imposed. All owners of impervious surfaces within the city which
contribute runoff water to the storm water system or any others who otherwise
use or benefit from the storm water system or the storm water utility will be
responsible for paying the storm water utility user fee as set forth in this
chapter.
   B.   Amount of User Fee. The user fee shall be based on: (1) for properties
classified as Non-Residential Area, the number of equivalent residential units
(ERU’s) on the customer’s property as calculated, based on the impervious
surface on the property; and (2) for Class A and Class B Residential Area, an
ERU shall be the average amount of impervious surfaces in a single-family
residential parcel, based on a statistical analysis of homes within the city.
One ERU equals 5,200 square feet of impervious surface area.
   C.   Calculation. Each Class A Residential Area shall pay a base rate equal
to 1 ERU, each Class B Residential Area shall pay a rate equal to the 2.5 of
the base ERU rate, and each Non-Residential Area shall pay a multiple of the
ERU base rate according to the measured impervious area on the property
calculated by dividing the total square feet of impervious area of the property
by 5,200 square feet.
   D.   User Fee per ERU. The user fee charge imposed hereby shall be as set
forth in the consolidated fee schedule.
   E.   Credits. The City Engineer or his designee may grant a fee credit as
set forth below. The credit shall be available for customers that (i) own and
maintain a detention facility in accordance with City standards and as set
forth in the Policy Manual, (ii) own and maintain a retention facility in
accordance with City standards and as set forth in the Policy Manual, (iii)
conduct training of personnel as set forth in the Policy Manual, or (iv)
demonstrate a financial hardship or who have a family member in active military
service as set forth in the Policy Manual.
   F.   Policies. The city hereby adopts the Holladay Storm Water Fee Policy
Manual to assist in applying, administering, and interpreting the user fee, the
user fee credit, and other provisions related to the storm water utility.
   G.   Appeals. Any person or entity who is aggrieved by a provision of this
chapter, request for a credit, or the application and calculation of the user
fee assessed to their property may appeal to the City as set forth in the
Policy Manual.
   H.   Billing and Collection. The City will contract with Rocky Mountain
Power to include the user fee on the monthly electric utility bill for all
residences and commercial properties that are billed for electric service. The
City shall bill the user fee to all other residential units or commercial
property that are not billed by Rocky Mountain Power for electric service.
(Ord, 2020-17, 12-3-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 2-18-2021)
TITLE 18
ANTIDISCRIMINATION
CHAPTER 18.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
18.01.010: Purpose
18.01.020: Administration
18.01.030: Antidiscrimination Board
18.01.040: No Private Right Of Action; No Special Rights
18.01.050: Severability
18.01.060: Definitions
18.01.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   Every individual in the city has the right to work and earn wages
through gainful employment. Discriminatory employment practices are detrimental
because they impede the social and economic progress of the city by preventing
all of the city's citizens from contributing to or fully participating in the
cultural, spiritual, social and commercial life of the community, which is
essential to the growth and vitality of the city's neighborhoods and
businesses. The Utah antidiscrimination act, Utah code section 34A-5-101 et
seq., addresses employment related discrimination based on race, color, sex,
pregnancy, childbirth or pregnancy related conditions, religion, national
origin, age (if 40 years of age or older), and disability, but does not address
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
   B.   Every individual in the city has the right to seek housing.
Discriminatory housing practices are detrimental because they impede the social
and economic progress of the city by preventing all of the city's citizens from
contributing to or fully participating in the cultural, spiritual, social and
commercial life of the community, which is essential to the growth and vitality
of the city's neighborhoods and businesses.
   C.   The Utah fair housing act, Utah code section 57-21-1 et seq., addresses
housing related discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, familial status, source of income, and disability, but does not address
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
The city has found that discrimination in employment and housing on the basis
of sexual orientation and gender identity must be addressed. The denial or
deprivation of employment rights and access to housing because of an
individual's sexual orientation or gender identity is detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens and damages the city's
economic well being. The purpose of this title is to provide a clear and
comprehensive mandate for the prevention and elimination of discrimination in
employment and housing in the city against individuals based upon sexual
orientation or gender identity and this title shall be liberally construed to
achieve that purpose. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.01.020: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager is responsible for administering and implementing this title.
(Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.01.030: ANTIDISCRIMINATION BOARD:
   A.   The city manager is authorized to establish the antidiscrimination
board and to appoint the three (3) members of the board.
   B.   The term of each board member shall be determined by the city manager.
   C.   Any member of the board may be removed by the city manager at any time.
The city manager shall select the chair of the board.
   D.   The board may adopt rules of policy and procedure for the governing of
meetings, its members, and the performance of its duties. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-
2014)
18.01.040: NO PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION; NO SPECIAL RIGHTS:
This title does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any
right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies
provided under federal or state law. This title does not create any special
rights or privileges which would not be available to all of the city's citizens
because every person has a sexual orientation and a gender identity. (Ord.
2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.01.050: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this
title is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by other
authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any
state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section,
sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of
which will remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.01.060: DEFINITIONS:
In this title:
ANTIDISCRIMINATION BOARD OR BOARD: The board comprised of three (3) persons
appointed by the city manager and operating as set forth in this title.
CITY: Holladay City, Utah.
CITY ATTORNEY: The duly appointed Holladay City attorney and includes the city
attorney's designated subordinate attorneys.
CITY MANAGER: The duly appointed city manager of Holladay City and includes the
city manager's designated representatives.
COMPLAINANT: A person, including the board or a member of the board, who files
a complaint under this title.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed
under this title, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through
informal negotiations involving the complainant, the respondent, and the board.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of
issues by conciliation under this title.
DISCRIMINATION: Any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation,
limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a
person because of a person's actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity or because of a person's association with any such person.
Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord
preferential treatment to any person because of that person's sexual
orientation or gender identity.
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or a portion of a building or structure,
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence of one or
more families inside the city and vacant land that is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a dwelling inside the city.
EMPLOYEE: Any individual applying with or employed by an employer. The term
does not include an elected official.
EMPLOYER: Any person employing fifteen (15) or more employees in the city for
each working day in each of twenty (20) or more calendar weeks in the current
or preceding calendar year, and includes any agent of such a person.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: Any person, and any agent of a person, undertaking to
procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person in the city or
holding itself out to be equipped to procure employee or opportunities to work
for any other person in the city.
GENDER IDENTITY: A person's actual or perceived gender identity, appearance,
mannerisms, or other characteristics of an individual with or without regard to
the person's sex at birth.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any organization that exists for the purpose in whole or in
part of collective dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or
conditions of employment, or other mutual aid or protection in connection with
employment.
OTHERWISE QUALIFIED: A person who possesses the following required by an
employer for any particular job, job classification, or position:
   A.   Education;
   B.   Training;
   C.   Ability;
   D.   Moral character;
   E.   Integrity;
   F.   Disposition to work;
   G.   Adherence to reasonable rules and regulations; and
   H.   Other job related qualifications required by an employer.
PERSON: One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations,
legal representatives, trusts or trustees, receivers and the city.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON: A principal real estate broker, an associate
real estate broker, or a real estate sales agent as those terms are defined in
Utah code section 61-2-2 or any successor provision.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: A religious corporation, association, educational
institution, society, trust or any entity or association which is a wholly
owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation,
association, society, trust or corporation sole.
RENT: To lease, sublease, let, or otherwise grant for a consideration the right
to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION: The making or purchasing of loans
or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real
estate; or selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property inside
the city.
RESPONDENT: A person identified in a complaint as having committed an unlawful
practice under this title.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: A person's actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual,
homosexual, or bisexual.
UNLAWFUL PRACTICE: A discriminatory act or practice relating to employment that
is prohibited under this title. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
CHAPTER 18.02
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
18.02.010: Unlawful Employment Practices
18.02.020: Exemptions
18.02.030: Unlawful Intimidation, Retaliation, And Coercion
18.02.040: Procedures For Filing Complaints
18.02.010: UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   Employers: An employer may not refuse to hire, promote, discharge,
demote, or terminate any person, and may not retaliate against, harass, or
discriminate in matters of compensation or in terms, privileges, and conditions
of employment against any person otherwise qualified primarily because of a
person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   B.   Employment Agencies: An employment agency may not refuse to list and
properly classify for employment, or refuse to refer a person for employment,
in a known available job for which the person is otherwise qualified primarily
because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   C.   Labor Organizations: A labor organization may not exclude any person
otherwise qualified from full membership rights in the labor organization,
expel the person from membership in the labor organization, or otherwise
discriminate against or harass any of the labor organization's members in full
employment of work opportunity, or representation, primarily because of a
person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   D.   Training Programs: An employer, labor organization, joint
apprenticeship committee, or vocational school, providing, coordinating, or
controlling apprenticeship programs, or providing, coordinating, or controlling
on the job training programs, instruction, training, or retraining programs may
not deny to, or withhold from, any qualified person, the right to be admitted
to, or participate in any apprenticeship training program, on the job training
program, or other occupational instruction, training or retraining program
primarily because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   E.   Notices And Advertisements: Unless based upon a bona fide occupational
qualification, or required by and given to an agency of government for security
reasons, an employer, employment agency, or labor organization may not print,
or circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated, any statement,
advertisement, or publication, use any form of application for employment or
membership, or make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment or
membership that expresses, either directly or indirectly, any limitation,
specification, or discrimination because of a person's sexual orientation or
gender identity.
   F.   Joint Labor-Management Committee: It is unlawful for a joint labor-
management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining
(including on the job training programs) to print or publish, or cause to be
printed or published, any notice or advertisement relating to admission to, or
employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other
training by the joint labor-management committee that indicates any preference,
limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sexual orientation or
gender identity.
   G.   Occupational Qualification: Nothing in this chapter prohibits a notice
or advertisement from indicating a preference, limitation, specification, or
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity when sexual
orientation or gender identity is a bona fide occupational qualification for
employment.
   H.   No Preferential Treatment: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization, vocational
school, joint labor-management committee, or apprenticeship program subject to
this chapter to grant preferential treatment to any person because of the
person's sexual orientation or gender identity on account of an imbalance which
may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any
sexual orientation or gender identity employed by any employer, referred or
classified for employment by an employment agency or labor organization,
admitted to membership or classified by any labor organization, or admitted to
or employed in, any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison
with the total number or percentage of persons of that sexual orientation or
gender identity available in the city's available work force. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-
20-2014)
18.02.020: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   A religious organization;
   B.   An expressive association whose employment of a person protected by
this chapter would significantly burden the association's rights of expressive
association under Boy Scouts Of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000); the
United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any
corporation wholly owned by it; or
   C.   The United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or
any corporation wholly owned by it; or the state of Utah or any of its
departments, agencies, or political subdivisions except for the city. (Ord.
2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.02.030: UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION, RETALIATION, AND COERCION:
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm,
damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice,
for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. (Ord.
2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.02.040: PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS:
Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful employment practice
subject to the city's jurisdiction under this chapter may file a complaint in
accordance with the provisions of
chapter 18.04 of this title. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
CHAPTER 18.03
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
18.03.010: Unlawful Housing Practices
18.03.020: Exemptions
18.03.030: Unlawful Intimidation, Retaliation, And Coercion
18.03.040: Procedures For Filing Complaints
18.03.010: UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES:
   A.   Discriminatory Housing Practices: It is a discriminatory housing
practice to do any of the following:
      1.   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse
to negotiate for the sale or rental, or otherwise deny or make unavailable any
dwelling from any person because of the person's sexual orientation or gender
identity;
      2.   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of the sale or rental of any dwelling or in providing facilities or
services in connection with the dwelling because of the person's sexual
orientation or gender identity;
      3.   Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale, or rental when in fact the dwelling is available;
      4.   To make a representation orally or in writing or make, print,
circulate, publish, post, or cause to be made, printed, circulated, published,
or posted any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to use any application
form for the sale or rental of a dwelling, that directly or indirectly
expresses any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on sexual
orientation or gender identity, or expresses any intent to make any such
preference, limitation, or discrimination;
      5.   To induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to buy, sell,
or rent any dwelling by making representations about the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of persons of a particular sexual orientation or
gender identity;
      6.   Engage in any discriminatory housing practices because of sexual
orientation or gender identity based upon a person's association with another
person.
   B.   Broker/Salesperson Discriminatory Practices: It is a discriminatory
housing practice for a real estate broker or salesperson to do any of the
following because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity:
      1.   To discriminate against any person in making available a residential
real estate transaction, or in the terms or conditions of the transaction,
inside the city, because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity;
      2.   To deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings inside the city or to discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of access, membership, or participation in the organization,
service, or facility inside the city because of a person's sexual orientation
or gender identity; or
      3.   Engage in any discriminatory housing practices inside the city
because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person's
association with another person.
   C.   Exceptions: This chapter does not apply to the following:
      1.   The sale or rental of any single-family dwelling, if the owner:
         a.   Does not own an interest in or title to four (4) or more single-
family dwellings held for lease or sale at one time located inside the city;
         b.   Has not sold two (2) or more single-family dwellings inside the
city in which the owner did not reside in the dwelling within the twenty four
(24) month period preceding the sale or rental of the dwelling; and
         c.   Does not use the services or facilities of any real estate
broker, agent, or salesperson, or of any other person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, in connection with the sale or rental of the
dwelling inside the city.
      2.   The rental of a dwelling that is occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, when the
owner actually maintains and occupies part of the dwelling as a residence.
For purposes of this section, the term "owner" shall mean the owner, spouse,
children and/or the owner's parents or in-laws.
      3.   Nothing in this section prohibits conduct against a person because
of the person's conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance under state or federal
laws. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.03.020: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter does not apply to a temporary or permanent residence
facility operated by a nonprofit organization, a charitable organization, or a
person in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society,
including any dormitory operated by a public or private educational
institution, if the discrimination is based on sexual orientation or gender
identity for reasons of personal modesty or privacy or in the furtherance of a
religious organization's sincerely held religious beliefs.
   B.   This chapter does not prohibit or restrict a religious organization or
any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled
by or in conjunction with a religious organization from limiting the sale,
rental, or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for primarily
noncommercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons.
   C.   This chapter does not prohibit distinctions based on a person's
inability or failure to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial
obligations, of a lease, rental agreement, contract of purchase or sale,
mortgage, trust deed, or other financing agreement.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to: 1) the United States government, any of
its departments or agencies, or any corporation wholly owned by it; or 2) the
government of the state of Utah or any of its departments, agencies, or
political subdivisions, except for the city. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.03.030: UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION, RETALIATION, AND COERCION:
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm,
damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice,
for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. (Ord.
2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.03.040: PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS:
Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful housing practice may
file a complaint in accordance with the provision of
chapter 18.04 of this title. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
CHAPTER 18.04
OFFENSES, INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
18.04.010: Offenses And Penalties
18.04.020: Complaint
18.04.030: Investigation
18.04.040: Conciliation
18.04.050: Enforcement
18.04.010: OFFENSES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   A person commits an unlawful practice and violates this title if the
person intentionally or knowingly violates a provision of this title or if the
person intentionally or knowingly obstructs or prevents compliance with this
title.
   B.   An unlawful practice committed under this title by a respondent owning
or operating fifty (50) or fewer dwellings or employing fourteen (14) or fewer
employees is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   C.   An unlawful practice committed under this title by a respondent owning
or operating fifty one (51) or more dwellings or by a real estate broker or
salesperson or employing fifteen (15) or more employees is punishable by a fine
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.04.020: COMPLAINT:
   A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful practice may
file a complaint with the board. A complaint may also be filed by the board if
the board has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an
unlawful practice under this title. A complaint must be filed within one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days after an alleged unlawful practice has
occurred.
   B.   A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the board, made
under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
      1.   The complainant's name, address, and signature;
      2.   The date the alleged unlawful practice occurred;
      3.   A statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an unlawful
practice is based; and
      4.   The respondent's name and address.
   C.   Promptly after the filing of a complaint, the board shall:
      1.   Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a
complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful practice has been filed
against the respondent;
      2.   Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
      3.   Advise the respondent of the respondent's procedural rights and
obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified
informal answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) calendar days after
service of notice of the complaint.
   D.   Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy
of the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer
must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      1.   The respondent's name, address, telephone number, and signature of
the respondent or the respondent's attorney, if any; and
      2.   A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint, including facts of any defense or exception. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-
2014)
18.04.030: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint, the board shall commence an
investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is
reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful practice,
except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the allegations
of the complaint, the board determines that the complaint does not come within
the scope of this title. Upon determining that a particular complaint does not
come within the scope of this title, the board shall dismiss the complaint,
notify the complainant and the respondent and take no further action.
   B.   In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this
chapter, the board shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person to:
      1.   Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any
other possible source of information;
      2.   Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
      3.   Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   C.   The board may dismiss a complaint during the investigation and prior to
referral to the city attorney if the board determines that:
      1.   The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
      2.   The location of the alleged unlawful practice is not within the
city's jurisdiction;
      3.   The alleged unlawful practice is not a violation of this title;
      4.   The complainant refuses to cooperate with the board in the
investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation
agreement;
      5.   The complainant cannot be located after the board has performed a
reasonable search; or
      6.   A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and
respondent. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.04.040: CONCILIATION:
   A.   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the
notice of the complaint to the respondent, the board shall, if it appears that
the respondent has committed an unlawful practice, attempt to conciliate the
complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the chair of the board, or a member of
the board designated by the chair, shall try to achieve a just resolution and
obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation
of the complainant's rights and take action to ensure the elimination of both
present and future unlawful practices. A conciliation agreement may include:
sensitivity training for the respondent and/or the respondent's employees; the
respondent's agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in its
practices; and the respondent's agreement to not engage in discriminatory
practices in the future.
   B.   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing
in a form approved by the city attorney and must be signed and verified by the
respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the chair of the board
who shall indicate approval by signing the agreement.
   C.   If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the
board shall immediately dismiss the complaint. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
18.04.050: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the board
determines that an unlawful practice has occurred and is unable to secure an
acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the board shall
refer the case to the city attorney.
   B.   The board shall refer the entire file to the city attorney, who shall
determine how best to pursue further action, if any, on the complaint.
   C.   If the city attorney determines that cause exists that an unlawful
practice occurred and the facts are sufficient to warrant the initiation of an
action through the Holladay City administrative code enforcement hearing
program set forth in title 7 of this code, then the city attorney shall provide
written notification to the respondent and the complainant that an action to
enforce this title will be initiated. The enforcement process and proceedings
shall be in compliance with the rules and provisions set forth in title 7 of
this code.
   D.   If the city attorney determines that there is no cause that an unlawful
practice occurred or that the facts are insufficient to warrant the initiation
of an action in justice court, the city attorney shall provide written
notification to the respondent and the complainant and notify the board who
shall then dismiss the complaint. (Ord. 2014-04, 2-20-2014)
 
